- CORONAVIRUS DISEASE 2019: THE U.S. AND INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CORONAVIRUS DISEASE 2019: THE U.S. AND
INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA, THE PACIFIC AND NONPROLIFERATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

February 27, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-105

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
docs.house.gov,
or http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
40-218PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York               Member
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey      CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia         STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida      JOE WILSON, South Carolina
KAREN BASS, California      SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts      TED S. YOHO, Florida
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island      ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
AMI BERA, California      LEE ZELDIN, New York
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas      JIM SENSENBRENNER, Wisconsin
DINA TITUS, Nevada      ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York          BRIAN MAST, Florida
TED LIEU, California      FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania      BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLPS, Minnesota              JOHN CURTIS, Utah
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota      KEN BUCK, Colorado
COLIN ALLRED, Texas      RON WRIGHT, Texas
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan      GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia      TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania       GREG PENCE, Indiana
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey      STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
DAVID TRONE, Maryland      MIKE GUEST, Mississippi
JIM COSTA, California
JUAN VARGAS, California
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas

Jason Steinbaum, Staff Director
Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific and Nonproliferation

BRAD SHERMAN, California, Chairman,

BRAD SHERMAN, Chairman

DINA TITUS, Nevada                   TED YOHO, Florida, Ranking Member
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania      SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
GERALD CONNOLLY, Virgina      ANN WAGNER, Missouri
AMI BERA, California      BRIAN MAST, Florida
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan      JOHN CURTIS, Utah
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia

Don MacDonald, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Fritz, Jonathan, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of East Asian
and Pacific Affairs, U.S. Department of State..................     7
Brownlee, Ian, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of
Consular Affairs, U.S. Department of State.....................    13
Walters, Dr. William A., Executive Director and Managing Director
for Operational Medicine, Bureau of Medical Services, U.S.
Department of States...........................................    18
Redfield, Dr. Robert, Director, U.S. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention.................................................    23

APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    81
Hearing Minutes..................................................    82
Hearing Attendance...............................................    83

CORONAVIRUS DISEASE 2019: THE U.S. AND INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE

Thursday, February 27, 2020

House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific and
Nonproliferation
Committee on Foreign Affairs
Washington, DC,

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:56 p.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ami Bera
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Bera. The subcommittee will come to order.
First-off, I appreciate the audience's patience given
votes. We do not control voting schedules, so thank you, and
thank you to the witnesses.
Without objection, all members have 5 days to submit
statements, questions, extraneous materials for the record,
subject to the length limitations in the rules.
I will now make an opening statement and then turn it over
to the ranking member for his opening statement.
I want to thank Mr. Yoho, my ranking member, for his
longtime friendship and partnership in this issue. Also, I want
to thank the members of the CDC and senior State Department
officials for taking the time to come up here. Obviously, this
is a very timely subject. This is our second hearing on the
topic. A couple weeks ago, we had the first hearing in Congress
on coronavirus and this will be my second hearing.
As I think about this issue I apply my background as a
physician, but more importantly, my background as the former
chief medical officer for Sacramento County who was in charge
of the public health delivery system there. I also use my
expertise as a former faculty member in my last home
institution, the University of California Davis School of
Medicine.
The reason why I give that background because is last night
it became personal for me and it is now hitting close to home.
The first novel coronavirus case potentially person-to-person,
non-transmission is in Sacramento County as we speak. That
patient is housed at U.C. Davis. And I have been in
communication with my former colleagues that were over there.
There are a couple concerning issues that are happening
over there. There are a couple of concerning issues that as we
go through the hearing, I am going to want to ask questions
about. But if I think about this particular case, it initially
arose in Solano County, which is close to where Travis Air
Force Base is, and is one of the points of entry where we are
quarantining patients as we evacuate them from overseas. Thus
far, we do not know how the patient was infected; this patient
did not have any travel history, and we are not aware of any
contact tracing.
That work continues.
The patient arrived at U.C. Davis last Wednesday or
Thursday and was intubated at the time on a ventilator. At that
juncture, the doctors at U.C. Davis medical staff did not have
a concrete diagnosis and had requested testing for coronavirus.
It was determined that this patient did not fit the criteria
for testing for the coronavirus.
This past Sunday, the doctors and the medical staff
insisted on the test. The test was performed. Last night we got
the results back and the news that all of you have heard. This
is the first patient testing positive where we do not have
confident contact tracing.
One thing that I will want to talk about, and perhaps with
Dr. Redfield during our questioning can discuss, is the testing
criteria. Also, I would like to discuss the rapidity of getting
testing capabilities quickly to every State, and the
distribution of test kits.
I was chatting with the Ambassador from Korea earlier today
and found out that Korea is testing 15,000 people a day right
now. So, we should be doing whatever we can do to assist our
scientists in get testing capabilities up and running as
quickly as possible.
There are a couple of other areas that I would like to
focus on in this hearing as well. I do applaud President Trump,
although I think the was delayed in announcing and identifying
someone as the head, he did not use the term ``czar'' but I
will use that term, who is the focus point to work across the
interagency and who has direct access to the President and Vice
President.
That said, I really do want to applaud Dr. Birx's
appointment announcement. She is very well qualified and has
our support.
I also appreciate the Administration's funding flexibility.
I did think the initial amount of $2.5 billion was not going to
be sufficient. I know the Senate suggested $8.5 billion. That
may not be enough. And I thinkwe are allocating this funding in
a bipartisan way, we should just be ready to make sure that our
scientists and the folks that are on the front line,
particularly the folks that are in public health systems and
hospitals on the front line, have the resources and support
that they need. Our No. 1 job is protecting domestic national
security. And at this juncture, while we do not know a lot
about this rapidly evolving public health threat, we have to be
ready to make sure that our communities, our public health
infrastructure, and our global health leadership has the funds
and ability to do their jobs.
In addition, as we are thinking about the dollar amount to
appropriate, we have to do a quick assessment of public health
infrastructure and assess the needs as well as the gaps. Having
been in charge of the public health system in a large county, I
know we run on shoestrings. Given the state of our
infrastructure, a bad flu season would overwhelm our hospitals
and emergency room capabilities. Slap on potentially what we do
not know about coronavirus. We just have to be prepared for the
worst and hope for the best here.
I also want to make sure, and I talked about this with some
of my colleagues on both sides of the aisle earlier this
morning, that we keep politics out of this. This has to be a
non-partisan effort. This has to be about looking at the
science, following the facts, and doing what we have to do to
keep the American public safe, but then also to focus in on the
international community. That is going to be extremely
important.
In addition, we have to make sure, in this era where it is
easy to put out false information, and with a very concerned
public, that we communicate clearly. We are all leaders as
Members of Congress and have the ability to communicate
effectively. So, we must coordinate with the CDC and others to
get accurate information out there to make sure the public is
accurately informed. This will help us quickly dispel any
misinformation and will allow us to do our jobs, allow you to
do your jobs, and our scientists to do their jobs better.
Lastly, this is the Foreign Affairs Committee and global
health security is something that we look very closely at. In
this sense, American leadership has to be central to how we
approach this in a global aspect. So, Dr. Redfield, I will be
curious to get an update on how our scientists are doing, how
our CDC workers are doing in China in the hot zone, and if they
have accommodated our workers. We have got to have an
international response, with everyone working together in a
transparent way and sharing information so we can get ahead of
this.
So, again, I appreciate the witnesses for taking their time
to come down here to inform us as Members of Congress but also
to inform the general public on what is rapidly evolving here.
And, again, I appreciate the members that are here.
And with that, let me turn it over to the Ranking Member
Mr. Yoho for your opening statement.
Mr. Yoho. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate those words. And this
is like yesterday, it is deja vu all over again; right? We had
the opportunity to meet with the chief of missions yesterday,
and Chairman Bera opened up pretty much with the same thing
about we are all on one team. This is Team America and we have
to work forward. And we have to be like a virus or a bacteria:
we know no borders; we do not care what your political
affiliation is; this is something we need to come together and
make sure we have the right response for America.
We had this meeting, this hearing 3 weeks ago. And you look
around about the concern because I think that speaks loudly
with the attendance here for people to wait as long as they
did. This is something that we need to be prepared for. And we
want to make sure that we are in that.
I am a veterinarian by trade. We dealt with herd
situations. That is not to mean we should treat people like
animals, but we should make sure we put in the proper
safeguards so that we protect our population.
We have a bill that we have sponsored, it is called the One
Health bill, which coordinates animal diseases with human
diseases. And this is why: seven out of ten human diseases
originate with the animals. We have dealt with coronavirus for
the last 30, 40 years in horses, cattle, dogs, cats, and other
species. And so we know what viruses do.
And I think the important thing that comes out of this, we
lived through the Zika virus up here, and we saw the
misinformation that was going out, the panic, the media,
politics got put into that and it was a disaster. What I have
seen in this response is there's a level, kind of a calm--I do
not want to say a calm, but there is more of a rational
approach. And I hope we can do that in this hearing. I think it
will help this and help inform the American people.
Other things that we are doing is this is appropriations
season, and we are putting in appropriations for NIH, for NSF,
for the research and development, but also for organizations
like Gavi that does vaccinations around the work, and
organizations like CEPI, the Coalition for Epidemic
Preparedness. They are looking at the new and upcoming diseases
to have vaccine models already ready for when something like
this happens, because we can all rest assured this is not going
to be the last time we are faced with something like this.
And then I think the collaboration that we have with other
countries. And we brought up the epidemiology last meeting that
we had here, we had two epidemiologists, and we looked at the
origin of where this was supposed to have come from in that
province in Wuhan. And it was the fish market or fresh market.
And we asked the epidemiologists if enough research was done.
And they felt, no, it had not. But yet, the Chinese Government
came and removed that market.
And so those start raising questions. I mean, you look at
the amount of response, the severity of the response of the
quarantines and people isolated, it sometimes does not match
what we are looking at as the disease or what we are being
told: it is not that severe; we can control it. But yet when
you have, you know, that province that was under quarantine, it
is about 20 percent of the United States of America under
quarantine. And then we have heard it is over 100 million
people under quarantine.
And what we want to make sure is that we have a measured,
accurate response, and that we have readiness that we are ready
to respond to this in the appropriate ways. And I think so far
what we have seen I am kind of proud of what our country has
done. And I said our country not an administration, but it was
the country. And a lot of that comes from you guys here in this
audience. And so we appreciate that.
And then as I was talking about collaboration with other
countries, we want to make sure no countries are excluded,
countries like Taiwan that was so instrumental in the SARS
epidemic. For a country like China to put pressure on other
countries to exclude them from this process and the WHA, World
Health Assembly, or the WHO, I think that is, I just think that
is a wrong move. You know, this is, again, viruses do not care
what your political affiliation is, we need all hands on deck
to deal with this.
And so, with that, Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back.
And thank you.
Mr. Bera. Thank you to the ranking member.
I am very pleased to welcome our witnesses to today's
hearing. We are joined by four excellent public servants.
Jonathan Fritz serves as Deputy Assistant Secretary for the
Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs. He will be followed
by Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for the Bureau of
Consular Affairs, Ian Brownlee.
The final State witness will be Dr. William Walters, the
Executive Director and Managing Director for Operational
Medicine at the Bureau of Medical Services.
Finally, we are honored to be joined by Dr. Robert
Redfield, the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.
Please summarize your written statements in 5 minutes. And
without objection, your prepared written statements will be
made part of the record.
Mr. Fritz, if you would like to begin.

STATEMENT OF JONATHAN FRITZ, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU
OF EAST ASIAN AND PACIFIC AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Fritz. Thank you, Chairman Bera and Ranking Member
Yoho. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today regarding
the outbreak of the COVID-19 novel coronavirus and the
Department of State's response.
Throughout this global public health emergency the
Department has worked around the clock on what has always been
mission No. 1 for us: ensuring the safety and security of U.S.
citizens abroad. The Secretary and the senior leadership team
have been personally engaged in directing and supporting the
U.S. response to this outbreak, in close consultation with our
colleagues at the Department of Health and Human Services,
including our CDC colleagues; at the Department of Homeland
Security; the Department of Defense and others.
Utilizing their expertise, our diplomats and staff serving
in the region executed evacuation plans, provided consular
services, engaged foreign governments, and reported on economic
issues arising from this outbreak. We simply could not have
done so much to care for U.S. citizens and our own personnel in
China without a department-wide effort. U.S. diplomats in
China, Seoul, Tokyo, Phnom Penh, and elsewhere contributed to
our evacuation efforts, ably aided by our locally employed
staff, including those at our Consulate General in Wuhan.
Throughout it all, we regularly engaged with the People's
Republic of China at the most senior levels, including
President Trump's February 7th conversation with President Xi.
Secretary Pompeo also spoke with his counterpart about the
evaluations from Wuhan, and stressed that protecting U.S.
citizens in times of crisis is our No. 1 priority.
Our Ambassador to China Terry Branstad worked directly with
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China to facilitate
evaluation flights and U.S. deliveries of donated assistance.
Our team in China was on the ground helping obtain permissions
for our flights and processing passengers, operating in often
difficult conditions. This work was instrumental in evacuating
U.S. citizens and even some of our allies to safety.
We faced challenges in evacuating U.S. citizens from the
quarantine zone in China, and additional complexities
supporting U.S. citizens on cruise ships. The Department worked
closely with our allies in Japan to ensure the health and
safety of U.S. citizens onboard the Diamond Princess cruise
ship docked in Yokohama. The U.S. Embassy Tokyo coordinated
closely with the Japanese Government, with Carnival
Corporation, and CDC and other components of the Department of
Health and Human services to assist U.S. citizens on the ship.
After a high number of COVID-19 cases were identified
onboard, and out of consideration for Japan's already
overburdened health system, the Department of Health and Human
Services made an assessment that the U.S. citizens and crew
onboard were at high risk of exposure and should be repatriated
to minimize risks to their health going forward.
In Cambodia we organized response teams in Sihanoukville
and Phnom Penh to assist U.S. citizens on the cruise ship
Westerdam. Working in close coordination with Holland America,
Cambodian authorities, and the embassies of other countries
with citizens onboard the ship.
Embassy teams included consular, medical, and logistics
experts to facilitate health screenings, lodging, and travel
needs of more than 600 U.S. citizen passengers. Our embassy
also utilized its consular messaging platform and social media
accounts to provide timely updates to passengers.
In coordination with these efforts, USAID has provided an
initial tranche of funding for affected and at-risk countries
to address critical gaps in COVID-19 country readiness,
including risk communication and community engagements,
laboratory detection, enhanced surveillance, and infection
prevention and control.
In addition, USAID is arranging shipments of essential
personal protective equipment to selected countries in
coordination with the World Health Organization.
Our efforts continue apace. We are continually engaging
with host governments in the Asia Pacific region to ensure they
are informed of our policies and that we can share information
and best practices to address this outbreak. We successfully
encouraged Beijing to accept U.S. experts in the WHO mission to
China.
On February 7th, 2020, the U.S. Government announced that
it is prepared to provide up to $100 million in existing funds
to assist countries, including China, impacted by and at risk
from the virus. Assistance to contain and combat COVID-19 will
be provided bilaterally and through multilateral organizations.
This commitment, along with the hundreds of millions generously
donated by the American private sector demonstrates strong U.S.
leadership in response to the outbreak.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to answering your
questions and those of other members of the subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fritz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Fritz.
Mr. Brownlee.

STATEMENT OF IAN BROWNLEE, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY, BUREAU OF CONSULAR AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Brownlee. Chairman Bera, Ranking Member Yoho, thank you
for the opportunity to testify today.
The consular mission has always been the safety and
security of U.S. citizens at home and abroad. We have worked in
recent weeks hand-in-hand with our colleagues from the CDC, HHS
ASPR, NIH, DHS, and others to provide critical information and
travel alerts for U.S. citizens overseas, to help arrange
repatriations of U.S. citizens from two countries, and to
provide in-person consular services to U.S. citizens impacted
by the outbreak in many other countries.
In China, U.S. Embassy and consular staff made thousands of
phone calls and corresponded tirelessly via email and various
online platforms to reach U.S. citizens in Hubei Province. We
worked with the Chinese Government to help Chinese grandmothers
accompany their U.S. citizen grandchildren on evacuation
flights.
As the Chinese Government locked down Wuhan, our team in
China coordinated with local authorities to allow U.S. citizens
to travel to the airport to be evacuated. Using State
Department chartered evacuation flights, and working with our
interagency partners such as HHS, CDC, and DoD we brought
approximately 800 U.S. citizens from Wuhan back to the United
States.
In Japan, U.S. Embassy staff created a dedicated webpage
for U.S. citizens quarantined on the cruise ship Diamond
Princess, and reached out to them individually by email and
phone. As some U.S. citizens developed health problems, not all
related to COVID-19, consular officers worked with Japanese
hospitals to ensure U.S. patients received appropriate medical
care.
In collaboration with our interagency partners, the
Department transported over 300 U.S. citizens back to the
United States on February 16th. We remain in close
communication with Japanese authorities and the cruise line to
assist those U.S. citizens who remained in Japan after the
evacuation.
In Cambodia, U.S. Embassy staff met the cruise ship
Westerdam in the port city of Sihanoukville. Our staff
coordinated--excuse me--our staff provided key liaison roles,
ensuring U.S. citizens were connected to the appropriate cruise
ship authorities and Cambodian health care professionals. We
also sent a team to the airport in Phnom Penh to provide
consular services.
Consular personnel in Kuala Lumpur, Karachi, and Amsterdam
worked late into the night to help 91 of those stranded U.S.
citizens get home last week.
We are supporting U.S. public health authorities' efforts
to contain the virus outside the United States. These officers
have implemented Presidential Proclamation 9984, which suspends
the entry into the United States of any aliens who were present
in China, except Hong Kong and Macau, during the 14 days before
any attempted entry into the United States.
The Bureau of Consular Affairs is entirely fee funded. And
most of those fees come from these applicants. Under our
current authorities, we use these fees to cover most of the
costs of providing services for U.S. citizens abroad such as
those I just described. However, based on what we now know, we
anticipate a loss of approximately 100--excuse me, of 98
million, a loss of 98 million dollars in visa revenues this
year as a result of COVID-19.
To ensure we can help U.S. citizens in distress, despite
falling visa revenues, I would ask that you grant the
Department greater flexibility in spending existing fees.
We remain committed to protecting the health and welfare of
U.S. citizens overseas, and working actively with the
governments and international partners to achieve this goal in
this crisis.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to answering your
questions or those of the other members of the subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brownlee follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Brownlee.
Dr. Walters.

STATEMENT OF DR. WILLIAM A. WALTERS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND
MANAGING DIRECTOR FOR OPERATIONAL MEDICINE, BUREAU OF MEDICAL
SERVICES, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATES

Dr. Walters. Chairman Bera, Ranking Member Yoho, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
As my colleagues have stated, the Department of State is
committed to taking all necessary steps to protect the health
of our overseas work force and promote the well-being of U.S.
citizens around the world. Between January 28th, 2020, and
February 16th, 2020, the Department executed the most complex
non-military evacuation of U.S. citizens in its history. The
safe and efficient rescue of 1,174 people from Wuhan, China,
and the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan is a testament to
the agility, proficiency, and dedication of our work force, our
interagency partnerships, and others to accomplish our core
mission: advancing the interests of the American people.
Following the SARS outbreak of 2004, the U.S. Government
Accountability Office recommended that the Department work with
interagency partners and the private sector to develop
capabilities to support the medical evacuation and
transportation of U.S. citizens from areas impacted by the
sudden outbreak of infectious disease.
And the 2014 Ebola virus disease outbreak again served as a
reminder that the Department must have a standing crisis
response aviation capability to protect U.S. employees and
citizens when emergency situations arise.
Such a prompt repatriation of U.S. citizens from quarantine
conditions could not have been possible had it not been for the
Bureau of Medical Services' existing aviation contract and
solid corporate partners. The MMS contract is the Department's
only standing response aviation support and critical care
medical evacuation capability, and the U.S. Government's only
standing biocontainment transport capability.
Upon receipt of the mission directives, we managed to
configure and simultaneously choreograph the movement of five
aircraft, including the coordination of all flight clearances,
overflights, and other required logistics. Department of State
personnel onboard these aircraft were trained and equipped to
manage these operations.
The Department successfully directed and executed a total
of seven flights over four missions, with evacuees transported
to five different locations within the United States equipped
to safely receive, evaluate, and house persons exposed to the
virus. This operation involved close coordination with our
interagency partners, including the Federal Aviation
Administration and the Departments of Defense, Health and Human
Services, Homeland Security, and others.
We also coordinated with international partners, including
the Governments of the People's Republic of China, Japan, the
Republic of Korea, and Canada. I was the lead medical service
officer overseeing these missions from the second and third
mission on the ground in Wuhan.
Some 41 countries and territories have reported cases of
COVID-19 infection, placing the health of our employees and
U.S. citizens in these countries and territories at risk. In
these unprecedented times, the Department's medical
professionals are committed to doing everything we can for the
health and safety of our work force and the U.S. citizens
overseas.
In summary, I would like to thank each of you for your
continued support as we keep pace with this international
emergency. We know that your support to the Department, the
Bureau of Medical Services in particular, has made this all
possible, and that your continued support will be critical in
the months and years to come.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Walters follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bera. Thank you, Dr. Walters.
Director Redfield.

STATEMENT OF DR. ROBERT REDFIELD, DIRECTOR, U.S. CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION

Dr. Redfield. Well, thank you, Chairman Bera and Ranking
Member Yoho, and the members of the committee for the
opportunity to speak to you today.
CDC, the Department of Health and Human Services, the State
Department, and other U.S. Government partners are fully
committed to confront the serious level health threat presented
by coronavirus disease 19. CDC's public health approach to
COVID-19 is built on decades of infectious disease expertise
and prior public health emergencies such as SARS, MERS, Ebola,
and pandemic influenza. Our goal is to keep America safe and to
slow the introduction of this new virus into the United States.
Our response involves multi-layered, aggressive
containment, and potential mitigation measures, as needed.
These proven health--proven effective public health
interventions include early diagnosis, isolation, and contact
tracing. These public health interventions also include
targeted travel restrictions as well as the use of quarantine
for individuals returning from transmission hot zones such as
Hubei Province, China, and the Diamond Princess cruise ship
docked in Japan.
Internationally, CDC is working with the World Health
Organizations and ministries of health across the globe to
continue to combat this outbreak. CDC has deployed over 600
staff to the response, including staff supporting Japan, South
Korea, and our country office in China.
This outbreak underscores our national leadership role on
the global scale and the necessity of strengthening our global
capacity to stop disease threats at their source before they
spread. When this outbreak was first reported in December 2019,
China reported 27 cases of pneumonia linked to a seafood
market. Today there are more than 78,000 cases and over 2,700
deaths.
Over the past few months we have seen confirmed cases
reported in 46 international locations, including the United
States. And several of these countries now are supporting--are
reporting sustained community spread.
In the United States, 15 cases have been confirmed by our
Nation's public health and medical community based on clinical
guidance provided them by CDC. On February 26th, CDC confirmed
the infection with the virus caused by COVID-19 in a person who
reportedly did not have any relevant travel history or exposure
to other COVID patients. It is possible this could be an
instant--an instance of community spread of COVID, which would
be the first time this has happened in the United States.
Three cases have been detected among the Americans
repatriated from Wuhan, and another 43 cases were confirmed
among the cruise ship passengers that were repatriated from
Japan.
We commend the efforts of the Government of Japan to
institute quarantine measures onboard the ship, and we
appreciate Japan's cooperation with the U.S. Government to
evaluate and care and evacuate American citizens. CDC works in
partnership with the State Department to assist in this
repatriation effort of American citizens, both from China and
Japan.
All of the individuals repatriated from Wuhan by the State
Department charters have now been released from their mandatory
quarantine. These individuals are not at risk of spreading the
virus to others and should return to their normal lives.
Passengers from the Diamond Princess are in the process of
completing their quarantine at several locations across the
United States.
We are grateful to all the Americans who have and still are
undergoing quarantine for their patience and their cooperation,
as well as their willingness to ensure that they, their
families, their communities and our Nation remain safe.
We also want to thank the Department of Defense, the
military personnel, their families on the installations where
the evacuees have been quarantined for their hospitality and
service to our Nation.
Efforts to direct flights from mainland China to 11 U.S.
airports continue. CDC is working closely with Customs and
Border Protection to screen arriving passengers from mainland
China for illness, and to identify people at high risk of
exposure to this new virus and ensure that they are referred
for the appropriate public health followup.
To inform future travelers of the virus and where it is
spreading, CDC continues to post travel advisories and alerts.
Specifically, China and South Korea are now Level 3 warnings
that advise travelers against non-essential travel.
Finally, CDC's current assessment, including the United
States, is the risk of this infection remains low. However, we
do anticipate new community cases. We have implemented a
successful containment strategy, but we must be prepared to
move to a blended containment mitigation approach. We also need
to make sure we continue to strengthen our public health
infrastructure, as alluded to by the chairman, and be ready for
broader community spread.
CDC and HHS will continue to keep Members of Congress
informed of new developments. We recognize that you are trusted
leaders in your community, and communication with the public is
essential during this emergency.
Thank you. And I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Redfield follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bera. Thank you, Director.
I will now turn to my opening questions. And then I will
recognize the ranking member and our other members for 5
minutes for the purpose of questioning the witnesses.
Director, in my opening statement, as well as as you
alluded to it in your opening statement, I mentioned this
potential first patient community spread. And it is in my home
county, Sacramento County, and the patient is housed at the
hospital that I used to attend, and have taught lots of medical
students in.
In talking to my colleagues earlier today and getting a
sense of the time lines of this patient, one thing is a bit
consuming. I have taken care of patients like this who get
transferred up, who are intubated, whose respiratory diagnosis
is unknown cultures are coming back negative, et cetera. And in
this case, it does seem like last Wednesday the medical staff
asked for a test of coronavirus and were told this patient did
not meet the criteria and this was not a coronavirus patient.
As the patient worsened, it does sound like this past
Sunday there was an insistence and a strong push, and
ultimately the patient did get tested. And we know the results
that came back 72 hours later as a positive test.
A question that I have, and maybe it is twofold, is No. 1,
what current criteria are we using to determine who is going to
get a test and who is not going to get a test? When a doctor
caring for this patient and they are looking at a patient and
they request it, it is a no-brainer, we ought to do that test
based on the medical expertise of the folks that are trying to
confirm a diagnosis.
At a minimum, with this new case, we ought to rethink what
those criteria are. I would be curious to hear what criteria
are we using today and if the CDC is updating that criteria?
And the second component is that our testing capabilities
seem a bit too slow at this juncture. And I would be curious to
hear what we are doing to increase the rapidity and
availability of tests, if we are getting testing kits out to
all 50 States as well as more broadly to cities and others.
And then another issue is that it did take 72 hours from
testing to get the results. If we could get those testing
facilities a little bit closer, the results might come back
quicker. I'd be curious to see how the CDC is thinking about
that.
I am also told that one of my sister institutions, GCSF,
have produced a more rapid test. We need the ability to get
some samples to confirm the specificity and sensitivity of that
test. And there are some private sector companies that are also
working on rapid diagnostic tools as well.
So, Dr. Redfield.
Dr. Redfield. Mr. Chairman, thank you for the questions.
First, I think you know when this outbreak started, for
better or worse, even in China, it was linked to whether you
were exposed to the sea market, so, or food market. So, obvious
every confirmed case was from the market.
And then in discussions I had with the Chinese CDC director
I suggested they go out and look at other people with flu-like
illness. And, of course, then they reported that there were
many cases that were not around the market.
When the United States began this PUI, we had the
epidemiological advantage of the link to Hubei initially, where
most of the cases came from. Clearly what has been demonstrated
by the recent case is that is no longer operational.
I will tell you that as soon as that case was recognized we
met and we revised our case definition for persons under
investigation. And I am, you know, today that has been posted,
along with a new health advisory, that the recommendation
should be when a clinician or a public health individual
suspects coronavirus then we should be able to get a test for
coronavirus.
So, that is the current guidance that went out today.
And this is a fluid situation.
And your second question is also critical: how do we expand
the availability of testing?
We think it was an accomplish to, within a week to develop
a test so we could get eyes on this. And I think the CDC
scientists were able to do that. But that was not to take away
the broader responsibility to the private sector to come in to
be able to provide broader testing for the non-public health
community.
We have had aggressive discussions about how to expand
that. And we are continuing. We have shipped our kits, as you
know, initially out to many, many jurisdictions. We had trouble
with one of the controls. That has now been corrected, and
there are now 40 jurisdictions that have the ability to do the
test modified with the FDA approval. And in the next today,
tomorrow, we anticipate more kits from the private sector that
have been contracted by CDC to get out. And, hopefully, our
real goal is that LabCorp and Mayo Clinic and others.
But you get at the root of it: why is there a difference?
And I used to run a diagnostic lab and developed tests. The
other countries have the ability for someone like me to develop
a laboratory test and to deploy it. In our country, we develop
a laboratory test and we need to go through a regulatory
process in order to get it deployed. And, again, I'm not
criticizing the regulatory process, I am just saying that is
the difference.
And many labs in this country, many hospitals could stand
up--as you mentioned, San Francisco and others, your own
Davis--could stand up a test within several days. Because we
have published the sequences and the methods and exactly how to
do this, and that is how that one company IDT is now ready to
sell a test, which is really basically a copy of the CDC test.
So, I do think we have to look at that because this is an
example where we were slowed in a sense because of the way we
want to assure accuracy of these diagnostic tests. And I know
you all are wrestling with that. But we are having work kits
out later today that are going to be sent to the States.
The State of California, I talked to your secretary of
health just today because they were down to 200 tests, we are
sending more out there. There are three laboratories now, I am
told, in California that have the ability to do the testing.
But both of your points are very, very important. We take
them very seriously. One at least we are not going to let
happen again because we corrected it after the first case, and
the other we are working hard to get these tests out and hoping
that the private sector comes in for the clinical use. CDC
develops them for the public health use, and we need the
private sector to come in for the clinical.
Mr. Bera. Director, I appreciate the change in the
criterion and applaud that.
I do think this is a unique situation where we need all
hands on deck. And we do need to take a look at speeding up the
regulatory process. We do need to allow the academics and those
that have the ability to develop their own testing capabilities
to quickly move through the process to make sure these are
sensitive, specific, and accurate diagnostic tests.
And then if the private sector can augment our ability,
especially now that there may be community spread, we have to
stop the bottleneck and get these tests out to all parts of the
country.
So, we can take that up here, but looking at the
Administration, we all need to do whatever we can do to speed
up that regulatory process to make testing readily available to
the practitioners that are out there.
And with that, let me recognize the ranking member.
Mr. Yoho. And I appreciate it. And I appreciate you all's
testimony. And I think what you are just bringing up is a lot
of the questions I had. You know, I assume it is PCR test,
analyze test. Okay.
The variation in those, you guys created that. And I think
along that line there should be provisional approvals quickly.
And that is the thing, if you guys are in a bottleneck where
you cannot get that, let us know so we can help relieve that
and then do the testing and verification down the road. But you
have to have a place to start.
And then when we get to the point where we have private
manufacturing of these, we just need to make sure that we are
all on the same page, it is the same test so we do not have a
variation in sensitivity or specificity. And that we need to
make sure that other countries are doing the same.
My concern is, you know, with so much of the APIs being
created in China--about 80, 85 percent plus is what I have
heard--you know, I look at it from a national security
standpoint or a national health standpoint, not just our
country but other countries. You know, if somebody needs Advil
and you have a population of 1.3 billion people, you know, are
they going to service their customers first before over here?
And I think this is a wake-up call for American
manufacturers and our pharmaceutical companies not to be
dependent on a country.
What are your thoughts about that? Whoever wants to tackle
that? Mr. Fritz, you are the one.
Mr. Fritz. Thank you, Ranking Member Yoho.
There is clearly going to be all sorts of economic impacts
as the outbreak continues to develop. We are paying very, very
close attention to not just the general macroeconomic impacts
that are going to occur with regard to the United States
economy and other economies around the world, but also to the
impacts on supply chains and, particularly, as you mentioned,
supply chains that are important to our ability to react to
future instances, future outbreaks.
I do not have anything that I can share with you right now,
ranking member, in terms of what those responses will look
like, but it is something that we are looking at very
carefully. We have people across the interagency process who
are actively considering ways we can make sure that we are able
to make sure that we do have access to the necessary supply
chains.
Mr. Yoho. Right. Let me ask about the cooperation. Do you
guys feel that the cooperation is adequate with the Chinese
Government as far as transparency, just working side by side?
Or do you feel like it is here is the information we will give
you, and kind of guarded?
Mr. Fritz. Sir, why do not I take a first----
Mr. Yoho. Go ahead.
Mr. Fritz [continuing]. Shot at that on certainly with
regards to the evacuation of our personnel and American
citizens, very diplomatically and logistically challenging. I
would have to say that we were able to achieve a very high
level of coordination with the relevant Chinese authorities to
make the five flights that we got into and out of Wuhan happen.
They weren't easy, but we did in fact, we were able to rely on
our Chinese counterparts working with us to make sure that
those succeeded.
Mr. Yoho. Do you feel like they are treating all the
countries that way? Because they heard reports that they were
not letting the Taiwanese out.
Mr. Fritz. I would not be able to characterize whether they
have been able--whether they have been treating everyone as
well as they have been treating us. I do know that they have
worked well with a number of other partners, but I, I have
heard similar reports about our friends from Taiwan being
treated differently with regard to their evacuation plans.
I would say in general, however, I think the PRC
authorities have generally made good faith efforts to help
evacuate folks from Wuhan of other nationalities.
Mr. Yoho. Does anybody have reports about this being in
North Korea, which I would assume it is? I mean, do we have any
definitive proof?
Dr. Redfield. We do not have any confirmed reports, no.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. Let's see. I think with that, Mr. Chairman,
I am going to yield back. And I appreciate everybody here. I
look forward to the questions, and I am going to gather some
more information.
So, thank you all. And I know working together as you are,
we will be prepared for this in the United States. And,
hopefully, we can be the ones that help the other countries the
most.
Thank you.
Mr. Bera. Great. The gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Levin, is
recognized to question the witnesses for 5 minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
On Tuesday, Nancy Messonnier, the Director of the National
Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases at the CDC
said this of coronavirus:
``Ultimately, we expect we will see community spread in''
the United States. ``It's not . . . a question of if this will
happen . . . but . . . when this will happen, and how many
people in this country will have severe illness.''
But National Economic Council Director Larry Kudlow then
said:
``We have contained this, I won't say (it's) airtight but
(it's) pretty close to airtight.``
And also, this is all on Tuesday, President Trump said the
coronavirus in the United States ``that it's under control.''
And a ``problem that's going to go away.''
So, that was all on the same day.
Americans are scared of this situation. And they want to
know what is being done to keep them safe. And hearing mixed
messages like this within the span of hours is not reassuring.
Dr. Redfield, how can the virus be both a problem that is
going away and also not a question of if but when?
What should we be telling our constituents about what to
expect?
Dr. Redfield. Thank you very much. I think it is a very,
very important question.
Right now at this stage, and I have said this and I
continue to say it, the risk to the American public is low. We
have an aggressive containment strategy that really has worked
up to this time--15 cases in the United States. Until the case
that we just had in Sacramento, we had not had a new case in 2
weeks.
We do believe we are going to continue to see new cases,
and we do believe now there may be the initial cluster
occurrence of a community acquisition.
Some countries this has moved very quickly, like we saw in
Korea now where we had more cases in Korea last, in the last 24
hours than we had in all China.
Mr. Levin. Right.
Dr. Redfield. We see it in Italy, it is moving fast. Iran
it is moving fast.
But other countries have really used a containment and a
blended mitigation strategy, like Singapore and Hong Kong, and
they have really limited the spread after the initial
introduction from China.
We are of the point of view that we are still in aggressive
containment mode, and which is dependent on early case
recognition, isolation, and contact tracing that now is going
to be looking to identify these community introductions, and
practice public health to minimize them.
But at the same time, we have done this to give us time.
And I think what Dr. Messonnier was trying to say, I think it
maybe could have been done much more articulately from what the
American public heard, what she was trying to say it is also a
good time for us to prepare if we have to go to more
mitigation. We are still committed aggressively to get
aggressive containment.
And I think I want the American public to know at this
point that the risk is low. I want them to know that we are
going to start identifying more cases, like we did the other
day. I am going to ask them to, obviously, accelerate their own
view of the standard things that we do for flu: handwashing
often, do not go to work or school if you are sick.
And we are, we have launched a larger, for our next level
of our multi-layered public health response, is to now
institute broad surveillance. And we have initiated it. We are
planning over the, hopefully, the new, in the next 4, 8 weeks,
obviously linked to the supplemental, to actually make our
surveillance for corona the same as flu nationwide. So, we can
be, you know, very quickly picking up when there is an
introduction in the community, go in and try to stop it.
So, I think that is our position at this point.
Mr. Levin. Good. But let me quickly ask you one other
question in my limited time.
I want to ask you to speak about the danger of xenophobia
in the situation like this. CNN reported last month on a
disturbing example from the SARS outbreak when, and quoting
now, ``people of Asian descent were treated like pariahs in the
west. There were reports of white people covering their faces
in the presence of Asian co-workers, and real eState agents who
were told not to serve Asian clients.''
We saw similar incidents during the H1N1 swine flu outbreak
in 2009, and during the 2014 Ebola outbreak. And, sadly, I have
heard reports of incidents like this around coronavirus.
So, I would like you to talk about why it is so important
to avoid stereotyping people as carriers of the coronavirus and
how incidents like these can be avoided, and how they are
dangerous really for public health.
Dr. Redfield. I could not agree with you more. For those
who have heard me talk before, I have always said that stigma
is the enemy of public health in all its forms. Whether it is
in dealing with HIV, whether it is dealing with drug use
disorder, whether it is dealing with obesity, whether it is
dealing with a response to coronavirus at this time, stigma has
no role, no place in public health. It is counterproductive.
Mr. Levin. So, I think we are going to have to proactively
get that message out to the American people so that we do not
harm our own public health with stereotypes folks may have.
Don't you agree?
Dr. Redfield. Yes, I, I will continue to echo it. And I
think you make an important point because we have, you know, we
have seen those reports. And I think, again, we have to re-echo
that stigma has no role in public health.
Mr. Levin. Thank you. And thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Mast, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Redfield, I want to start with you. And you spoke
specifically about early diagnosis being part of the positive
that is going on here. Can you discuss with me what are early
symptoms which lead to early diagnosis?
Dr. Redfield. You know, I think the first thing I want to
say is there is a lot we do not know. And we are learning more
each day. That is what concerns those of us that are
confronting this. If it was flu, we understand flu. But there
is a lot we do not know.
But what we have learned in the last 8 weeks is that this
virus can actually cause asymptomatic infection, no symptoms.
Now, that is complicated when you are dealing with a public
health threat if you can have it. And on the Princess ship over
50 percent of the individuals that were diagnosed in the
process in Japan lacked symptoms.
Now, there may be an ascertainment issue because if they
thought if they had symptoms they would be treated different.
But, clearly, there is a significant percentage of people that
lack symptoms. And there is clear evidence now that we have
learned, those individuals can actually transmit the virus.
So, as the chairman knows, from a public health point of
view that, that makes this more complicated.
The other side of it, its symptoms can be as negligible as
a scratchy throat, a dry cough. And you can see that is why
initially we had PUI definitions that were pretty narrow
because if all of a sudden everybody with a scratchy throat or
a dry cough were during flu season came, then we have some
complexities.
At the severe end it can cause really a very significant
pneumonia, respiratory compromise requiring critical care. And
overall it does look like 5 to--5 percent of individuals in the
China situation are critical, 15 need critical care. Other
countries are starting to show similar. But on the other
spectrum there can be this asymptomatic illness.
So, we are still earning. It is complicated. Obviously, in
the individual case that we talked about here where severe
pneumonia in an otherwise healthy individual, in light of what
we now know that can prompt the medical community to consider
coronavirus in a differential diagnosis. But a lot of
individuals may just present with a sore throat and a dry
cough.
Mr. Mast. Let me go to the other side of the table. Eighty-
plus thousand cases diagnosed. And the number that I have read
is 33,000 recovered in mainland China, recovered from having
the diagnosis. Can you say what has been a chief factor that
has led to those that have recovered through it? Is that
something that we know?
Dr. Redfield. I think there is probably two major factors.
One--or maybe three--one is age, and one is comobidities. So,
individuals that happen to have diabetes, or hypertension, or
chronic obstructive lung disease, and happen to be elderly,
these individuals have a much higher mortality.
But the other issue that needs to be stressed is the
effectiveness of the health care system. So, in Wuhan the
mortality right now is somewhere over 4 percent. Their health
system is beyond strained. Before this outbreak they had 132 I
think isolation beds for infectious disease. Today they have
over 20,000.
Now, you can go from 132 beds to 20,000. You can build the
structure. But, as the chairman knows, where are the doctors?
Where are the nurses? Where are the ventilators? Where is the
trained health care professional?
So, we see a mortality and we believe it is the integrity
of the health system that is a major factor. Because if you
just go to the rest of China, the mortality is probably about a
half a percent.
Okay. So, I think, I think the major factors I would say
were co-morbidities, age, and the resilience of the health
system that you happen to be in when you get sick. If you do
not have access to oxygen, the mortality is going to be a lot
higher. This is why we are worried about Pakistan, Afghanistan,
Bahrain, you know, North Africa, all the countries that have
come on board recently, many of them do not have health systems
that are going to be able to sustain life in the presence of
pulmonary compromise.
Mr. Mast. And this is something you have a lot more faith
in our health system, obviously, than Wuhan, or pick any of the
other countries that you just listed off?
Dr. Redfield. Yes. I think we have, we are in a strong
position, we have an effective health care system. You know, I
think, you know, at this stage if we can continue to do what we
are trying--early identification, find these community cases,
get our arms around them--I think we can continue to respond.
Obviously, if the numbers get to the point that we cannot
control, then that is a different, a totally different part,
totally different issue. But right now----
Mr. Mast. I will pause you there because my time is about
to end just to say I think you, you mentioned something that is
important to realize about this, that our health system has a
different starting point than that health system of Wuhan and
many other places. Certainly does not make us impervious to
this but it is a better starting place to be.
I thank you for your comments.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Mast.
The gentlelady from Pennsylvania, Ms. Houlahan, is
recognized for 5 minutes to question the witnesses.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. I am actually going to start, I
know that it is my obligation in some ways to ask complicated
questions about policy, but, Dr. Redfield, I would actually
like to start and lead off with Mr. Levin's conversation for
the human beings who are at home, you know, my kids, my family
members, my community, and ask the doctor, you are the 18th
director of the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, and
Administrator of the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry. And in your capacity could you help me to answer a
few questions that I frequently get asked.
The first--and they can be any answer, I do not know the
answers, I am just asking on behalf of my community--should
people be afraid?
Dr. Redfield. No.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. Could you turn on your microphone.
Dr. Redfield. No.
Ms. Houlahan. Should people engage in regular hand washing
and coughing into their sleeves?
Dr. Redfield. Absolutely.
Ms. Houlahan. Should people be stocking up on cleaning
supplies?
Dr. Redfield. No.
Ms. Houlahan. Should people be stocking up on prescription
medications that they have?
Dr. Redfield. Not at this time.
Ms. Houlahan. Should people be stocking up on food
supplies?
Dr. Redfield. Not at this time.
Ms. Houlahan. Should you wear a mask if you are healthy?
Dr. Redfield. No.
Ms. Houlahan. And is there a website--and you can answer
this later if you do not know it by heart--where people can go
to access good information about these questions?
Dr. Redfield. Absolutely, in the CDC. CDC.gov we have all
of the information on that website, and a sub thing can take
you to coronavirus and where we are in any preparedness, and
all our recommendations.
Ms. Houlahan. And, sir, is there anything else that I
should have asked you that is a regular, everyday person kind
of question?
Dr. Redfield. The one comment I would make, because I do
see people feeling a need to go buy masks, and I would ask
them--and some people scoff at me when I say this--we need to
make sure those N95 masks are available to the doctors and
nurses that are going to be taking care of individuals that
have this illness.
And it really does displease me to find people going out.
There's no role for these masks in the community. These masks
needs to be prioritized for health care professionals who as
part of that job are taking care of individuals and/or
individuals who have this virus and are in home isolation or
home quarantine for those family members.
I would like to have them prioritize the uses that we
recommend and get people to realize that that is what these
masks need to be reserved for.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. I appreciate that.
And with the last couple minutes of my questioning, I think
this is either for Mr. Fritz or for Dr. Redfield based on how
people have answered questions, I am going to followup on the
line of questioning that has to do with prescription and
pharmaceutical supply chains and the integrity of the supply
chain.
Is there a place, a way that we have historically been
tracking various supply chains? In my old business we would
make sure that you had at least or three suppliers of the same
material just in case. Is there something that we have, a data
base or other system that tracks those kinds of suppliers and
where they are geographically?
Mr. Fritz. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the question.
As I mentioned, there is a very intense interagency process
under way. I think HHS in particular, the Food and Drug
Administration, and other relevant agencies are all looking
very carefully at this exact question and making sure that the
answer to that question going forward is that we do have access
to whatever we need to sustain ourselves in the current
outbreak and to make sure that we are ready for future ones.
Ms. Houlahan. So, I understand that the FDA largely is, you
know, sort of lead on this, but is there a role that the State
Department can play on this? Is there something that we in this
body can do to be helpful in that?
Mr. Fritz. What the State Department is doing is we are
looking very closely at the impact of the outbreak on our
global supply chains. And, of course, we are working with some
of our other foreign affairs and trade-related agencies to map
that out.
And then we are, again, together with HHS and others
looking at how that impacts our ability to access what we need
in time of crisis here in the country.
Ms. Houlahan. Yes. And I am just looking for this to be
sort of a sad lessons learned, you know, how can we take this
experience and make sure it does not happen to us again? And
how can we make sure we know where our supplies--suppliers are
and how to make sure that we are safe from this kind of
exposure again.
Mr. Fritz. Yes, ma'am. I think this crisis is teaching us
that we need to pay very, very close attention to this in the
era of globalized supply chains. And we are bound and
determined to make sure that whatever lessons are learned from
this are applied going forward.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. And with my last half a minute of
conversation I just wanted to kind of take off on something
that we were happy that our health care system was better than
Wuhan. That is awesome. But can you comment a little bit more
about how we need to work with other nations to make sure all
of our health care systems are working together in tandem on
this?
Mr. Fritz. Thank you for that question, ma'am.
I would like to point out that U.S. foreign assistance over
a number of years now has focused in large part on helping
countries around the world build public health systems that are
able to be resilient in the face of these crises. Of course,
that is being put to the test in many instances.
I think what we can say is things probably would be much
worse if it had not been for our efforts over a number of years
to share best practices and actually make resources available
to build capacity around the world in this aspect. And, of
course, we have announced up to $100 million of assistance for
partners around the world to respond to the COVID-19 crisis.
And----
Mr. Fritz. Thank you. I have run out of town. I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Ms. Houlahan.
The gentleman from Ohio. Mr. Chabot, is recognized to
question the witnesses for 5 minutes.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fritz, I will direct my question at you if I can. I was
one of the original founding co-chairs of the congressional
Taiwan Caucus. And I am now one of the co-chairs of that
caucus. And as you know, and as we all know, the PRC, China,
considers Taiwan a breakaway province. Taiwan, for all intents
and purposes, conducts itself as an independent nation, not
necessarily recognized by the world as such, but it is. And the
people there are free. They ought to be a model to other
countries around the globe. They have been bullied by the PRC
for many years now.
But my question is this: they have sought to be recognized
as an observer status basically at the WHO for many years. In
my view they ought to be essentially a fully recognized
participant in the WHO. It is kind of a gap in our world health
system in not recognizing them, not letting them fully
participate. But at this point China has still blocked them
from so participating.
With something as serious as the coronavirus and,
obviously, its origins in the PRC, in China, and Taiwan being
right next door, and Taiwan having some of the top medical
institutions and doctors, medical personnel in the world there,
you know, it seems to make no sense that China continues in
this effort. Taiwan could be helpful, even more helpful to
China.
So what gap does this create in the world's response to
this very serious medical and the situation we have with the
coronavirus, what is the problem with what China is doing
relative to Taiwan?
Mr. Fritz. Thank you very much for the question,
Congressman.
As you said, Taiwan is a robust democracy. It is a model in
that respect. It is a reliable partner on public health and a
number of other concerns that we share. And it is a force for
good in the world. I could not agree more.
And I think this COVID-19 outbreak only further underlines
the unacceptability of Taiwan being excluded from the World
Health Organization and the World Health Assembly because the
People's Republic of China blocks every attempt for it to do
so.
As you mentioned, not only has the COVID-19 outbreak
affected Taiwan, they have 30 some cases there, and to the
extent that they are unable to get timely information from the
WHO, that impacts public health on Taiwan.
On the other hand, as you pointed out, Taiwan has a lot of
expertise, and they have some experience. And, in fact, they
have their own epidemiological track record now dealing with
COVID-19. And to the extent that that is not being shared in a
complete and timely fashion with other WHO members, clearly
that does not do anything for the public health of the rest of
the international community. Which is, of course, why the
United States has and continues to push very hard for Taiwan to
have meaningful participation in the WHO and to be granted
observer status at the World Health Assembly.
China, it is worth pointing out that the People's Republic
of China was okay with Taiwan being an observer back when a
different party was in power in Taiwan. So, through 2016 Taiwan
did have observer status at the WHA. It is only when, when the
democratic, the DPP party came into power in 2016 that China
began blocking across the board Taiwan's participation.
And we continue to push back very, very hard against that
with as many of our like-minded partners as possible. And I
think our argument is only bolstered now by the COVID-19
outbreak
And I would point out that, you know, this push by the U.S.
is fully with our U.S. One China policy and, of course, with
the Taiwan Relations Act which governs unofficial relations
between the United States and Taiwan.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. My time is almost expired,
so let me just reiterate what you said. I agree with all the
points that you made. Thank you for that. And I want to thank
the Administration for continuing to be a friend of Taiwan. And
we would encourage that they continue to do so, even step that
up.
And it is a shame that the PRC, China, allows its
intransigence with respect to Taiwan to put not only the people
of Taiwan and its own people but the rest of the world more at
risk than we ought to be. So, they ought to, they ought to do
the right thing here and allow Taiwan not just to be observer
status but to be a full member of the World Health
Organization, the WHO.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chabot.
The gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr. Cicilline, is
recognized to question the witnesses for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. And, Mr. Chairman, I want to
thank you for the courtesy in allowing me to participate in
this hearing.
Thank you to our witnesses for their testimony.
Dr. Redfield, I want to ask you kind of to followup a
little bit on Ms. Houlahan's question about the supply chain
because, as you described this potential pandemic becoming
really a global challenge--I guess it already is by most
estimates--what are we doing to assure that there is a
sufficient supply of medical supplies? You mentioned oxygen. Do
we have a coordinating body that is figuring out if this
pandemic proceeds in a serious way in this country that we will
have access to the resources we need both for the kind of
containment we've spoken about and treatment? Is there someone
doing that sort of planning?
Dr. Redfield. Yes, that is not really within what I do at
CDC, but I will tell you that the Assistant Secretary for
Preparedness and Response, ASPR, has done extensive work. And
as was mentioned by Mr. Fritz, there is an interagency group
that is really going through this in quite detail with the FDA
and ASPR in terms of many of the medical issues. But there is a
broader intergovernment group going in the broader issues.
And so I can tell you that is ongoing. And we could
obviously get to you who is the leadership on it, but I know
ASPR and FDA have done it on the medical side. And there is a
broader intergovernmental working group to really get down to
all of these issues.
Mr. Cicilline. Right. And you also made reference to the
China CDC or counterpart. Can you speak a little bit about the
relationship between the CDC in the U.S. and the Chinese,
particularly as it relates, particularly just in this health
care worker transmission.
Two weeks ago China reported 1,700 health care workers had
been infected by coronavirus. And just wondering what we are
learning about that transmission and whether or not that is
informing protocols here in this country to protect our health
care workers?
Dr. Redfield. Yes. Thank you.
CDC has had now over a 30-year working relationship with
China's CDC. There is a reason they call it China CDC. And I
actually have a U.S. CDC component that is affiliated with the
embassy but is attached to the China CDC.
The chairman, the head of CDC China and I have been in
regular discussions since the very beginning when this happened
on New Year's Eve, and had very open scientific discussions
about what he knew at the time, what he was learning so we
could use that information. And that continues bi-
directionally, as I said.
From the be--you know, at the beginning there was not a
thought that there was human-to-human transmission and
nosocomial transmission. They saw that, you know, in the first
week, they did not see any in the second week. But, remember,
they were using, you know, a definition of whether people were
very severely ill. They were not recognizing that this could be
mildly symptomatic.
Since then there has obviously been extensive hospital-
based transmission. One series that was published in one of our
journals, in JAMA, recently showed that up to 40 percent of the
cases got infected either because they were health care workers
or because they went into a hospital where they were infected
after they got there.
So, health care transmission is really a high, high risk,
particularly in areas that really are not vigilant in the
importance of infection control. We are happy to say to date we
have not had a health care worker.
Obviously, the new case as was mentioned by the chairman,
raises concern because people were intubated and not
necessarily in precaution, so we are aggressively evaluating
that health care setting.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
And, Dr. Redfield, could you just give us a quick update on
the vaccine development status and whether or not additional
resources are necessary, what the timetable looks like for
that? I think lots of people are interested in that.
Dr. Redfield. Sure. Well, the NIH, Dr. Fauci has the lead
on this. But I can tell you what he has told us and others is
that they do have a candidate product that they are planning to
move into a phase one trial, hopefully in the next 6 weeks,
which will evaluate immunogenicity and safety. Assuming that
that candidate--and they have partnered already with a private
sector company--and assuming that goes well, then they would
move into an expanded phase two trial.
And in reality, if everything goes really well and they get
the strategic partners that they need, he is saying he looks at
a year to 18 months before we could have it.
We do believe scientifically that this is a virus that
should be able to have a successful vaccine based on the
coronavirus as opposed if we were trying to do this, say, for
HIV, you know, we would say, well, we do not know because we
are not sure how that is going to work or not. But for this
virus there is a lot of scientific reason to think that it will
be successful. And the NIH is really moving forward very
aggressively to try to make that happen.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Bera. The gentlelady from Virginia, Ms. Spanberger, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you very much. Thank you to the
witnesses for being here.
And, as you might imagine, I am very concerned about this,
the issue of this virus, and constituents across central
Virginia, the district I represent, are deeply concerned. So I
want to start by saying thank you, Dr. Redfield, for what you
said to my colleague Representative Houlahan which is that they
should not be afraid. I think that is incredibly important. I
appreciate you being here today to talk about this important
issue but also to mention that because so much of how we are
handling this, this disease, this outbreak, will also be
determined by how we are communicating and what the temperament
and feeling on the ground is.
I wanted to speak very briefly about some local
preparedness. And, Dr. Redfield, I will start with you.
The coronavirus is expected to put additional strain on our
health care system. And you have noted that our health care
providers are already at near max capacity due to a bad flu
season. How is the Federal Government ensuring that medical
providers across the country have what they need and the
resources that they need? And what else could we be doing?
Dr. Redfield. A very important question. And I want to say
that my partnership agency in the Health and Human Services,
ASPR, has been working and continues to work to see that
hospitals begin to get prepared. That is one of their central
missions to the Assistant Secretary for Response and
Preparedness, ASPR. And so they are going through that in great
detail. They have had dialogs with different hospital
corporations, with hospital leaders to begin to see that.
Because you do say that this, you know, for us there is not
a lot of flex in our health system right now. And most
hospitals right now because of influenza if you are looking at
them they may be at 95, 96, 97 percent capacity. This is why I
stress that our current public health response, that multi-
layered response is containment, containment, containment,
containment, to try to buy us time for the fruits of labors by
NIH, and Dr. Fauci, and the private sector. So, hopefully, in
the not-too-distant future, in a year, year-and-a-half, 2 years
we will have a vaccine.
But I can tell you ASPR is very aggressively working and
evaluating this and trying to, the term they use is
``resilience,'' to try to make sure they can build resilience
into the system.
Ms. Spanberger. And following up on that notion of
containment, in order to contain we need to identify it, in
your written testimony you noted the importance of using
illness surveillance systems. Can you tell us a bit more about
how we are applying existing systems to this virus and our U.S.
public health agencies developing new surveillance, illness
surveillance systems specific to coronavirus?
Dr. Redfield. Yes. This is really important. This is really
one of the most important components from CDC's perspective in
the recently requested supplemental.
We have an excellent surveillance system in this Nation for
flu. We have multiple surveillance system, as you have just
mentioned. We have the--we have multiple. And rather than
recreate the wheel, what we have proposed, and we have actually
begun this in to at least initiate it, is we are really
adapting our entire respiratory disease surveillance systems
and now interfacing coronavirus-19.
And, you know, I am very hopeful in the next 8, 12 weeks we
will be in a position that we will have your flu surveillance
system, if you follow that, and you are going to have your
national coronavirus system.
I am more interested in this as I am hoping is the canary
in the mine field--in the mine that I can see when and if we
are getting community, I do not have to wait until an
individual gets hospitalized and is on a ventilator. You know,
I have to be honest with you, we do not know what we are going
to find when we start this, but we are very anxious to get this
broad coronavirus surveillance system using all the systems
that we have right now for respiratory disease and get that
operational as soon as possible.
Ms. Spanberger. And to be able to see the trends that we
may be seeing that in fact demonstrate that we are looking at
potentially an outbreak in a locality or in a State?
Dr. Redfield. Absolutely. And then, and then be able to put
the full power of the public health approach of case
recognition, isolation contact tracing to try to make sure that
that cluster is contained.
Ms. Spanberger. And do you have the financial resources and
the employee capacity for this surveillance system and what you
need into the future?
Dr. Redfield. Well, I will say that is one of our major
components of the supplemental that was put forward----
Ms. Spanberger. Okay.
Dr. Redfield [continuing]. Was to be able for us to roll
this out nationally.
Ms. Spanberger. Great. Thank you so much to the other
witnesses. I know I concentrated my question on Dr. Redfield,
but I do appreciate your time and your presence here today.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Ms. Spanberger.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Lieu, is recognized to
question the witnesses for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Chairman Bera, for calling this
important hearing.
Thank you, Dr. Redfield, for your public service, including
your service to the U.S. military.
The Washington Post published an article, headline is ``A
Faulty CDC Coronavirus Test Delays Monitoring of Disease's
Spread.'' So, my first question to you is does the CDC's test
for coronavirus work?
Dr. Redfield. Yes.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. What is the error rate on that test?
Dr. Redfield. So, we created a test really very rapidly
based on the sequence of the virus, within really a week of the
sequence being published. And it is a PCR-based test. And the
way it was designed at CDC was it actually measures three
different, if you will, components.
Mr. Lieu. I just need to know the error rate about, if you
know it.
Dr. Redfield. Yes. The problem was in when the test sent to
the States one of the components had a contaminant in it. That
is what had to be corrected.
The test at CDC works fine. When it was given to a
manufacturer to scale up for the States----
Mr. Lieu. Has the CDC fixed it?
Dr. Redfield. It has been corrected and there are tests
that are being shipped out as we speak.
Mr. Lieu. Okay. So, in fact that first test did not work?
Dr. Redfield. First test works because it was developed at
CDC, and it works fine. We test every one in the country. When
the manufacturer scaled to send to the States, when the States
got it they could tell positives, they could tell negatives,
but because of one of the contaminants in the control there was
another group that was we do not know if it is positive or
negative; it was inconclusive.
And at that time the FDA requested that we not use that
test and have people send it to CDC where the initial lots that
we made were quite functional and there was no contaminant. And
that is the test we continue to use today.
There are now over----
Mr. Lieu. All right, I just needed so the current test
works?
Dr. Redfield. Current test works.
Mr. Lieu. Okay, great.
So, it is they are reporting now that 48 countries have
coronavirus cases. In Italy it has skyrocketed now to 650
cases. South Korea has now 1,700 cases, as you yourself stated.
There are more new cases in South Korea than in China. Why is
it that we are only testing people who have traveled to China?
That seems to make not a lot of sense to me.
Dr. Redfield. Well, when this outbreak originally
occurred----
Mr. Lieu. I am talking about right now, not when it
occurred. Right now. Why aren't we testing people----
Dr. Redfield. Well, we are going----
Mr. Lieu [continuing]. That traveled to South Korea,
traveled to Italy, traveled to----
Dr. Redfield. Right.
Mr. Lieu [continuing]. The 11 European countries where
there are now coronavirus cases?
Dr. Redfield. We are continuing the travel restrictions
that were initiated----
Mr. Lieu. No, no, I am just talking about testing people.
Why do not you expand the test? Because there is a person in
Northern California that doctors recommended get the test and
CDC said no because the person had not traveled to China. That
is just really stupid because, you know, this has extended way
beyond China to 48 countries, every continent except Antarctica
has these cases. We really should be testing not just those
that have traveled to China.
Can you commit to expanding the test to beyond those that
have just traveled to China if they have the symptoms that look
like they have coronavirus?
Dr. Redfield. Congressman, I mentioned earlier, I think
before you were here, just so you know we initially had a
geographic restriction. We have changed that. We have posted
there is no geographic restriction. That if a clinician or a
health department official considers the coronavirus in the
differential diagnosis, that now meets our criteria for----
Mr. Lieu. When did you make that change?
Dr. Redfield. We made that, well, yesterday we did it and
posted it today.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you for making that change. Okay.
So, in terms of transmission, because earlier you said
people should not be afraid, my understanding based on the
articles, Reuters reported that coronavirus contagion rate
makes it hard to control. And there are these two scientific
studies that show essentially each person infected with
coronavirus is passing the disease on to between two and three
other people on average at current transmission rates. And then
you have this long incubation period, potentially 14 days or
more. You could have an exponential explosion of cases rather
quickly such as in Italy; isn't that correct?
Dr. Redfield. I think we have seen that, obviously, in
Italy, Korea, and Iran. And yet----
Mr. Lieu. All right. So, this person in Northern California
who did not travel to China, where we do not know where he got
the coronavirus, he could have passed it on to two more people,
who passed it on to two more people, who passed it on to two
more people. So, there could be a whole cluster of cases. But
until as of yesterday we do not know because we were not
testing anyone who did not travel to China. Am I understanding
this correctly?
Dr. Redfield. The current public health evaluation of the
case in the chairman's district is being led by the State
public health system of California. We are supporting it. We
have a large number of contacts that have been evaluated, that
are being isolated, that are being tested to really look at the
full extent of the potential transmission around that case.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
I am going to conclude by saying Donald Trump has attempted
to minimize the coronavirus outbreak. There is an article in
the Daily Beast titled ``Coronavirus May Explode in the U.S.
Overnight Just Like in Italy.'' I will request that when the
data and science contradicts what Donald Trump says that you
follow the data and the science.
I yield back.
Dr. Redfield. Yes, I could just say that I commit that CDC
is a science-based, data-drive service organization. And that
is one of the prides that I have to be the director now, to be
in a science-based, data-driven, but most importantly service
organization.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Mr. Bera. Let me recognize the gentleman from California,
Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you. China failed to, well, actually hid
this disease at the beginning. China continues to try to
exclude Taiwan from the WHO. There are number of things China
could be doing. We need Chinese cooperation to start clinical
trials. Dr. Redfield, are we getting it?
Dr. Redfield. There is a drug called Remdesivir that is now
in clinical trials in China and Japan. And it has been extended
actually to the United States for the repatriated individuals.
Mr. Sherman. There are similarities, vague similarities to
the flu. As flu is often seasonal, is this disease--our
president has said, oh, it is going to be gone by April. How
confident are we that transmission will be substantially less
when the winter is over?
Dr. Redfield. It is unknown.
Mr. Sherman. There are various treatments that are used for
flu such as Theraflu. Is there any reason to think that there
is some chance that that would be helpful in reducing the
effect of the disease?
Dr. Redfield. Not for the coronavirus-19.
Mr. Sherman. And, likewise, the SARS vaccine, would that
provide any protection?
Dr. Redfield. It is unlikely that they cross-reacted. But
the methods that they used to develop that vaccine is the
reason that Dr. Fauci has been able to accelerate the vaccine
he is developing.
Mr. Sherman. And what is the earliest we could have a
vaccine?
Dr. Redfield. Well, Dr. Fauci has said 1 year to 18 months,
if everything goes well.
Mr. Sherman. Got you.
Let's see, how well are we cooperating with China today?
Are they providing the information we need and our people on
the ground, Mr. Fritz?
Mr. Fritz. Thank you, Congressman.
I pointed out a bit earlier that we did get a very--we got
good faith cooperation from Chinese officials as we worked to
send in and get out our five planeloads of evacuees.
Mr. Sherman. I am not talking about--yes, but do we have
people on the ground at the epicenter of this epidemic getting
information that is helping Dr. Redford do--Redfield do his
job?
Mr. Fritz. I will defer to my colleague on the actual----
Mr. Sherman. Are you getting what you need from China?
Dr. Redfield. I have regular discussions with my
counterpart George Gao, who is the head of CDC. We do have a
CDC U.S., a CDC that is embedded into the China CDC, so we are
having daily interactions. I have a team of respiratory experts
that are there working there.
At a scientific level we are having good dialog.
Mr. Fritz. Congressman, if I could, I would point out that,
you know, Secretary Pompeo and others have also, of course,
made it clear that China's allergy to freedom of speech,
freedom of expression, et cetera, have been obviously had a
very negative impact on the ability of----
Mr. Sherman. The initial response of local officials was to
try to keep it under wraps, and the failure to be a free
society. That is why this thing got going. And we are now in a
position that perhaps could have been avoided if China had a
different policy toward free expression versus hide things and
hope that you can keep them under wraps.
Let's see, why does the Administration request for
additional funding rely overwhelmingly on transferring funds
from other disease-fighting accounts? Dr. Redfield, do we need
to spend any money on Ebola? Can we just grab that money, no
problem?
Dr. Redfield. Obviously we have an ongoing Ebola outbreak
right now in the Congo. I really cannot----
Mr. Sherman. Do you think it is wise then to take all the
money that we had appropriated for Ebola and not spend any
money on Ebola?
Dr. Redfield. I really cannot comment on the budgetary
decisions that were made.
Mr. Sherman. Are you doing useful work that will save lives
or may save lives with regard to Ebola? If we leave the money
in the budget will you spend it effectively in ways that help
save lives?
Dr. Redfield. We currently have an ongoing Ebola outbreak
in the eastern DRC where we have a substantial number of CDC
people deployed. And we are, if you will, and I say this in
knock-on-wood, we are finally close to winning. Okay. We are
down to really in the last week we did not have a single case.
So, we now, we now project based on our models that we
might actually end this outbreak by the end of June. But,
obviously, when instability happens again we could be right
back where we were 2 months ago, so.
Mr. Sherman. And if this Ebola outbreak expands in the
eastern Congo, it could be a threat to the United States, just
as a Chinese-epicentered problem has been a threat to the
United States and in California?
Dr. Redfield. Well, we have been fortunate with Ebola in
that there is very little movement from the Ebola eastern Congo
where this outbreak is and the United States. But we obviously
have had to invest significantly in what we call exit screening
from the Congo as we have dealt this.
As you know, we have been in this outbreak now for almost
about to start the third year.
Mr. Sherman. If we do not fight Ebola in Africa does that
mean Americans are safe and everything is fine, and you are
assuring me that we can just not worry about Ebola, and we are
not going to have a problem this year or next year?
Dr. Redfield. I think one of the most important things our
Nation can do is build a robust global health security
capacity, all right, so that we can detect, prevent, and
respond to these outbreaks at their source. And this is exactly
what we are doing with Ebola. And the more that we can expand
that capacity, and I believe strongly it is a core mission of
CDC, we are the tip of the spear to identify these infectious
disease threats, and obviously we appreciate your continued
support in that regard.
Because what we are seeing with the coronavirus is just
another example of why it is so important that we have global
leadership and the ability to detect, prevent, and respond to
these outbreaks.
Mr. Sherman. I would just comment that the outbreak of this
coronavirus demonstrates the importance of your work and the
absolute folly of pulling the plug on some of your work because
of an unwillingness to fund the additional work that we need to
do for the coronavirus.
With that, I will yield back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you.
I am going to use the chairman's prerogative to ask a
couple questions because I feel bad, Mr. Brownlee, Dr. Walters.
I appreciate your coming down. See, I do not know if I am doing
a favor asking you questions or if the goal as witnesses is to
slide out of here with no questions. But I appreciate your
coming down.
Mr. Brownlee, I hear your concerns, and we will continue an
ongoing conversation about flexibility and consular functions.
I have been honest in my concerns with the Administration in
announcing travel restrictions for individuals coming from
China. I understand the rationale and reasoning behind it, but
also have some concerns about whether it is going to do what we
hope it does with regards to containment.
Mr. Brownlee, going forward are we considering similar
measures against other nations? And if we are, under what
specific circumstances?
And then the last question is has the CDC and the State
Department issued travel advisories for countries who have been
impacted by coronavirus?
What specific objective criteria are we using to make these
determinations? Dr. Redfield, that is a question for you.
Mr. Brownlee. Thank you very much for your question,
Chairman.
With regard to further possible proclamations, this remains
the prerogative of the White House. They are gathering
information from all available sources as to whether further
restrictions might be necessary to help contain the virus.
As Dr. Redfield has noted now several times, we are still
in the containment phase. Whether CDC and other health care
provide--public health authorities will recommend that is
beyond my scope.
With regard to travel advisories, this too is something we
revisit constantly in the Bureau of Consular Affairs. We are
looking at a variety of different issues with regard to any
single country. Health is one, crime is another, risk of
terrorism another, natural disaster, et cetera.
We look at information that we draw from a variety of
sources. The U.N. provides some information on health issues.
We talk with the Bureau of Diplomatic Security with regard to
the crime and terrorism risks. We pull information from the
intelligence community, in other words, from a variety of
different sources. We talk to our friends, the five like-minded
countries, U.K., Australia, et cetera.
We gather all this information. We use a fact-based
metric--matrix to decide whether we are going to rank a country
one, two, three, or four.
Mr. Bera. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Brownlee. I hope that answers your question, sir.
Mr. Bera. Dr. Redfield.
Dr. Redfield. The purpose of the CDC levels is really a
different purpose: it is really for public health purposes
only. And we actually have three levels that, you know, makes
it confusing.
We have the first, which is just an alert to let the
American public know that there is an ongoing infectious
disease issue. And so right now for the alert, Singapore,
Taiwan, Thailand, Vietnam.
Once we see that there is significant human-to-human
transmission, so it is not just say there is something going on
there, we go to what we call Level 1. And right now that is
Hong Kong.
When there is actually multiple clusters of human-to-human
transmission, then we go to a Level 2. And that really tells
people, particularly if you have your older or if you have any
comorbidities, you really ought to reconsider travel. And that
right now for us is Iran, Italy, and Japan.
Now, this changes every day, as we said.
And then Level 3 we are telling people--this is when we
have broad community-based transmission--we are telling the
American public that we recommend they do not travel.
So those are our levels. And we reevaluate them every day
based on the data that we see of what is happening in the
country at the time really around human-to-human transmission,
how isolated it is, how broad it is. And right now, obviously,
in Korea we have very broad transmission throughout the
country. It has moved to a Level 3. China, very broad
transmission throughout the country.
But you should anticipate that these are going to continue
to change. They can go up or down. I would not be surprised if
we do not have changes even in the next 24, 48 hours based on
what is happening in these countries.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Dr. Redfield.
And, Mr. Fritz, I know you are on a tight time-line. So, we
appreciate your being here. If you have to leave the panel,
thank you.
If I can ask Dr. Walters a question because, again, I
appreciate your coming down here and making yourself available
to us.
In thinking through the evacuation of some of the Americans
on the Diamond Princess and so forth, there were reports that
positive-testing patients--and again it may be that those
results were not communicated--were commingled with negative-
testing patients. I am curious how that might have happened,
and then how we avoid that happening in the future?
Dr. Walters. Mr. Chairman, thank you for the question.
The time line matters. So, the Diamond--the decision to
evacuate American citizens from the Diamond Princess was not
based on, you know, there is an outbreak of COVID-19 on the
ship. The decision was based on there was evidence of ongoing
person-to-person transmission. This was a problem that was not
getting better, it was getting worse, and despite the best
efforts of the Government of Japan.
Once the decision was made that it was safer to move these
American citizens, many of whom were in an age range that puts
them at the greatest risk, we followed a protocol. This was I
think the sixth flight that we had done in, like, 2 weeks. Each
of those individuals, each of the 329 individuals that we took
off that ship were evaluated by a medical officer from either
the State Department or Health and Human Services, ASPR, within
that 24-hour period.
The embassy in Tokyo had reached out to the Ministry of
Health, Welfare, and Labor and asked that all lab results be
reported by 4:30 that afternoon. The evaluations were done. The
evacuees then were handed from the Government of Japan over to
the care of the U.S. Government. They were disembarked from the
ship. They were loaded onto buses. And this was to be one
single movement of 15 buses from the ship to the airport.
It was only once those evacuees were, 329 people on 15
buses, and in the minutes after midnight on the docks at
Yokohama that an official from the Government of Japan
approached the embassy personnel with a list. And on that list
were 16 names. And of the 16 names, 14 people were manifested
and somewhere on 15 different buses. And the buses were already
in movement.
In the movement from the docks at Yokohama to the airport
there was some discussion, hey, we have got this problem, we
are working through it. And that is only a 40 or 45 minute
movement.
Once they arrived at the airport the 14 were identified in
a way that was efficient but protected their privacy. And it is
important to remember, none of these individuals had symptoms.
They were not coughing, sneezing, you know, they did not have
fevers. That had all been confirmed. They were removed from the
bus. They were taken to the only place--now, imagine, morning
is breaking at that airport, it is raining, these are 60 to 80
year old American citizens that are helped off the buses and
put into an isolation area aboard the aircraft.
The way the aircraft is set up, the air flow moves from the
nose to the tail. So, the most at risk area is near the tail of
the aircraft. We had already partitioned off, as we had in
previous flights, an area to protect other passengers from any
contagion that might be with those folks. And they were placed
there. And then there was a robust interagency discussion.
Much has been made about the discussion, but at the end of
the day we reached consensus. And there was consensus between
the Department, our partners that we rely on from Health and
Human Services, State Department, and others that yes, these
are evacuees; yes, they have been placed in the care of the
U.S. Government; yes, they are contained and they pose no
further threat. And with that, we brought them back to the
finest quarantine facility in the world to receive the best
care available.
Mr. Bera. Thank you for that explanation.
And now the ranking member had additional questions.
Mr. Yoho. Yes. And that is for State Department, because we
heard over in China I think it was 1,600 health workers came
down and they were sick. We had talked to our Ambassador from
Cambodia, we had a discussion with him today and he was saying
what a stellar response our State Department did, working 24/7
at six different locations moving people out.
What kind of protections do we have for our State
Department personnel? Because I know when we go on details you
guys work your tails off, and we appreciate it, and we want to
make sure you have the coverage and the health care that you
need. Do you feel adequate?
Dr. Walters. Yes, sir. Thank you for the comments and the
question.
Here is what I would say. This is an international
emergency that signals----
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Dr. Walters [continuing]. A domestic risk. But in 220
locations around the world we have a work force of 75,000
people, some of whom are in countries that have active cases.
Others are in countries that may tomorrow find themselves with
active cases.
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Mr. Fritz. We learned our lessons in 2004. We learned our
lessons again in 2014-2015. And we are thankful to Congress for
the support we have had in the preparedness side of this. There
is PPE at every embassy. Our health care workers, our work
force is almost 700 in all these locations. They are well
educated, they are well prepared.
We continue to look at our resource requirements. And we
continue to look at our authorities, not just to take care of
American citiz--to the chief of mission personnel, but really
in that global picture to protect Americans abroad.
Mr. Yoho. And we feel confident that if, you know, an
embassy were to come down and the workers get exposed that we
can get the supplies needed in there? If it is in an area that
is more remote where we do not normally have good health care
maybe, that we can get it in there in sufficient numbers, we
feel like we are protected there; right?
Mr. Fritz. So, there are two parts to that answer. The
first part is the same aviation contract that made these
evacuations possible is the same aviation contract that makes
delivery of critical supplies possible.
The second part to that is actually a greater risk. And the
greater risk here is when you look at the way we do medical
evacuations of chief of mission personnel around the world,
they do not typically come back to the United States. They go
to medivac centers with established relationships in South
Africa or U.K.
Mr. Yoho. Okay.
Mr. Fritz. Those countries are now making it more and more
difficult in a way that you can understand to bring non-U.K.
citizens or non, you know, South African citizens in if there
is any risk that they have COVID-19. So, we continue to work
with our international partners to keep those diplomatic
platforms open so that Dr. Redfield's teams have a place to
work and the resources and relationship to do it, but still be
able to medivac our chief of mission people home when the time
comes.
Mr. Yoho. Okay, thank you.
Dr. Redfield, again there is this cloud of lack of
transparency that we keep getting from China. What signals can
we see from China to see what the real extent of damage is
behind the containment?
You know, the National People's Congress meeting has
recently been canceled. I mean, that is a pretty strong signal
to show that that threat is really--they are really that
concerned about it as they should be.
But then with the people over there not getting, you know,
an open press where they can get reliable information, do we
feel like they are being forthright with you. I man, you are
working with them on a more of a scientific platform. Do you
feel comfortable with the information you are getting?
Dr. Redfield. From my colleagues, the scientific
interaction we are having with our CDC colleagues and from the
China CDC I am very comfortable with what we have. As I said, I
have my own director of the American CDC in China. They are
regularly interacting.
So, at the scientific level we are having collaboration. I
really cannot really comment beyond that.
I will say it is worth nothing that they have probably
introduced some of the most aggressive containment strat--
mitigation strategies that we have ever seen----
Mr. Yoho. Ever seen on the planet, I think.
Dr. Redfield [continuing]. In the history of the world, you
know. But and I would like to say, just so people are feeling
better, that there is a reduced number of cases in China. Just
last night----
Mr. Yoho. If that is accurately reported.
Dr. Redfield. If accurately reported. But even then it was
434 people and over somewhere between 25 and 30 deaths last
night. So they still have a major problem despite everything
they have done in mitigation.
Mr. Yoho. I want to throw one thing out, and I do not
really expect an answer on this. Being a veterinarian, we have
seen the porcine viral diarrhea syndrome broke out several
years ago. Within a year it was in America. Lost about 300,000
sows in America.
African swine fever broke out I think it was May 2018. I
cannot remember the exact date. We have not seen that here. But
we do know this: it is a very hardy virus that can be
transmitted in different fomites. It can resist freezing, it
can resist heat, and it can make the transshipping from China
to the United States in containers, in different materials,
whether it is feed, packaging. And so this is something we need
to be alert through APHIS, or USDA, through CDC that we are
monitoring these things better than we ever have before because
that is a port of entry that we might not even be looking
about.
We are looking at people, but we also need to look at
containers and fomites coming in that way.
Dr. Redfield. Yes. The only comment I would make for this
virus, just so you know, we are aggressively evaluating how
long this virus can survive and be infectious. And where on
copper and steel it is pretty typical, it is really pretty much
about 2 hours, but I will say that on other surfaces, cardboard
or plastic, it is longer. And so, we are looking at this
because we do not know the role of fomite transmission.
Now, I do not think it is going to impact cargo, OK, unlike
maybe some of the other viruses that you talked about. But I do
think that it may have contributed to the huge outbreak we saw
on that Diamond Princess. It may not have all have been
aerosolized. It could have been fomites.
So, we are aggressively evaluating that to understand how
well this virus survives in different conditions.
Mr. Yoho. We would appreciate you keeping us informed on
that. Thank you.
Mr. Bera. I understand Ms. Spanberger has additional
questions.
Ms. Spanberger. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Since we have been in this hearing there is a breaking
story with the Washington Post, and I do not expect that you
all have seen it yet. But it is there is a whistleblower report
that a senior HHS official who oversees workers at the
Administration for Children and Families has now filed a
whistleblower report that HHS employees were sent to an
airplane hangar to meet evacuated Americans at the March Air
Force Base in Riverside, and that they were not given any PPEs
or protective equipment while they were interacting directly
with those who were potentially impacted.
I raise this, recognizing that we are dealing with
different agencies here present today. But I think this speaks
to a general concern. It is a little bit of a followup to
Congressman Bera's question related to whether or not State
Department officers have what they need to stay safe.
And I would, so I will pose that question.
But then also wanted to make sure to make the point that
this is deeply concerning because as we are dealing with a
significant outbreak, something that is personally causing
great fear in our communities among individuals, we need to
ensure that our constituents have faith that the Administration
and the U.S. Government is doing everything possible.
And there are already some concerns about whether or not
that is the case, and what--how people can keep themselves
safe. And so, finding out that the U.S. Government might have
put its own personnel in harm's way is deeply concerning to me.
So, if you could comment both whether or not your agencies
are ensuring that their personnel are safe, and then comment
on, you know, what we can do in light of this when we are back
in our districts and people are saying, How can we trust the
government to keep us safe if this is happening to its own
people? I would love your comments on that.
Dr. Walters. Yes. Thank you for the question and the
concern.
I can speak, having been on those missions, and certainly
the first trip out of Wuhan, the second, the third, the Diamond
Princess, and based on a relationship that I have had with HHS
ASPR and CDC dating back to 2014. Every precaution has been
taken.
Ms. Spanberger. So, was it your experience that you did not
witness any individuals who were not wearing PPE?
Dr. Walters. No, I can say unequivocally that everyone
involved with those evacuations was appropriately equipped and
trained.
Ms. Spanberger. Okay. Well, and I do not seek, I do not
seek to be argumentative with you, sir, I am reading breaking
news in the Washington Post. But that is good to hear.
And then specifically with State Department officials and
the availability of protective gear and the attention to detail
there?
Dr. Walters. We take every precaution. We have the
equipment and the training that we need to do this safely.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you.
And would you care to comment as well, Mr. Brownlee?
Mr. Brownlee. Yes, please.
My consular colleagues in China, Japan, and elsewhere have
been working on an ongoing basis with people. So, for example,
in Japan there are still 100-plus U.S. citizens from the
Diamond Princess in the country. A number of those are
hospitalized. We are regularly engaging with those people but
we are doing so in a safe fashion, taking professional advice.
So, whereas initially some of the visits were taking place
in person, that became cumbersome because they were having to
suit up. Now these visits are taking place on a telephonic
basis.
I have here a photograph, I gave the chairman a copy of it,
that shows my colleagues standing on the quayside. As they were
processing people coming off the Diamond Princess they were
properly taken care of.
Ms. Spanberger. I can see the photo from here that they
are----
Mr. Brownlee. I will leave you a copy.
Ms. Spanberger [continuing]. That they are equipped.
And then the general concern about, again this is just a
report that is breaking news, the veracity of it will be
determined later, but it is in the news and people are reading
it as adding to this story, are there other comments that you
all would like to make related to ensuring that our
constituents, people we represent have faith that we are
handling this, that all involved agencies are handling this
virus and concerns in the way that it should be handled? And
just in light of what might otherwise be some concerning news.
Dr. Walters. What I would say is that the psychology in
dealing with highly infectious disease is often worse than the
pathology. We have the best medical care in the world. And
whether it is Ebola or coronavirus, the American health care
system is ready to receive and ready to take care of our health
care workers and our public.
From the State Department's perspective, we have a work
force that is at the front line. We are happy to be there to
facilitate the relationships that are going to be critical for
containing this overseas, whether it is a delivery of foreign
assistance of the exchange of technical information.
What I tell my family is that you live in the best country
in the world and that people who know how to do this are in
positions where they can advise State, local, and international
health care workers.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you. I thank you for the indulgence
of the second question, Mr. Chairman.
And to the witnesses, thank you so much for all of the work
I know that you are putting in on this. Thank you for your
continued service to our country, and to keep us all safe and
healthy. I truly appreciate it.
I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Thank you.
Let me recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Doctor, what is your best estimate as to the
mortality rate of this disease among those who are healthy and
under age 65?
Dr. Redfield. Again, I think the most important thing in
that scenario, under 65 and healthy, is whether you are health
system functional or not. So, as we have seen with the Wuhan
health system----
Mr. Sherman. Healthy health system, healthy human under age
65.
Dr. Redfield. Yes, well----
Mr. Sherman. My constituents.
Dr. Redfield. Yes, I think, again, you know, we do not have
the data. But I, we suspect if you look at the mortality rate
of this disease outside of China, we are probably looking right
now at somewhere around a half a percent. Right? But, again, we
will have to see more data to really be clear on that.
Mr. Sherman. And seasonal flu has a mortality rate of?
Dr. Redfield. About .1 per, .1 per thousand.
Mr. Sherman. Point one per thousand or .1 percent?
Dr. Redfield. Point 1 percent. I am sorry. Yes, .1 percent.
Mr. Sherman. The Chinese are telling us that there is a
decline. Should I, should we believe them, Doctor?
Dr. Redfield. I think that there probably is a decline.
Again, I do think some of the mitigation strategies are
starting to have impact, particularly out of Hubei. Most of the
cases now are in the Hubei area.
Mr. Sherman. Want to ask you about masks. It is funny, I
went onto Amazon. Buy 50 masks is 50 bucks which, and you know,
they are not very heavy, less than a pound. And then Amazon
wants to charge an additional $400 for shipping and handling.
Needless to say we will be in touch with Amazon on this.
But I do not think that Amazon has ever charged $400 to ship a
box, and not a rush basis actually, a delay for 2 weeks from
now, on less than a pound $400 shipping and handling seemed an
extraordinary charge. But, you know, given Mr. Bezos' need for
food and the necessities of life, I can understand.
We see pictures from all over the world, people wearing
these masks. Who should wear the masks in the United States?
Dr. Redfield. Yes, as I mentioned earlier, the masks, the
N95 masks really need to be reserved for health care providers
that are taking care of these patients in the hospital, as well
as confirmed individuals that are in home isolation to minimize
the spread while they are in home isolation.
We would not recommend the American public go out and get
these masks. And I----
Mr. Sherman. Does the mask protect the person wearing it or
protect others from the person wearing it?
Dr. Redfield. Well, there is really the issue here is to
protect the individual who is being exposed to someone who has
the pathogen. And we believe that that is where the mask should
be.
A lot of the people you see wearing these masks they are
really not going to have a functional impact whatsoever in
terms of transmission. These surgical masks that you see
everybody wearing on the--even when I, you know, was traveling
today here in the city I saw people again even in our own city
wearing masks.
Some of them do it, they have a cold or an illness that
they think it might minimize them. I would tell those people to
stay home. That would be more effective than trying to feel
that you have to go to work and wear a mask.
So I think the CDC has on its website really good guidance
on the appropriate use of masks. And I encourage people to go
look at it.
Mr. Sherman. It looks like the Chinese have had a decline.
They dealt with extraordinary lockdowns of entire areas. Should
we be locking down any neighborhood where we find that
someone--what level of lockdowns do we need, if any?
Dr. Redfield. Yes, the backbone of our response right now,
and really the most important part of our multi-layered
response, even though sometimes people do not recognize it
because it is not like travel restrictions or screening at
airports, the backbone is the American medical community and
public health community. As I mentioned, of our 15 cases that
we diagnosed in this country, 14 of them were diagnosed by our
medical public health community.
So, I am going to maintain confidence on early diagnosis,
isolation, and contact as our major mechanism to confront this.
Mr. Sherman. To test for this is it sufficient to just take
people's temperature as they were doing? Or is it contagious
before it is symptomatic, and do we need to give a lot of
people blood tests?
Dr. Redfield. Yes, so the issue on how infectious this
virus is at different States of symptomatology is still
unknown. But we do know that you can transmit this virus before
symptoms.
Does that contribute meaningfully? We do not know. And I
think that is what we are trying to learn.
Clearly, we and the CDC is working on another, other task
which the chairman would understand, we are trying to develop
serological tests so that we can understand the extent. Like,
in China right now what they are doing is they are measuring
the active virus, and that is what we are doing, but that does
not really tell us what the denominator is of who has really
been infected. You need a serological test to do that.
We are currently working on----
Mr. Sherman. I know the chair, the chairman understands
what you are saying.
Dr. Redfield. Okay.
Mr. Sherman. You are saying we want to test to see which
people have been exposed, have the antibodies, and may have
been asymptomatic throughout the whole process----
Dr. Redfield. Yes, sir.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. And just did not know they had
the disease.
Got you.
See, now you are not the only member----
Mr. Bera. There you go.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. Up here who understands it.
I yield back.
Mr. Bera. Well, thank you.
Once again, I just want to recognize the witnesses and say
I that appreciate your service to our country. And, obviously,
this is a very fluid situation.
I did just want to make reference to the breaking story
that Ms. Spanberger identified. I am fully confident that we do
everything we can to protect our personnel and our workers as
we were evacuating folks from China, putting them on airplanes,
bringing our citizens back home. It does sound like there was
someone who did see some personnel that did not have protective
gear and were released.
I hate to use the term whistleblower because it has gotten
politicized. But it is important that if there are folks that
are raising issues, we must address them. And I do feel that it
is very important for this body to say publicly we want to
encourage folks who see things, for the sake of bettering
ourselves, to report the issue. Those whistleblowers are those
individuals that are raising issues.
We are fully committed to protecting them. And we fully
want folks that are seeing things to feel comfortable and
protected coming forward. I am not commenting on whether this
story is accurate or inaccurate, but I am commenting on the
fact that it is important for folks that see things to identify
them and not fear retribution for coming forward. That is our
law. That is the way this process works.
Dr. Redfield, I appreciate your coming up to the Hill and
keeping us informed. Again, we look forward to working very
closely with the CDC.
And, you know, as one doctor to another, you know, as we
work through the regulatory process to speed up our testing
capabilities and availability of diagnostic tests throughout
this country, we look forward to working with--well, you are
not the one holding it up necessarily, but we do look forward
to speeding up that regulatory process to make sure we get
these tests out and are able to do it.
And, again, I appreciate updating the folks that we are
testing. I do think that is going to be helpful. And trusting
our doctors that are on the front line if they do suspect
coronavirus, being able to get that test done.
Dr. Redfield. I just want to make one comment for the
record, that we have been working very closely with the FDA.
They have been very supportive. I just want to make sure but
they are operating within the regulatory framework that we
have.
And I think the point that I wanted to make is that the
loss of laboratory development tests to be used when we are
developing new tests and responding to new emergencies I think
is something that should be re-looked at.
Mr. Bera. I appreciate that.
And, again, thank you and thank all three of you as well as
your colleagues at HHS, USAID, and Homeland Security for
regularly coming up to the Hill to brief Members of Congress.
And again, this is fluid, so let's maintain close contact and
dialog.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:56 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OPENING STATEMENT
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
