- FITARA 10.0

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FITARA 10.0

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

AUGUST 3, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-110

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-910 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2020

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri              Jim Jordan, Ohio
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Harley Rouda, California             Michael Cloud, Texas
Ro Khanna, California                Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Clay Higgins, Louisiana
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Ralph Norman, South Carolina
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Chip Roy, Texas
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Carol D. Miller, West Virginia
Jackie Speier, California            Mark E. Green, Tennessee
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois             Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota
Mark DeSaulnier, California          W. Gregory Steube, Florida
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan         Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Jimmy Gomez, California
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Katie Porter, California

David Rapallo, Staff Director
Wendy Ginsberg, Subcommittee Staff Director
Cameron MacPherson, Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Christopher Hixon, Minority Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Government Operations

Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia, Chairman
Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   Jody B. Hice, Georgia Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Jackie Speier, California            Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan         Gary Palmer, Alabama
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands   Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Ro Khanna, California                W. Gregory Steube, Florida
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachsetts
Jamie Raskin, Maryland

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on August 3, 2020...................................     1

Witnesses

Panel 1

Carol Harris, Director, IT Management Issues, Government
Accountability Office
Oral Statement...................................................     6
Clare Martorana, Chief Information Officer, Office of Personnel
Management
Oral Statement...................................................     7
Jason Gray, Chief Information Officer, Department of Education
Oral Statement...................................................     8
Maria A. Roat, Deputy Federal Chief Information Officer, Office
of Management and Budget
Oral Statement...................................................    10

Panel 2

David Powner, Director of Strategic Engagement and Partnerships,
The MITRE Corporation
Oral Statement...................................................    29
LaVerne Council, Chief Executive Officer Emerald One, LLC
Oral Statement...................................................    31
Richard Spires, Principal, Richard A. Spires Consulting
Oral Statement...................................................    33
* Written opening statements and statements for the witnesses are
available at: docs.house.gov.

INDEX OF DOCUMENTS

----------

Documents listed below are available at: docs.house.gov.

* Report from Interos Solutions re: IT Supply Chain
Vulnerabilities; submitted by Rep. Palmer.

* Questions for the Record: to Maria A. Roat; submitted by
Chairman Connolly.

* Questions for the Record: to Jason Gray; submitted by
Chairman Connolly.

* Questions for the Record: to Clare Martorana; submitted by
Chairman Connolly.

* Questions for the Record: to Carol Harris; submitted by
Chairman Connolly.

* Questions for the Record: to David Powner; submitted by
Chairman Connolly.

* Questions for the Record: to LaVerne Council; submitted by
Chairman Connolly.

* Questions for the Record: to Richard Spires; submitted by
Chairman Connolly.

* Questions for the Record: to Maria A. Roat; submitted by Rep.
Hice.

* Questions for the Record: to Jason Gray; submitted by Rep.
Hice.

* Questions for the Record: to Clare Martorana; submitted by
Rep. Hice.

* Questions for the Record: to Carol Harris; submitted by Rep.
Hice.

FITARA 10.0

----------

Monday, August 3, 2020

House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Government Operations
Committee on Oversight and Reform
Washington, D.C.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:04 p.m., in
room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Gerald E.
Connolly (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Connolly, Norton, Lynch, Raskin,
Hice, Grothman, and Palmer.
Mr. Connolly. Welcome, everybody, to the Subcommittee on
Government Operations and our tenth hearing on FITARA.
Before we begin, pursuant to House rules, most members
today will appear by Webex, remotely. Since some members are
appearing in person, or at least this member is, let me remind
everyone that pursuant to the latest guidance from the House
Attending Physician, all individuals attending this hearing in
person must wear a face mask. I'm dropping mine only to speak.
Members who are not wearing a face mask will not be recognized.
Let me also make a few reminders for those members
appearing in person. You'll only see members and witnesses
appearing remotely on the monitor in front of you when they are
speaking in what is known as Webex active speaker view. A timer
is visible in the room directly in front of you.
For members appearing remotely, I know you're all familiar
with Webex by now, but let me remind everybody about a few
points. First, you will be able to see each person speaking
during the hearing, whether they're in person or remote, as
long as you have your Webex set to active speaker view. If you
have any questions, contact Committee staff and they will try
to be helpful.
Second, we have a timer that should be visible on your
screen when you're in the active speaker with thumbnail view.
Members who wish to pin the timer to their screens should
contact Committee staff for assistance.
Third, the House rules require that we see you, so please
have your cameras turned on if you're on remotely on Webex
during this hearing.
Fourth, members appearing remotely who are not recognized
should remain muted to minimize background noise and feedback.
Fifth, I'll recognize members verbally, but members retain
the right to seek recognition verbally in regular order.
Members will be recognized otherwise in seniority order for
questions.
Last, if you want to be recognized outside of regular
order, you can identify it in several ways. You can use the
chat function, you can send an email to majority staff, or you
can unmute yourself to seek recognition verbally, though that's
the least preferable way to do it. Obviously, we don't want
people talking over each other.
Let's see. OK. I will begin with my opening statement.
Mr. Hice, you are on remotely?
Mr. Hice. Yes, sir, I'm here.
Mr. Connolly. OK. We're glad you're there. I know you're in
self-quarantine, and I know you'd prefer to be here physically,
but I am really glad we have the hybrid remote option so that
you can participate fully in today's hearing, and hope
everything's going to be OK. And I'll call upon you as soon as
I finish my opening statement for any remarks you may have.
Today marks the tenth hearing examining agencies'
implementation of the Federal Information Technology
Acquisition Reform Act, known as FITARA, to track agencies'
progress in Federal management and procurement.
I'm happy to announce that this steady oversight has
produced the first scorecard in which all agencies received a
passing grade. This achievement is a testament to the hard work
of Federal agencies' Chief Information Officers, and also a
testament to, I think, this committee and subcommittee's steady
and bipartisan oversight of FITARA since we enacted it in 2014.
This isn't just about passing grades. These grades
represent taxpayer dollars saved, better mission delivery, and
serving the Nation more effectively and efficiently. And during
this pandemic, we've come to realize just how vital good IT and
strong IT governance are to Federal Government and the people
we serve.
We certainly have seen limitations because of lack of IT
investment, whether it be with the Ethernet system at SBA,
Small Business Administration, or the struggles of the IRS to
provide personal checks to all citizens and dependents in
America. We've also seen limitations in the unemployment
systems in the 50 respective states. So, it underscores how
important these investments in this kind of improvement really
are.
In November 2015, when we first introduced the FITARA
scorecard, I said I hoped this would be the second in a series
of hearings our subcommittee holds to gauge agency progress in
realizing the transformative nature of FITARA's reforms. Five
years later, the benefits of continued oversight, I think, are
clear, and one would be hard-pressed to find a sustained
bipartisan congressional oversight initiative on its tenth
installation. These 24 agencies have made real improvements on
the scorecard--and I think we're putting it up over there on
that screen--over a period of time.
In November 2015, the average FITARA grade was a D across
all participating agencies. This year, for the first time, no
agency received a D and no agency, of course, received an F. As
I said before, these improvements represent vital services
delivered and dollars saved.
Among the FITARA scorecard categories with the greatest
impact is the IT portfolio review process known as
PortfolioStat. This process enables agencies to reduce
commodity IT spending and demonstrate how IT investments align
with the agency's mission and business function. PortfolioStat
went from helping Federal agencies save $3 billion in fiscal
2015 to $20 billion this fiscal year.
When the software licensing metric was first added to the
scorecard in June 2017, 21 out of 24 agencies received an F
grade for that metric. Now, 23 out of 24 agencies have As and
have an inventory of software licenses and use that inventory
to make cost-effective decisions and avoid duplications.
Federal agencies are also closing and consolidating more
data centers, resulting in significant cost savings. The 24
graded agencies have a reported total of $4.7 billion in cost
savings from fiscal years 2012 through 2019. Those agencies
have also reported plans to save more than $264 million in this
Fiscal Year alone.
At the very first FITARA hearing, a witness stated that IT
is no longer just the business of the CIO; rather, IT is
everybody's business. Never has this been clearer than in the
wake of the coronavirus pandemic, where IT has saved thousands
of lives by enabling people to telework and keep the government
and the economy running while preserving their own health and
safety. We have seen firsthand how the agencies that continued
to use outdated IT during the pandemic prevented the delivery
of government services when the public needed them most.
Back in 2015, I cautioned that the FITARA scorecard was not
to be considered a scarlet letter but a point-in-time snapshot
to be able to measure progress and incentivizing. Five years
and ten scorecards later, we're now at a point in time where
all agencies have received passing grades, the first time ever.
FITARA 10.0 marks the point at which we can reflect on five
years' worth of progress.
Initially, the FITARA scorecard consisted of four metrics,
including data center consolidation, IT portfolio review
savings, incremental project development delivery, and risk
assessment transparency. Since then, the scorecard's success
has led this subcommittee to incorporate other aspects of
Federal IT into the grades.
Our framework is not rigid, but like the best of IT, it
evolves. We augmented and changed the scorecard to examine
other key components, such as cybersecurity, and incorporated
constructive feedback from agencies and CIOs. Today, the
scorecard incorporates grades adapted from three additional
pieces of legislation, including the MEGABYTE Act, the
Modernizing Government Technology Act, and the Federal
Information Security Management Act.
The bottom line is that the FITARA scorecard continues to
hold agencies accountable and show the American people that
they deserve the best IT has to offer, yet all agencies still
have work to do. Today, two-thirds of graded agencies have CIOs
who report directly to the head or deputy of the agency. It's
true that more CIOs are finally getting a seat at the table
with other C-suite positions, but we'll hear from GAO today
none of the 24 graded agencies have established policies that
fully address the role of the CIO, as called for by Federal law
and guidance. We must continue to work to ensure that all CIOs
have the authority and policies in place to be able to properly
do their jobs.
This hearing will discuss which existing metrics have
achieved their goals and which might need to be considered for
retirement. We'll also start a careful discussion about what
metrics might be incorporated in future scorecards to continue
to improve IT across the government. In other words, we're
going to continue this scorecard.
Today I hope to hear from our witnesses at GAO about what
it takes to continuously improve and use efficient IT
acquisition and management practices to do that, what powers
and authorities might CIOs and government need to improve
government IT, and in return, what transparency and oversight
will be provided to Congress and the public to ensure those new
powers are used effectively and efficiently. We must continue
to see the dividends from putting resources toward modernizing
legacy systems, migrating to the cloud, and maintaining a
strong cyber posture.
With the coronavirus resurging as states pursue reopening,
the stakes for effectively implementing FITARA are perhaps
higher than ever. When executed well, government IT
modernization can ensure the efficient delivery of critical
services, improve the government's knowledge and decision-
making, and save lives. When executed poorly, it can,
unfortunately, lead to outright failures in serving the
American people when they need the government the most. Simply
put, the fate of the world's largest economy, it's no
exaggeration to say, rises and falls with the ability of
government IT systems to deliver in an emergency.
The importance of Federal agencies' effective use of IT is
too great to ignore, and this subcommittee will continue its
oversight of agencies' IT acquisition and management as we move
forward.
With that, I call upon the ranking member for his opening
statement.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Chairman Connolly, and thank you for
holding this hearing today on the tenth FITARA scorecard. As
you well know, this has literally been a bright spot of
bipartisan work for this committee, and I look forward
personally to continuing to see the development of the
scorecard's usefulness as it relates to Federal IT reform.
I also would like to take just a moment and give a shout-
out of thanks to the outgoing Federal Chief Information Officer
Suzette Kent. She's been extremely dedicated in her service, is
deeply appreciated. As you well know, enhanced CIO authority is
one of the pillars, literally, of the FITARA, the whole system,
and Ms. Kent has just done an outstanding job with her
leadership and enthusiasm to really help drive some of the IT
modernization efforts that have been outlined in the
President's management agenda. So, we're grateful for her
leadership and service, and hope to continue to buildupon the
initiatives that she has championed.
But, as you shared, Chairman, we are here today to discuss
the tenth FITARA scorecard. Agencies have really made
tremendous progress, as you well mentioned, over the past five
years, and I want to congratulate them on their dedication to
improve the IT procurement and management processes. A job well
done.
Some of the things that we have seen accomplished over the
last several years include, as you mentioned, Mr. Chairman,
savings of literally billions of dollars. We have increased
transparency for risky IT investments and, of course, the
elevation of the CIO position and authority within the agency.
So, for all these successes, we are very grateful for what
has been done, but obviously, there is more yet that needs to
be accomplished. And I would suggest some of those things, we
need to continue to update the metrics so that they better and
more effectively match the IT management and implementation
practices that are actually being used today.
Also, I think it's imperative that we, as a committee, put
in place the right kind of incentives to bring about IT
modernization at scale as it relates to the pandemic. I think
this has really highlighted to us and exposed, if you will, the
heavy reliance that we have on some legacy systems and some
longstanding technology problems. We need to find ways to get
agencies to move the needle on some of these crucial issues.
And I think last, we need some forward-looking, if you
will, some forward-looking metrics to help modernize government
as a whole. I think some of those things would include some
moving forward as it relates to the citizen experience. I think
you actually referred to that, Mr. Chairman. I think it's
important that we move in that direction, enhancing the skills
of the Federal IT work force I think we need to continue
looking toward, and also just overall moving toward a more
agile and secure cloud computing environment. All these things
I think are extremely important that we continue moving toward.
So, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today. And
in advance, I want to say thank you to each of our witnesses
for being here today. We appreciate your time and your
expertise that you'll bring to the table.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Hice. And I also want to thank
you personally. You and I have talked about this. This
subcommittee has always had a strong bipartisan thrust,
especially on this subject. I worked closely with Darrell Issa
in writing FITARA. I worked closely with Will Hurd in expanding
on it and having these hearings on the scorecard, as well as
with Mr. Meadows, now the chief of staff to the President of
the United States. And you've pledged to do the same, and I
really very much appreciate that and look forward to continuing
to work with you, and hope you are OK and healthy in Georgia.
Thank you for your remarks.
Ms. Harris, if you would unmute yourself in order to be
sworn in, and if our three witnesses who are here in person
would rise and raise their right hands.
Do you swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to
give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
so help you God?
Let the record show that all of our witnesses answered in
the affirmative.
Without objection, your written statements will be part of
the record.
I now call on Carol Harris, director of IT Management
Issues at the Government Accountability Office, to give us her
summary testimony. Welcome, Ms. Harris.

STATEMENT OF CAROL HARRIS, DIRECTOR, IT MANAGEMENT ISSUES,
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Harris. Thank you, Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member
Hice, and members of the subcommittee. I would like to thank
you and your excellent staff for your continued oversight of
Federal IT management and cybersecurity with this tenth set of
grades. It's been nearly 5-1/2 years since FITARA's enactment,
and your scorecard has served as a good barometer to measure
progress of its implementation.
During this time period, the agencies have made significant
progress. In this latest scorecard, there is 1 A, 9 Bs, and 14
Cs. As you mentioned, this is the first scorecard in which all
24 agencies received a passing grade. This is huge, considering
only seven agencies had passing grades in the first scorecard.
In addition, the agency with the greatest transformation has
been the Department of Education, moving from an F to a B-plus.
I'll focus my remarks on a lookback on the progress made
since scorecard one, where things stand now, and where we need
to go.
First, agency progress made. I'll start with incremental
development. The number of major IT projects utilizing
incremental development has increased from 58 to 76 percent. In
addition, the level of transparency on the dashboard has
improved, with 61 percent of major projects being reported as
red or yellow, as compared to 24 percent with the first
scorecard. We've also seen dramatic improvements in the
agency's management of software licenses, going from two A's to
23. And the number of CIOs with direct reporting to the agency
head has increased from 11 to 16.
To date, the agencies have also closed more than 6,300 data
centers and saved just shy of $20 billion through OMB's
PortfolioStat initiative. The progress made in all of these
areas would not have happened to this extent without your
scorecard and oversight.
While these accomplishments are indeed noteworthy,
significant actions remain to be completed to build on this
progress, and this brings me to my next point on where we're
at.
One-third of the agencies' CIOs still aren't reporting to
the agency head. CIOs have told us that this reporting
structure is critical to carry out their responsibilities. It
gives CIOs a real seat at the management table, and it will
likely help to attract more qualified individuals to these
positions over time.
In addition, about half of the agencies have not
established working capital funds for use in transitioning from
legacy IT systems. Roughly 80 percent of the over $90 billion
spent annually on Federal IT is on operations and maintenance,
including on aging legacy systems. Establishing these funds are
so critical so that the savings from software licenses, data
center optimization, and PortfolioStat can be reinvested in
agency IT modernization priorities. If each of these agencies
did these two things, the grades would be 4 As, 15 Bs, and 5
Cs. These two actions and the associated higher grades are
achievable by the next scorecard.
Now turning to data centers. We remain concerned about
OMB's current guidance which revised the classification of data
centers and data center optimization metrics. For example,
OMB's new data center definition excludes more than 2,000
facilities that agencies previously reported on. Many of these
excluded facilities represent what OMB itself has identified as
possible security risks. The changes will likely slow down or
even halt important progress agencies should be making to
consolidate, optimize, and secure their data centers.
Finally, regarding where we need to go scorecard-wise, the
preview of the Federal EIS telecommunications transition will
draw urgent attention to an area that has historically been
neglected by the agencies. For example, had the prior telecom
transition occurred on time, agencies could have saved $330
million. And as I testified before you earlier this year, the
agencies are behind schedule and could again be missing out on
hundreds of millions in savings. Your scorecard will be an
effective means for holding agencies accountable and ensuring a
timely transition.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my comments, and I look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Ms. Harris, and I look forward to
those questions as well.
Clare Martorana. Have I got that right, Clare?
Ms. Martorana. Close, sir. Martorana.
Mr. Connolly. Martorana, forgive me. You are recognized for
five minutes.

STATEMENT OF CLARE MARTORANA, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, OFFICE
OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT

Ms. Martorana. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Hice,
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss the status of information technology at the Office of
Personnel Management, and to provide thoughts on the future of
FITARA.
I joined OPM in February 2019 as the seventh CIO in seven
years and entered an agency with several key challenges:
Critical staffing vacancies, antiquated and fragile technology,
and a charge to fully transition the IT systems for National
Background Investigation Bureau, now DCSA, to the Department of
Defense, which we hope to complete this fall.
As a new Federal CIO coming from the private sector,
admittedly, this is a complex operating environment. Meeting
and balancing numerous executive, legislative, and oversight
requirements while working in an uncertain and inflexible
budgetary cycle is quite challenging. However, I'd like to
focus on what's possible, because that's what OPM's employees
and the American people deserve.
One of the first authorities I learned about was FITARA. As
CIO, it provides me with an operating framework and a mandate
to make enterprise IT decisions and strategic investments that
make best use of taxpayer dollars. I have received a steady
stream of support from OPM leadership and--I'm sorry. I have
received a steady stream of support from OPM leadership to meet
the provisions of FITARA by establishing an agencywide
enterprise IT strategy. We anticipate working with program
offices and enabling organizations as we move forward in this
direction.
We are extremely proud of raising OPM's FITARA score to a
C-plus. With only one net new hire and no increase in
incremental funding, we have been able to make significant
progress and show people within OPM what is possible, like
rolling out new laptops across the organization and moving to
cloud email. This has enabled us to continue meeting our
mission while supporting DCSA employees and contractors in a
maximum telework environment during the pandemic.
Just a few weeks ago, the dedicated CIO team successfully
migrated our mainframe platform from the Teddy Roosevelt
Building here in D.C. to a commercial data center. OPM and DCSA
systems are now fully operational in a new modern environment
with continuity of operations in place. Once we transition the
daily IT operations of this important national security mission
to our colleagues at the Department of Defense this fall, OPM
will be able to focus on OPM's mission and begin our digital
modernization journey.
Now I'd like to touch on a few enhancements to FITARA that
could drive digital modernization at OPM and across government.
The first is funding flexibility. OPM's legacy funding model
with seven funding streams for CIO creates incredible
complexity and inflexibility to address our IT challenges. By
standing up a working capital fund with transfer authority
dedicated to IT enterprise investment and CIO oversight and
authority over this funding, we will create enterprise
efficiencies and measurable cost avoidance.
Also, modern technology, because Federal employees deserve
the tools I've had the benefit of using in the private sector.
Attracting, retaining, training and reskilling our work force
with a customer-first mindset, utilizing agile development,
modern tools, and modern technology is essential.
Our modernization strategy begins with upgrading our
existing paper-based processes and workflows with modern
electronic equivalents, allowing us to retire end-of-life
systems. All of these are possible if we work on modernizing
OPM together and giving OPM's customers the 21st century
experience that they deserve.
I look forward to working on this digital modernization
journey together. Thank you for the invitation, and I look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Ms. Martorana. Martorana.
Martorana, excuse me.
Mr. Jason Gray, Chief Information Officer of the Department
of Education, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF JASON GRAY, CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER, DEPARTMENT
OF EDUCATION

Mr. Gray. Thank you, Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member
Hice, and members of the subcommittee, for this opportunity to
appear before you today to talk about the progress the
Department of Education has made in implementing FITARA. I
would also like to thank you for your continued support and
commitment to improving IT management across the Federal
Government.
I appreciate the support I received from Secretary DeVos
and Deputy Secretary Zais. It has been critical to the
Department's FITARA implementation. I also want to thank my
colleagues in Federal Student Aid, the assistant secretaries,
and everyone in my office for their continued hard work,
commitment, and dedication.
I'd like to briefly share an update on our IT modernization
efforts and describe the impact FITARA has had on my ability to
effectively manage the Department's IT.
In my June 2019 testimony before this committee, I shared
that the Department had just completed a massive wholesale
modernization of our IT infrastructure. This effort transformed
the way my office delivers IT services to the Department.
Within a five-month timeframe, we migrated over 450 terabytes
of data into a secure cloud environment and replaced
approximately 5,000 laptops with newer high-performing models.
Our users went from experiencing 20 minutes of laptop boot-up
time to less than a minute, which translates into a return on
investment of more than 1,500 hours of previously lost
productivity per day.
The cloud environment enabled us to reduce the Department's
service storage cost from $1.43 per gigabyte to 12 cents per
gigabyte. The Department anticipates saving approximately $20.5
million over a five-year period as a result of this initiative.
While the Department will realize cost savings, the true
value of the modernization initiative was in our ability to
quickly adapt and respond to the Department's needs throughout
the pandemic. Due in large part to the modernization, we have
been able to support 100 percent remote work force with minimal
impact. When our PIV issuance process was suspended due to
staff not being able to come into the office, we were able to
quickly evaluate and implement within days, not months, a
solution to virtually onboard more than 300 new employees and
contractors to date.
By fully embracing the cloud, we were also able to complete
a massive technology refresh of 28 major systems, more than 700
servers, and over 500 terabytes of data over a single weekend,
with no impacts to IT services. In a traditional environment,
this would have taken us weeks to accomplish. Without FITARA,
we would not have been able to complete the massive IT
modernization initiative last year and certainly not within the
timeframe I described.
It was through the reporting relationship I have with
Secretary DeVos and the relationships we have built across
functional areas that I was able to drive the Department's IT
priorities to achieve our IT modernization goals. The
initiative was a cornerstone of our five-year IT modernization
plan and strategic roadmap, and I'd like to thank you for
providing us with the opportunity, following my testimony last
year, to brief Representatives of this committee on it.
When we originally developed our modernization plan and
strategic roadmap, we identified shadow IT, redundant or
duplicative systems, and manual or obsolete processes. The
institutionalization of FITARA in the Department's governance
process has provided me with the mechanisms to continually
assess and rationalize our IT portfolio and adjust our plans
accordingly, from strategically aligning our IT resource
management plans with the requirements of the Foundations for
Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 to prioritizing
investments to comply with the 21st Century Integrated Digital
Experience Act, or evaluating the use of shared services for
capabilities such as grants management to the rapid response
actions required to address emergency cybersecurity directives
from DHS. I am able to achieve a level of visibility necessary
to understand the impact to Department's IT resources.
While we have made significant strides in our FITARA
maturation and IT modernization initiatives, the Department
continues to seek Congress' assistance with the establishment
of a working capital fund. We coordinated with OMB and Congress
to obtain appropriations language that would allow us to
transfer funds to a working capital fund and included the
request in our President's budget request for both 2020 and
2021. I respectfully request your assistance with obtaining
this transfer authority to further enhance the Department's
ability to achieve the goals of FITARA.
In conclusion, the Department has established a solid
FITARA framework and have clearly demonstrated our ability to
leverage it in support of the Department's mission. But we do
recognize that FITARA and IT modernization is a journey and
it's important to continually improve.
I thank you for your time today, and I look forward to your
questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Gray. It's good to have you
again giving us a year later progress. We certainly will try to
work with you on that transfer authority, so work with us on
that.
Our final participant in this panel is Maria Roat--is that
correct?
Ms. Roat. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. Who's the Deputy Federal Chief
Information Officer at the Office of Management and Budget.
Welcome.

STATEMENT OF MARIA A. ROAT, DEPUTY FEDERAL CHIEF INFORMATION
OFFICER, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET

Ms. Roat. Thank you. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member
Hice, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss FITARA and how we can continue to drive
and sustain governmentwide IT modernization.
I joined OMB eight weeks ago as the Deputy Federal Chief
Information Officer, bringing a career of Federal and military
technology experience and an agency perspective to my role.
Throughout my career, I have seen firsthand the value of
investing in modern scalable solutions and how taking prudent
risk, collaborating, brainstorming, and sharing ideas and
concepts drives change. And I have experience as a CIO and know
how a strong partnership with and commitment from an agency's
business stakeholders can improve how the government meets its
mission and serves the American public.
COVID-19 put a spotlight on digital transformation and the
need to adapt quickly. Every agency worked at never before
experienced levels of telework and sustained performance by
leveraging capabilities already in place. There was a sense of
urgency, and CIOs were entrepreneurial, creative, innovative,
and agile.
Since the first FITARA scorecard, technology investments in
cloud, in infrastructure enabled an overall seamless transition
to telework. Simultaneously, CIOs were positioned to rapidly
deploy and leverage scalable platforms for digital service
delivery for COVID response activities. They leveraged
microservices to quickly stand up new public-facing portals and
switched to video teleconferencing for telehealth and benefits
interviews and to engage with their customers.
CIOs deployed virtual desktops to replace the purchase of
costly hardware for surge employees. And the CIO Council
identified areas for future investments and improvements where
we need to address gaps or move faster. We must keep the
momentum. Agencies were able to move fast, innovate, and
implement changes for more digital interoperability. There is a
shared interest across all levels of government, Congress, the
executive branch and the administration, to continue technology
improvements.
The Technology Modernization Fund and IT working capital
funds and their multi-year funding approaches are two programs
instrumental in improving, retiring, or replacing legacy
systems. We must do more to drive sustained long-term
transformation and ensure digital first as we add value and
service delivery.
Throughout my career, I've had the honor to lead and work
side by side with amazing innovators and technologists, public
servants working for the Federal Government. Today, over 2
million civilian personnel use technology to carry out their
job.
Just as importantly, as we consider any technology
investment, we should also remember that the people charged
with using those solutions must also be skilled in the use of
technology. As the pace of capability and threat continues to
accelerate, we must invest in our work force to keep their
skills relevant.
The CIO Council continues to invest in the IT work force
and is building on last year's success with the Federal Cyber
Reskilling Academy to launch this month a similar training
program in data science. This summer, we are holding,
virtually, the third annual Women in Federal IT event, where
women in leadership positions across the Federal Government
share stories and provide on-the-spot mentorship and career
advice to emerging leaders. We graduated two cohorts from the
robotic process automation reskilling course, and in September,
we will graduate 20 people from the CIO and CISO SES Career
Development Program.
As we focus today on the tenth edition of the FITARA
scorecard, we must adapt to the ever-changing technology
landscape and, likewise, adapt the scorecard. I look forward to
collaborating with you to further refine the scorecard to
support sustained, long-term modernization and drive
innovation.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today, and
I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Ms. Roat. I appreciate that. I
find myself in agreement with everything you've said. It is
good to learn that the administration has decided to embrace
telework in light of the pandemic, given the fact that the
administration was actually cutting back on telework the last
two years.
And with respect to retiring legacy systems and the need
for the Technology Modernization Fund, I also find myself in
agreement, but we need the administration to make a robust
request in the budget if we're going to make progress on the
TMF.
The chair now calls on the distinguished Congresswoman from
the District of Columbia for her five minutes of questions.
Welcome, Ms. Norton.
Ms. Norton, are you there? Ms. Norton?
Mr. Lynch, are you there?
Ms. Norton. I'm here.
Mr. Connolly. You're there. OK, great. Sorry about that.
Eleanor, just speak up a little bit.
Ms. Norton. All right. I'm sorry. I punched the wrong
button.
Mr. Connolly. There you go. There you go.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much.
And, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for this annual
hearing. It's very important to have been brought up to date,
as you have allowed our witnesses to do.
Now, the FITARA says--and I'm quoting it now--that CIOs
have a significant role in the decision processes of the
management, governance, and oversight processes related to
information technology. Well, I would have thought that they
have a major role to play in an agency overall, and I
understand that IT is now baked into policy design and
implementation.
This question is for Ms. Harris. There are CIOs that do not
report to agency heads and, of course, if they don't, they're
unlikely to play that key role that we spoke about. Well, who
doesn't and why don't all of them now report?
I think it was perhaps in your testimony or the testimony
of one of you that one-third do not report to the agency head.
I'd like to know why. I understand that there's a minus and a
plus that you can look to see whether people are reporting, but
I don't understand what determines or how agencies determine
what this committee has long said would be helpful.
Ms. Harris. That's correct, ma'am. About one-third of the
agency CIOs do not have direct reporting mechanisms to the
agency head, and that is a problem, because agency CIOs have
reported to us that that reporting structure is very critical
to allowing them to carry out their responsibilities.
Ms. Norton. Well, Ms. Harris, would you explain to the
committee what would be the resistance so that we can work with
agencies? Why would an agency not want everybody in the room?
Ms. Harris. Honestly, I think it, in large part, has to do
with agency culture, and being able to change that culture so
that the CIO does have that seat at the table is vitally
critical. So, it's going to take work with the senior leaders
within those agencies to empower those CIOs, change those
organization charts so that those CIOs have direct reporting
capabilities, and work with you all as well to ensure that that
happens.
Ms. Norton. I'd like to work with the chairman on making
sure that there is no resistance. In the 21st century, you
would have thought that having the CIO at the table would just
be a given. So, I really don't understand the resistance to it,
and believe that the committee could be helpful in either
requiring, through legislation or through regulation, that the
CIO be at the table.
This is a question, I suppose, for Ms. Roat, and it has to
do with the recruitment of and attrition of IT staff. Are these
staffers valuable outside of the public sector, Ms. Martorana
or Ms. Roat? Is there great competition for these staffers? I'd
like you to discuss that. Then I'd like you to tell the
committee what we could do to help attract and keep Federal IT
workers.
Ms. Roat?
Ms. Roat. Yes, ma'am. Thank you for your question. For the
work force, it is hard to attract work force to the Federal
Government and, in turn, folks that we do train in the Federal
work force do go to the private sector and make more money.
What attracts people to the Federal Government is the
ability to focus on a mission, whether you're working for the
Department of Energy or Transportation or DHS or NASA. People
are excited about the mission, and that's what draws people to
the Federal Government. As a CIO, I've had experience with that
where people want to come on board, and I've had some
incredible talent. Other CIOs have had the same experience.
But to your question, it is hard to get people in, but once
you get them in, the folks that want to come in, they want to
stay. They love what they do. And when people leave the Federal
Government, they may go back to private industry, get more
experience, maybe they make more money, and then turn around
and come back to the Federal Government.
But, again, we continue to explore flexibilities in hiring,
compensation, and looking at ways to build skills. As I said in
my opening comments, we've done a lot for the Federal work
force so far through the CIO Council on data science, on
cybersecurity, and we're going to continue to build on those
skill sets so that we can maintain that work force. So, it's
not only just attracting new workers, but maintaining and
educating our current work force.
Ms. Norton. Finally--I'd just like a moment, Mr. Chairman--
is pay a salient issue here in keeping people in the Federal--
IT workers in the Federal work force?
Ms. Roat. For folks, for people that are working in the IT
world that are coming into the Federal Government, they can get
compensated much more on the private sector.
Ms. Norton. We might have a look at that also, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Congresswoman. And let me just say
in response to your query about CIOs, I couldn't agree with you
more. When we wrote FITARA, there were 250 people spread out
over 24 agencies with the title CIO.
I asked the private sector, Ms. Martorana, how many CIOs do
you have? And almost 100 percent the answer is one. So, we've
got a lot of work to do. We didn't mandate there shall be one
CIO. We allowed it to evolve that one CIO was sort of primus
inter pares, first among equals, who reported to the boss. But
if we need to strengthen that, we will. We'll also be guided,
Ms. Harris, by GAO's counsel on that matter as well. But we are
making progress.
And listening to the testimony today, you've got
relationships with the head of the agency, and that makes all
the difference in the world, the empowerment from the boss. But
it's something we are very mindful of, and I thank the
distinguished Congresswoman for bringing further attention to
it.
The chair now recognizes the distinguished ranking member,
Mr. Hice, for his five minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Roat, I'd like to ask you this. One of the things that
I have discovered in becoming more and more familiar with this,
it seems like one of the current metrics measures how much of
an agency's portfolio is high risk. The issue that I have found
is that there's no definition of what high risk is, at least
not that I've been able to determine.
When I think of high risk, I think of things like
vulnerability to cyber attacks, but what I found out is that
high risk means something else to others. It may mean whether
or not a system is able to be delivered on time and at budget
and, if not, it's at high risk.
So, my question, really, is there any uniform and
comparable kind of way for agencies to define what we all mean
by high risk, so that we're all on the same page?
Ms. Roat. Thank you for the question. As you look at the
programs and the portfolios across the Federal Government,
those programs that are high risk, GAO does look at programs
that are high priority, the high priority programs, and there
are different definitions, including high-value assets.
So, when you're looking at those systems that are at high
risk, are those the systems that are the oldest in the Federal
Government that perhaps need to be modernized or are they high-
priority programs that are high visibility and have to be and
are critical to the Federal Government. So, as we're looking at
the definitions, there are separate definitions, whether it's
high-priority programs, high-value assets that are critical to
the Federal Government, or those programs and those systems
that are high risk in the Federal Government. So, there are
different characterizations that are used in different reports.
Mr. Hice. And to me, that's part of the problem. Is there
any kind of way of getting a uniform understanding of what
we're talking about on high risk? Because you just mentioned
about three or four different things that come under that
category. So, what--or even just to prioritize the high-risk
categories so we know if the high risk is any of the things
that you mentioned or if it's cyber vulnerabilities or
whatever. Can we and should we kind of focus this definition a
little more tightly?
Ms. Roat. Yes, sir. We should take a look at that to make
sure that we're aligned on the definitions and that we're all
speaking on the same page as we're looking at the definitions
of programs across the Federal Government. I mentioned three
with three definitions on that, where, you know, GAO is using
the high-priority programs and some of the other ones. So, I
agree with you, we should take a look at that and make sure
that we're all in alignment.
Mr. Hice. OK. I agree. Let's try to move forward on that.
Also, another thing that has come up, when it comes to
legacy IT, the current scorecard does capture whether or not an
agency has a working capital fund, but it does not deal with
whether or not any of those funds are being used to modernize
old systems.
So, my question really is, what kind of metrics can we add
to the scorecard to incentivize agencies to make these kind of
IT overhauls that need to be made? We've got to make the
transition.
Ms. Roat. I agree with you. It is imperative that we
continue to modernize. The IT working capital fund is one of
those programs that allows agencies to have that long-term
sustained investment in technology that is incredibly--that's
critical to modernizing. So, the IT working capital fund, where
you can have multi-year dollars within those, that's the
intent, is to modernize those legacy systems and really drive
that modernization over multiple years.
Where you have legacy systems and programs, being able to
invest that over multiple years is the way you get out of, you
know, that technical debt and you continue to move the ball
forward on that. So, with the Technology Modernization Fund and
the IT working capital fund, those are two critical programs
for agencies to sustain long-term modernization.
Mr. Hice. OK. Thank you.
My last question will kind of deal with the customer
service aspect. More and more we're having people who are
involved in coming to the government digitally. What about, how
can we put this type of metric in future scorecards to make
sure that we are providing the customers what they need?
Ms. Roat. Thank you for that. There's--with the IDEA Act, I
think there's an opportunity to really look at the customer
experience. That was the intent of the 21st Century IDEA Act--
the customer experience and how they interact with the Federal
Government. And there's a number of requirements in there, from
e-signatures to 508 to enabling an easier customer experience
with the Federal Government.
So, I look forward to working with you and the committee on
understanding what are some good metrics on that, because that
is a perfect example of a metric that could evolve over time as
agencies are continuing to improve their websites and their
customer experience with the American public.
Mr. Hice. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the gentleman.
And that's a good point, Ms. Roat. We'll be glad to work
with you on that.
Before I call on Mr. Lynch for his five minutes of
questioning, Ms. Harris, did you want to address the question
Mr. Hice raised about what falls under the penumbra of high
risk on the scorecard?
Ms. Harris. Sure. So, high risk is defined by each of the
individual agencies. So, it could be cost, a certain cost
threshold. It could be a high-value asset. There are a number
of ways that agencies do define what they consider to be high
risk.
And I think that having--I think OMB would play an
excellent role in having a more uniform decision or even having
perhaps a watch list of the 10 to 20 top critical IT
investments across the government would be an excellent way to
be able to focus and hone down what those high-risk investments
are. We have work for this committee, looking at the top 10 to
20 mission-critical IT acquisitions across the government where
we have put together the list for you. That report will be
coming out in September. We would be happy to work with OMB to
perhaps use that list as a jumping-off point to have another
working list for OMB and the executive branch agencies to work
from.
Mr. Connolly. I would just say a word of caution. When we
began this category, there were agencies that claimed they had
no high-risk projects, none. No, everything is fine, nothing to
look at here. We needed to get out of that protective defensive
mode, candidly, to say, hey, these are high risk for these
reasons and we're going to monitor them so that they don't go
awry, but if they do, we'll take quick action.
Because that was part of the problem FITARA was trying to
address, that we had these long multi-year, multi-billion-
dollar systems integration projects, and nobody felt empowered
to pull the plug if the milestones weren't being met. In fact,
there weren't always milestones. And we were trying to make
sure that we didn't make a bad thing worse.
In the private sector, if something goes awry, the CEO
says, pull the plug, we're going to move on, we'll try
something different. A little harder to do in the public
sector, because everybody wants to know why did you waste the
money? But nothing is improved by doubling down on something
that's not working.
So, high risk really matters and getting it right really
matters, and we don't want unwittingly to change the definition
so that we go back to the old days of everything's fine,
because the point isn't to ding on people because it's bad, it
is to capture something going awry before it goes off the
cliff.
But I thank you, Mr. Hice, for raising it, because I think
some uniformity of understanding probably would be a good
thing.
Mr. Lynch, I'm sorry to impose on your time. Welcome.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to followup on that sentiment, because you and I
know, as longtime members of this committee, that, you know,
it's been a history of we don't have any problems over here,
we're good, until there's a blowup like we had at OPM when 22
million records went out of people who were applying for
security clearance and others that were in government as well.
So, we saw the disasters. So, I approach this with a little bit
of skepticism, just healthy skepticism. I'm happy to hear the
good reports, don't get me wrong, but I've been here too long
to believe all of that.
So, I want to ask about--you know, let's go to Mr. Gray.
You know, I read recently a pretty good story in The Washington
Post that talked about thousands and thousands of borrowers of
student loans whose personal information, their Social Security
numbers, their detailed financial information was left exposed
by the Department of Education for like six months. And it had
all their personal--you know, these were people looking for
some relief. Either they had been taken advantage of or
exploited by for-profit universities, those type of cases. So,
they had to basically open the kimono of these applicants who
were looking for relief, and yet we left all their information
available to whoever would tap into it. So, that's one issue I
got. I'd like to hear from Mr. Gray on that.
Then on OPM, I noticed the grade is a C. And given the, you
know, history here--and we all know what it is, I mean, just
horrific, horrific, and OPM had not even encrypted Social
Security numbers. It was just an unmitigated disaster, and we
continue to suffer from that today because of all the people we
exposed who had asked for security clearance, right? Those are
the people that do some of the most sensitive work in our
government, and they were all exposed because of the lack of
cybersecurity at OPM.
So, I'd like to hear from Mr. Gray and also someone who can
speak on behalf of OPM as to why they only have a C at this
point. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. We'll ask Mr. Gray to go first, and then
we'll call on Ms. Martorana.
Mr. Gray. So, thank you for that question. I will share
that that article is incorrect. The Department did not leave
that open for many months. What really happened was that we had
a situation where a file share was inadvertently left open to
internal Department only employees. As this was briefed on
Friday, there was no external access. It was not open. It was
one element. We did report, as required, through OMB Memo 20-
04.
It is a low-risk incident. And as I briefed this committee
on Friday, it is a situation like being in a bank where a bank
has a vault. Every employee that can go into that vault is a
trusted employee. Every person that works at the Department is
vetted. They have fingerprints. They have user agreements. They
have annual cybersecurity and privacy awareness training,
records management training.
This is a situation where an employee actually recognized
that a safety deposit box in that vault that external people
could not get to was unlocked. It should not have been
unlocked.
Mr. Lynch. Mr. Gray, hold on for a second.
So, did every single person have a need to know in each of
those cases, or was it looser than that?
Mr. Gray. Every employee is vetted to be able to access
information and, no, not every employee needed to access that.
And as of this morning----
Mr. Lynch. OK. That's all. You need to tighten that up. So,
you need to tighten that up, right?
Mr. Gray. Absolutely, and we absolutely did.
Mr. Lynch. It's not exactly what the Post led me to
believe, but we can tighten it up, right?
Mr. Gray. Yes, Congressman, we can, and we have.
Mr. Lynch. OK. So, let me go--I only have a minute left, so
let me go to Ms. Martorana on OPM, please.
Mr. Connolly. You need to turn on--thank you.
Ms. Martorana. Sorry. Thank you for the question.
We continue to work diligently at OPM to upgrade our
infrastructure, upgrade our overall cyber posture. We are
struggling with our staffing. We are struggling to make sure
that we have appropriate staff levels to support all of the
systems that we are maintaining.
One of the biggest challenges that we do have is we are
still supporting our Department of Defense colleagues as we are
decoupling our systems. So, we are still, on a daily basis,
operating DCSA, the national background investigation systems,
on all of their daily operations, as well as all of the laptops
and their desktop support services, et cetera.
So, as we are able to hand that mission fully over to the
Department of Defense and focus singularly on OPM, that will
give us the opportunity to be able to focus on OPM's core
mission and upgrade all of the services that we deliver to our
own mission.
Mr. Lynch. OK. That's a fair answer.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your indulgence. I really
appreciate the courtesy. Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Lynch, if I could followup on that
question, I understand the sequencing with the Department of
Defense; but when we go back to the original breach, and you
weren't there, part of the problem was that we had software for
cyber protection, Einstein, and there was Einstein 2 which had
not been installed. Now, that has nothing to do with the
Defense Department.
That's a management issue about getting around to it,
prioritizing. I wonder if you want to take a moment to try and
reassure Mr. Lynch and the rest of the subcommittee that that
attitude has changed, that, in fact, we are prioritizing cyber
and protecting our data bases at OPM.
Ms. Martorana. Yes. I can assure you that the rigor and
discipline within the current OPM team is extraordinary. We
would not have been able to execute something as complex as our
main frame migration without having a disciplined management
team and extraordinary CIO team that is doing a diligent job on
a daily basis.
Can we do better? We can always do better, right? IT is one
of those areas where you can always improve; but the team is
extraordinary, and we work utilizing every single tool and
asset available to us.
Our cyber team and our CISO are extraordinary, and we do
everything possible to safeguard every single asset within our
environment. We utilize the best tools of the Federal
Government, including DHS, to support us, the perimeter of OPM.
So, I think you can rest assured that at this time all
safeguards and standards are being operated at the highest
level.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
And thank you, Mr. Lynch.
The Chair now recognizes----
Mr. Lynch. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes our returning colleague, the
gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Palmer, for five minutes.
Mr. Palmer?
Mr. Palmer. Can you hear me now?
Mr. Connolly. Yes, sir, we can. We can't--is your video on,
Mr. Palmer?
There you are.
Mr. Palmer. It is.
Mr. Connolly. There you are.
Mr. Palmer. You got me? All right.
Well, first of all, I want to compliment Mr. Lynch on his
library. That's impressive.
Mr. Connolly. I hear he rents it.
Mr. Palmer. He rents it.
Ms. Harris, there was a 2018 report submitted before the
U.S. China Economic Security Review Commission that found that
the Federal Government's top seven IT providers sourced over 51
percent of its materials from China since 2012. And I just want
to ask you if you think that this poses a significant economic
and national security risk.
Ms. Harris. Yes, sir. This is significant, a significant
risk to national security. We had work ongoing for this
committee related to the IT cyber supply chain, and the vast
majority of the agencies have not instituted proper supply
chain internal controls. This is a major issue. We're going to
be making more than a hundred recommendations associated with
this. But it does pose a significant threat to our Nation.
Mr. Palmer. Well, and I bring this up, Mr. Lynch raised the
question about the breach at OPM, that I think there are still
issues with that, with that information, the personal
identification information that's still out there.
What would be the budgetary impacts of shifting Federal
technology acquisitions away from China?
Ms. Harris. Sir, I'm not in a position to answer that
question. We have not done work specific to that,
unfortunately, so I'm not in a position to answer that with
specific facts.
Mr. Palmer. Ms. Roat, would you at OMB have an idea about
that?
Ms. Roat. No, sir, I do not.
Mr. Palmer. Well, I think that's something that we need to
get an estimate on. I think we're talking--there's a tremendous
amount of talk about shifting the supply chain out of China,
particularly when it comes to drugs and materials that are
critical to our economy and to our national defense.
And the fact that--I think, Ms. Harris, you're the one a
few minutes ago that said that we spend 80 percent of our
budget on maintaining antiquated systems. Is that correct?
Ms. Harris. Yes, that's correct.
Mr. Palmer. And then 51 percent of that is sourced from
China, I think. So, I think this is something--and I'm going to
make this request to Ms. Roat and to Ms. Harris that either
your agencies come up with the estimate or you work together to
come up with that estimate--if I need to, Mr. Chairman, I'll
put that in writing; but I think we need to know what it would
cost us to shift our IT supply chain away from China.
So, I would appreciate it if we could get a response from
you and let us know when you start working on it.
The Commission also recommended Congress to establish a
comprehensive national security supply chain management
strategy. It further recommended that direct statistical
agencies, such as the Census Bureau, review methodologies for
collecting and publishing deeply detailed supply chain data to
better document the country of origin for imported goods from
China, including imports related to our Federal IT system.
And this is for all of the witnesses. Are you aware, are
any of you aware of any current actions that the Federal
Government is taking to implement these recommendations?
Ms. Harris, let's start with you.
Ms. Harris. Sir, I don't--that work is out of the scope of
what I am doing for this committee. So, I'll have to take that
for the record to see if there's a better expert within GAO to
answer that for you.
Mr. Palmer. OK. Mr. Gray? Well, that would be outside of
your area of expertise, too.
I'll go to Ms. Roat. Do you know where we are on that?
Ms. Roat. Right now we are working very closely with
agencies to take a look at their supply chain, currently
briefing them out on the requirements of section 889, but,
again, working very closely with the agencies to understand
their footprint and what the impacts are on that. So, that work
is ongoing and will continue.
Mr. Palmer. Is it specific? Are there specific--is there
specific work being done on the IT systems?
Ms. Roat. Again, we're working with the agencies to
understand, as you alluded to, what the impact is and
understanding if there's equipment that needs to be replaced,
upgraded, those kinds of things, the impacts on those systems.
So, that work, we have kicked it off and that is underway right
now.
Mr. Palmer. OK. I thank the Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. Let me just say to the gentleman, I think he
raises a really good point about the need for coordination so
that we're not, you know, retiring legacy systems with 150
different systems that can't coordinate, or can't be encrypted,
or have different requirements as much as we can in
coordination by OMB to make sure--and the CIO and CTO in the
White House to make sure that we're making prudent decisions
for the future, both in the cyber realm and in terms of
interoperability and coordination, very important.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman, if I might respond to that?
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Palmer.
The Chair now recognizes----
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman, if I may respond to that?
Mr. Connolly. Of course.
Mr. Palmer. May I respond to that?
Mr. Connolly. Yes, you may.
Mr. Palmer. You're absolutely right about the
interoperability among Federal agencies, but it also should
extend to the states, and we're seeing--in my previous
experience on the Oversight Committee, we saw multiple examples
of the inability because of the antiquated systems to have that
interoperability between state agencies and the Federal
agencies.
I just wanted to add that. And I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. You are quite correct, and we're certainly
seeing that in unemployment IT systems all across the country.
There are at least a dozen that still use COBOL. Now, the only
good news about that is I understand that the Chinese don't
know how to hack into COBOL, but that's about the only good
news.
So, you're absolutely right, and we're seeing that affect
millions of Americans in terms of not getting their payments in
a timely fashion, which creates a snowballing effect in their
ability to cope during the pandemic.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Raskin, for his five minutes.
Mr. Raskin?
Mr. Raskin. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Connolly. Welcome.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you very much. I'm sorry, I thought I was
unmuted already.
Mr. Connolly. No problem.
Mr. Raskin. Thanks for calling this very important hearing.
In June of last year, the day before the FITARA 8.0
hearing, OMB issued guidance which revised and narrowed the
definition of a data center. According to GAO, this revised
guidance eliminated reporting on more than 2,000 facilities
governmentwide, including types of facilities that OMB had
previously cited as cybersecurity risks.
Removing the requirement to report on these facilities
diminishes our ability to exercise oversight over potential
security risks. Ms. Harris also noted in her opening statement
that consolidation of data centers has saved us billions in
taxpayer dollars. So, why would we discontinue efforts that
save money and improve cybersecurity?
Ms. Harris, does GAO remain concerned with OMB's decision
to change the definition of data center and to no longer
require agencies to include smaller data centers in their data
center inventories?
Ms. Harris. Yes, sir, we still remain very concerned about
the new definition of data centers. Our concern in particular
is because when agencies stop reporting on these data centers,
they'll fall under the radar. They'll stop looking at them in
general, and then that's where the cybersecurity vulnerability
risks increase because they're not looking and paying attention
to these centers.
Mr. Raskin. Yes. And OMB's changes to the new guidance no
longer allowed the subcommittee and GAO to evaluate agency
progress toward data center optimization and consolidation.
Ms. Roat, can you tell us why OMB would stringently narrow
the definition of data center when doing so could both impair
cybersecurity and increase costs to the taxpayer?
Ms. Roat. Thank you for the question.
So, OMB updated the definitions of data centers to better
align with industry standards. When you look at the overall
definitions of data centers, those areas where there was maybe
just a router and a switch in a closet somewhere, those really
aren't classified as true data centers because they have com
gear in it. So, those types of things were changed as part of
the definition.
As you look at the modernization across the Federal
Government and agencies closing data centers, they are taking
big steps to rationalize their portfolio, upgrade their
infrastructure, and address those cyber security concerns just
across the entire environment.
So, as you shut down data centers, there are many steps
behind it to do that. So, even as we change the definition of
data centers, modernizing and closing and shutting down data
centers per the industry standards takes a lot of work and
those application, rationalization and infrastructure upgrades
will continue as we close data centers.
Mr. Raskin. Well, will you commit to working with the
subcommittee to track data centers in ways that are consistent
with the law and GAO's recommendations to improve cybersecurity
and maximize the saving of tax dollars?
Ms. Roat. Yes, sir. We look forward to working with the
committee on those data center metrics.
Mr. Raskin. OK. Agencies required to implement the data
center consolidation reported in total $4.7 billion in cost
savings from Fiscal Year 2012 through 2019. Of these 24
agencies, 23 reported in August of last year that they had met
or planned to meet OMB's Fiscal Year 2019 savings goal of
$241.5 million.
Ms. Roat, do we now know whether agencies met their Fiscal
Year 2019 cost savings goals? If not, when will we have that
knowledge?
Ms. Roat. I'll work with OMB on those data centers and
those metrics to make sure that we have accurate information
for that, but we continue to track what the agencies are
reporting to make sure that progress continues on the cost
center and savings.
Mr. Raskin. OK. Thank you for that.
Ms. Harris, is there any more potential for cost savings
through data center consolidation?
Ms. Harris. Yes. We believe that there is, and so that is
why this should continue to stay as a priority for the
committee on the scorecard, as well as for the agencies.
Mr. Raskin. Well, why has the Administration chosen to halt
its efforts in this field?
Ms. Harris. Unfortunately, I don't feel comfortable
speculating as to why the OMB would make that decision; but,
again, you know, backtracking on identifying and including
things like servers in closets and considering that to be a
data center is something that we disagree with OMB on.
That is something that should be counted because it may not
be an opportunity for consolidation, but it certainly still
poses a threat from a cybersecurity standpoint. So, we do
believe that having the more inclusive definition is the way to
go.
Mr. Raskin. OK. Can you describe the barriers to cloud
adoption in your approach to removing those barriers?
Ms. Harris. Well, the barriers to cloud would--it would
be--the No. 1 barrier is agencies having it as a priority.
We've found in our work on cloud adoption that agencies don't
necessarily have the robust processing in place to take a look
at all of the investments that they have in terms of whether or
not they would be eligible candidates for the cloud.
So, we've made recommendations to the agencies in
implementing those processes, and we currently have work to
look at whether those agencies are in the process of
implementing the recommendations that we've made to them.
Mr. Raskin. OK. I think I have run out of time, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much for your indulgence.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you very much, Mr. Raskin. And your
point about data center consolidation is very important, and I
agree with you.
Let me just say, Ms. Roat, I wrote that section of the
bill, so I care about it, and I'm not going anywhere.
So, we are going to insist on a robust definition of data
centers so that we continue the goal of consolidation to, A,
effectuate savings that can then be used internally for
reinvestment because they are one of the big sources of
potential savings and, second, in the whole mission of cyber
protection.
So, we'll work with you, but we're not going to countenance
squishiness in the definition so that people get off the hook
and aren't accountable for what were the data centers we're
trying to consolidate. So, I hope you will take that message
back.
The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman, is recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Do you see me on there?
Mr. Connolly. We can hear you. We can't yet see you.
Mr. Grothman. Well, you might have to put up with just
hearing me. Oh, there I am.
Mr. Connolly. There you are.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I got in a little bit late.
Is Ms. Martorana still around?
Mr. Connolly. Yes, she is right here.
Mr. Grothman. Good, good, good, good, good, good. OK.
I understand you spent a lot of your career in the private
sector and are focused on improving the digital experience.
Given OPM's importance to the Federal work force and public,
could you describe how you approach digital modernization?
Ms. Martorana. Sure. There's an enormous opportunity for us
at OPM to better serve our customers across a broad spectrum,
from continuing to improve the opportunity for job seekers all
the way through to retirees.
So, there are numerous opportunities. But the most
important place to start is on a firm platform and starting
with the foundational investments that are required in people
and technology to start that digital modernization journey.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I'll ask you another question together
with Jason.
[Inaudible] Ms. Martorana, and what steps are you taking to
comply with FISMA--[inaudible]
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Grothman?
Mr. Grothman. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. I'm sorry, could you repeat your question? It
sounds like you're in a railroad train.
Mr. Grothman. OK. I'm sorry. I'll speak up.
Mr. Connolly. That's OK.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Both of your agencies--this is both for
Ms. Martorana and Jason Gray. Both of your agencies have
critical missions and process sensitive data, yet both of your
agencies get C's in cybersecurity, which means you have got
room for improvement.
What steps are you taking to comply with FISMA, a critical
tool for ensuring effective information security across the
government?
Mr. Gray. So, I will start. We have taken a four-phased
approach, focusing on our processes and making sure that we're
refining our processes to not only comply with FISMA but also
enhance our cybersecurity posture.
We're also looking and have been focused on strengthening
our processes as it relates. We also have a lot of tools that
we have and continue to use with defense in depth, a whole
bunch of them.
Then also equally as importantly, as was mentioned earlier,
education. So, it's focusing on making sure that our staff
understand that and the department as a whole understands the
importance of cybersecurity.
We've also developed and implemented a cyber risk scorecard
that we produce that has near real-time metrics that shows it's
aligned directly within the cybersecurity framework, and that
is visible to our system owners so they can see exactly how
they're doing.
To the comment earlier about making sure that we're
measuring the risk and actually when something is red, it's not
necessarily a bad thing. It's an indication that that needs
some work. That gets briefed every single month to the
secretary, the deputy secretary and monthly to all of the
assistant secretaries for all of theirs.
So, it is really focused on a process improvement, policy
improvement, leveraging the tools that we have, and making sure
that we're educating everyone at the department on the role of
cybersecurity.
Mr. Grothman. OK.
Ms. Martorana, do you have anything?
Ms. Martorana. Yes. And I think I can mimic basically. We
are probably a little bit behind where the Department of
Education is, but following in those footsteps, the people, the
process, adding new technology and tools, and significant
training. We are consistently training our work force to make
sure that the policies and processes that we develop and the
tools that we are implementing are understandable and that the
entire work force is comprehending that every single one of us
are the best tools that we have in keeping all of our
information systems safe and secure.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Grothman?
I think that train left the station.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Grothman.
The Chair will now recognize himself for his five minutes
of questioning.
Oh, you're back? Glenn, did you have one more question?
Mr. Grothman. Yes, yes.
Mr. Connolly. Go ahead.
Mr. Grothman. Ms. Harris, at this point nearly all agencies
have gotten A's in the software licensing metric. Do you think
it's time to remove this metric? And, if so, how can we evolve
this metric to capture some of the cost saving aspects like
eliminating unused software licenses?
Ms. Harris. Yes, that's a great question.
So, I think that given all agencies except OPM have
received that A, it may be time to retire that particular
metric or evolve it. Certainly when it comes to the evolution
of the metric, one of the key things that we'll have to work
with with this committee on, as well as with OMB, is the
availability of governmentwide data that's publicly available
because that's what is used in order to generate all of these
scores or these grades.
So, that would be a key factor in what we could use to
potentially evolve the software licensing grade.
Mr. Grothman. Thanks much.
Great hearing and thanks for putting this together.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Grothman. Thank you for
joining us.
Ms. Harris, despite all of the progress in the scorecard,
we really don't seem to have made progress in retiring legacy
systems. Why not? And what will it take to seriously
incentivize agencies to do that?
Ms. Harris. Mr. Chairman, I think what we need to see
greater progress on is the working capital fund establishments
because that's a very important mechanism that the agencies can
use to transform their IT and to modernize it.
So, we would like to see a more aggressive push by the
agencies that have not yet implemented those working capital
funds to do so as quickly as possible so that they're able to
put those savings that they generate from software licensing,
from portfolios and data center consolidation into that fund so
that they can use those moneys to be able to--and the
flexibilities associated with a working capital fund, to be
able to modernize their platforms.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Gray, you will forgive me, but I think
you soft pedaled the breach.
So, yes, the breach may not have been huge but, you know,
this committee had a hearing on your agency or including your
agency several years ago, and what came out was surprisingly,
although maybe not surprisingly, but the Department of
Education actually has a huge data base, 40 million Americans.
You applied for a student loan, you've got my financial data,
my checking account, my savings account, all kinds of other
financial data that's pretty sensitive. And that's a pretty big
data base and a juicy target for some people up to no good.
So, the fact that we had this breach raises the question
about how secure is that data--the bigger data base. And given
the fact that you get a C minus in cyber, one of your lower
grades, it underscores vulnerability, maybe I need to be
concerned. I wanted to give you an opportunity to talk about
that.
Mr. Gray. So, I appreciate the question. The incident that
happened in 2017 is obviously very different than what happened
here. What was briefed on Friday is that we literally had a
file share, one out of over 7 million folders, one where a user
inadvertently allowed other people within the department
permissions.
If you have a situation where people have the ability to go
through and say, hey, I'm going to allow people to have access
to this, that sort of thing will happen.
In this situation the employee who actually identified that
did not report it to the department. They reported it
externally to the department. To compare this to the TSA, this
would be like a TSA individual at an airport seeing a
suspicious package and instead of reporting it, seeing
something, saying something, they took it externally, which
then went to the media.
So, to get to your question, though, I agree this was
identified. When we were reported--when it was notified to me,
we took care of it right away. We've also gone through and
scrubbed and rescrubbed. We've hired a third party to come in
and recheck all of what we've done just to make sure.
As of this morning, they have come to the same exact
conclusion as it relates specifically to this incident. This is
a low-risk incident where an internal--as I mentioned about the
bank and the safety deposit box, it was for trusted employees.
In this case we had a trusted employee who saw something and
instead of doing what they were supposed to do, they took it
external.
To get to your question about cybersecurity, absolutely I
take cybersecurity seriously. I have been at the department for
over four years. This is my fifth agency that I have been at.
Cybersecurity is certainly one of the core focus areas that I
have had. We, as I mentioned, have gone through what processes
can we improve, is there policies that we need to implement,
are there additional tools which we--as I mentioned, we have
network access control, data loss prevention. So, we're taking
a lot of necessary steps to ensure that we're protecting and
defending the information that we are entrusted to.
Mr. Connolly. You have legacy systems at the Department of
Education?
Mr. Gray. Yes one.
Mr. Connolly. One. How old is that system?
Mr. Gray. I would have to get you an exact number, but it's
probably been around longer than I have.
Mr. Connolly. Wow. Well, I have two conclusions from that.
One is you're younger than I thought or the other is ah, gosh,
you know, that really puts an exclamation point on it.
From your point of view, and you have had experience in
other agencies, let's stipulate we need a working capital fund.
But other than that, what's it going to take? Because my
experience is, in the private sector, management needs to put a
priority on something if it's going to happen. There has to be
a multi-year commitment if that's what it takes. You've got to
back it up with a budget commitment every year.
From your point of view, what's it going to take to retire
that legacy system?
Mr. Gray. To continue on the path that we're on--actually
there's a Next Gen financial student aid system that is well
underway. That acquisition or that entire group of projects
incorporates removing that legacy system and getting rid of it.
So, it is actually on the road map on where we're going.
General Mark Brown, who leads the Federal student aid, has
been doing an amazing job working very closely--both of our
teams working closely together from an oversight standpoint, to
make sure that we are--it's fed into our governance process.
So, at this point we have the support. Funding is always
something we can always use, but we have the absolute support
from the Secretary, from leadership and governance to address
that legacy system because we do recognize it is old and needs
to be improved.
Mr. Connolly. It is an enormous opportunity cost, not only
for you but the rest of the Federal Government. If we're
spending 80 percent of a $96 billion line item--well, it's not
a line item, but that's roughly our budget for IT every year,
and 80 percent of it is going just to maintain legacy systems,
no wonder we've got some of the problems we've got.
So, Ms. Martorana, you're relatively new to OPM. Where did
you come from, may I ask?
Ms. Martorana. The United States Digital Service. I spent
two years at the Department of Veteran Affairs prior to
joining.
Mr. Connolly. OK. And you had private sector experience
before that?
Ms. Martorana. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. OPM got, I think, a C, C minus overall grade.
Given the fact that you're the H.R. agency for the entire
Federal Government and, as Mr. Lynch mentioned, really
sensitive data on Federal employees, on people seeking security
clearances, you know, a breach there, what could go wrong with
that? And, sadly, we had the biggest single breach in the
history of the Federal Government with your agency several
years ago.
There is a sense, not about you personally, but that the
agency remains surprisingly less than driven by a mission to
make sure that never happens again and we're the exemplar for
the Federal Government as opposed to a laggard. So, I want to
give you the opportunity to address that. I heard you like your
team and they're committed and you feel pretty good about where
you're headed, but a C minus is not a great overall grade for--
given your mission. And maybe put more positively, as we look
to the future, what will it take to get to an A from your point
of view.
Ms. Martorana. Yes. We're a C plus, so a slight correction.
Mr. Connolly. What's that?
Ms. Martorana. C plus.
Mr. Connolly. C plus rather; excuse me.
Ms. Martorana. With the mainframe platform migration that
we just completed and the coming data center closures that that
will trigger and the--we had a failing grade in software
inventory, but through the COVID supplemental, we're able to
procure software that will allow us to actually do a software
inventory. We will be able to check that off of our list as
well, which should get us to approximately a B FITARA score
within the next six months. So, we are making pretty
significant progress.
You know, security is our primary focus, right. Every
single day we keep those systems safe, secure, and operational.
But one of the biggest challenges that we have is funding and
personnel. To the question earlier about risk, one of the
biggest risks I think that we are facing, in addition to those
systems, the legacy systems, is also we have many, many people
in our work force that are retiring.
And with those folks retiring and a lot of these systems'
documentation not--systems being old and not being very
properly documented, a lot of the knowledge of those very old
complex legacy systems is retiring with those subject matter
experts.
So, I think we have multiple levels of challenges that we
have to face together. So funding, multi-year funding so that
we can actually retire those legacy systems and put in more
modern technology, that will reduce risk.
Continuing to upskill and train our Federal work force and
inspire younger and different people to come into the Federal
work force is a critical part of what is going to be needed for
us to continue to secure and maintain and operate those
systems.
Mr. Connolly. I certainly agree with you, although I would
say, not about you, you know, freezing wages, threatening to
cut back in compensation, disparaging the work of the Federal
work force, making it harder for people in the workplace to
have appeals and representation and talking about extending a
probationary period from one to two years, none of that is
particularly appealing to young people on the college campus to
come work for the Federal Government.
It's almost designed, in fact, to also accelerate the
phenomenon of retirement when people--40 percent of the Federal
work force is eligible for retirement, and some of them can
delay it because they're so driven with their mission and so
passionate about what they're doing, or they can accelerate it
because they feel so discouraged and unappreciated. And none of
this was helped by a 35-day shutdown, the longest in American
history.
So, you come from the private sector; I come from the
private sector. I don't know a CEO who would get very far with
his or her board disparaging the work force, slashing
compensation and talking about--you know, discrediting, shall I
say, their value and their work. No CEO I know would keep the
job.
And, you know, you praise your work force, you motivate
your work force, you incentivize your work force----
Mr. Palmer. It looks we lost the Chairman. Is he still on
your screens?
Mr. Connolly. OK. Well, anyway, I want to thank you for the
observation. Thank you for the work you have done. We will stay
in touch. Congratulations on progress.
And we certainly, Ms. Roat, need OMB to keep the pressure
on and to be supportive. We've got to come up with some
creative solutions to help agencies, in addition to money,
retire these legacy systems. And they want to, they're
motivated, but it's a big, big decision and a multi-year
commitment in most cases and quite disruptive actually in
making that transition.
So, we've got to have some creative solutions. As we see
the vulnerabilities in our systems, they have to be addressed.
Thank you to the first panel so much for being here today.
Please stay safe and healthy.
We're going to take a five-minute break and then convene
the second and final panel of this hearing.
Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Connolly. The subcommittee will reconvene.
Mr. Powner, Ms. Council, and Mr. Spires, are you with us?
Mr. Powner, can you unmute and acknowledge you're with us?
Mr. Powner. Yes, I'm here, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. If you would stay unmuted so I can
swear you in.
Ms. Council, are you with us?
Ms. Council. Yes, Chairman Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
And, Mr. Spires?
Mr. Spires. Yes, Chairman Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
If all three of you would raise your right hand. Do you
swear to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
truth or affirm the same, so help you God?
Let the record show all three of our witnesses on the
second panel have affirmed in the positive.
Thank you.
Mr. Powner, if you're ready, I'm going to call on you for
your five-minute opening statement.
And welcome back to our subcommittee.
Mr. Powner. Thank you.
Mr. Palmer. It's good to be back, Mr. Chairman. I don't
have an opening statement.
Mr. Connolly. I would ask--oh, Mr. Palmer?
Mr. Palmer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. I'm sorry, I didn't see you. Go ahead.
Mr. Palmer. OK. I do not have an opening statement, but I
failed to do something in the previous panel, and that is enter
a document and ask for unanimous consent to enter a document
into the record on the supply chains vulnerabilities.
Mr. Connolly. Certainly, yes.
Mr. Connolly. And, Mr. Palmer, if you didn't hear me, I
said I would be glad to work with you on that whole question
about supply chain. I think it's a very good point you made.
Mr. Palmer. Well, I had hit the little raise my hand button
thing--I'm trying to get used to all of this webinar stuff--and
I had a followup question that I will ask one of the panelists
here.
But with that, with no opening statement, I will yield back
so that we can move forward with the questions for the panel.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Palmer. I didn't call on you
for an opening statement because Mr. Hice had an opening
statement for the whole hearing, and this is the second panel
of that hearing. But, obviously, if you had something you
wanted to add, you're more than welcome.
Mr. Palmer. I thought you were asking me if I had an
opening statement. I do not, but I will have questions.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, of course, and we welcome them. Thank
you.
Mr. Palmer. And I thank the Chairman.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Powner, you're recognized for your five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID POWNER, DIRECTOR OF STRATEGIC ENGAGEMENT AND
PARTNERSHIPS, THE MITRE CORPORATION

Mr. Powner. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Hice, and
Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify on the FITARA scorecard.
For the past two years, I have worked for MITRE, a not-for-
profit corporation that operates in the public interest. We're
public/private partnerships with federally funded R&D centers.
We work across government, partnership with industries to
tackle challenges for the safety, stability, and well-being of
our Nation.
Prior to joining MITRE, I was at GAO where I worked closely
with this committee crafting FITARA, helping with the creation
of the scorecard, and assisting in its oversight.
I would like to start by thanking you, Chairman Connolly,
for your leadership not only in creating FITARA, but also your
unprecedented follow-through with more than five years of
consistent oversight which has included 10 scorecards.
The Federal IT community has benefited greatly from working
with you and your bipartisan partners along the way,
Representatives Issa, Hurd, Kelly, Meadows, and now Ranking
Member Hice.
Today I would like to address three areas: One, the results
and progress that have occurred since FITARA passed; two, the
reasons for these results; and, three, potential areas to
consider for future scorecards.
The progress that has resulted from the scorecard in your
oversight are significant. Billions of taxpayers' dollars saved
consolidating data centers and reducing duplicative business
systems and licenses. FITARA's scorecard has also helped
elevate the CIO role. More CIOs have a seat at the executive
table and relationships with agency CFOs have strengthened.
These enhanced authorities and relationships will be critical
as CIOs lead their agencies to more modernization and digital
transformation.
So, why was FITARA and its implementation successful?
Simply put, it was a collective team effort from the
Legislative and executive branches. Let's look into the
specifics of this oversight. Mr. Chairman, your approach
focused on critical sections of the law, established clear
metrics with specific targets, was measurable and data driven,
and the oversight was consistent every six months over a five-
year period. This is extremely important since it took at least
two years with four scorecards to see significant progress in
any of the graded areas.
Also, OMB played a critical role. They issued FITARA
implementation guidance and required self-assessments after
FITARA was passed. Federal agencies' CIOs have provided
leadership and delivered results. This progress is evident with
the high grades on today's scorecard.
So, where should the scorecard go from here? Some of the
areas graded have reached a level of maturity where perhaps
grading is no longer a necessity. Now, this is not to say that
they're not important, just that other areas could benefit from
the transparency, measurement, and oversight the scorecard
provided.
For example, Mr. Chairman, the hearing you held a few weeks
ago on mission modernization and your March hearing where you
covered GSA's EIS contracting are prime candidates.
My written statement provides five recommendations to
consider as the scorecard is enhanced. These recommendations
are very consistent with the goals in the President's
management agenda. Here's a brief rundown of the five.
No. 1, enhance the cyber area by considering metrics with
agency and industry use and measure cybersecurity. This should
include areas like patch and vulnerability management, missed
cybersecurity framework, and supply chain management.
No. 2, add a mission modernization category that provides
transparency to our Nation's most important IT acquisitions and
incorporates a customer experience measurement as well as
legacy retirements.
No. 3, add an infrastructure category that highlights
progress on EIS so that we have in place more modern and secure
networks.
No. 4, add an IT work force category that provides a
comprehensive view of agencie's gaps in critical cyber
engineering areas and tracks progress to build the
appropriately skilled work force.
And, No. 5, add an IT budgeting category that continues to
focus on working capital funds but also incorporates TBM so
that IT costs are better captured.
We need to shed a light on the discipline agencies use in
IT budgeting so that it reflects actual needs for
modernization. This category could drive better conversations
both internally with CFOs and externally with OMB and the
Congress.
In summary, Mr. Chairman, these recs are about having
better secure agencies, tackling true mission enhancement,
having a modern infrastructure, a skilled work force to do it,
and the right resources.
Could an enhanced scorecard help in these critical areas?
Absolutely. Future legislation to enhance OMB policies could
also.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Hice, we look forward to
further assisting you on these important topics for our Nation.
Mr. Connolly. I thank you, Mr. Powner, and I also thank you
for being one of the architects, key architects of establishing
the scorecard, and I think it's evolved in a way that we hoped
it would, which is to incentivize agencies to evolve and to
modernize and to understand the criticality of that mission.
And I thank you for your leadership in allowing us to be where
we are five years later.
LaVerne Council, chief executive officer of Emerald One,
welcome.

STATEMENT OF LAVERNE COUNCIL, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, EMERALD
ONE, LLC

Ms. Council. Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Hice and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to share my experience implementing
FITARA as an Assistant Secretary for Information Technology and
CIO at the Department of Veterans Affairs where I served from
2015 to 2017. I am pleased to join you and provide my
recommendations to support the continued effectiveness of
FITARA.
Prior to joining the VA, I spent over 30 years as a global
leader in operations and technology in private industry. During
that time I led organizations as large and complex as the VA. I
had complete fiduciary responsibility and accountability for
implementing world-class processes and technology. However,
during the preparation for my role in the VA, I frequently
heard about how difficult it was to execute IT projects in the
Federal Government. The causes were numerous: one or two-year
appropriations, complicated program budgeting, hiring delays,
data center proliferation, cultural nuances, even technology
procurement decisions being made outside the IT organization.
While I did witness each of the obstacles mentioned, within
a short period of time, we were able to make progress at the
VA. How were we able to do it? We had one critical strategic
tool I could rely on. It was FITARA. FITARA is the law, and
regardless of whatever obstacles I might have encountered, I
had a law that I could leverage. I want to thank the committee
for giving us that law and, therefore, the authority to act
accordingly.
Let me share a figure with you, 74 percent of all main
frame IT modernization projects fail. That's a staggering
figure, and it is industry-wide. The primary reason is
enterprise complexity and age. Many organizations obtain or
develop new technology to enable a new process or solve a
problem well before they understand how the solution will be
supported or how the process will work.
In most cases you're trying to make something new work on
something old. Integrating new technologies on top of old
infrastructure is always a risky proposition. The old
infrastructure generally has not been well maintained.
Therefore, unforeseen risks often occur and lead to subsequent
failures. Just like the stuff in your attic or basement no one
wants to get rid of anyway and no one has updated anything, the
same thing happens in IT.
In addition to the infrastructure age, the organization's
culture, and how it drives the use of technology, and the CIO's
influence within the agency has a major impact on projects'
success.
At Emerald One we address the issue of complexity by not
just focusing on people, process and technology, but also
engaging the leadership, being culturally aware, building
trust, attaining the full value of the solution, and doing it
in the shortest possible time so you can take advantage of the
new technology. We call this the Elements of Brilliance.
With this in mind, I respectfully submit to the
subcommittee several recommendations that I believe could
strengthen FITARA.
The first recommendation is make the FITARA scorecard an
agency-wide metric, therefore, providing the agency CIOs with
the support needed to become the enabler of a critical agency
asset along with the rest of the leadership team.
The second is to add a metric that measures the agency's
average technology life cycle. This could be utilized to
understand the risk of modernizing in that environment.
The committee should also consider a method to assess
cultural readiness. The culture must be prepared to adopt new
technology, not just endure it. Organizational leaders must
focus on user adoption by measuring and managing the culture's
preparedness before tackling any new technology.
And, finally, you must ensure that the agency's fiscal
reality supports the technology mandates we impose. Many of our
agencies continue to receive technology budgets that allow them
to do little more than maintain and sustain outdated systems.
MGT supported by the TMF were both positive steps forward.
By creating more meaningful connections between the mandates,
the committee can create the leverage many CIOs need to
modernize.
As the Chairman shared in his July 20th opening statement,
we can no longer allow outdated and legacy technology to stymie
the delivery of vital public services.
Chairman Connolly, Ranking Member Hice, and Members of the
Committee, thank you again for the time and opportunity to
share my experience and perspectives on FITARA. I look forward
to its continued success and implementation and am happy to
take your questions at this time.
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Council, thank you so much; really very
helpful observations from your own experience, very practical,
and we look forward to working with you as we proceed. Thanks
so much.
Mr. Spires, welcome back.
Mr. Spires?

STATEMENT OF RICHARD SPIRES, PRINCIPAL, RICHARD A. SPIRES
CONSULTING

Mr. Spires. Yes, Mr. Connolly. Good afternoon to you----
Mr. Connolly. Welcome back.
Mr. Spires [continuing]. Ranking Member Hice and Members of
the Subcommittee. I'm honored to testify today in regards of
FITARA and the scorecard that Congress has been issuing over
the past five years.
Having served as the CIO of the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security, as well as IRS, and having served as the Vice Chair
of the Federal CIO Council, I had ample opportunity to
understand the management dynamics inherent in Federal IT.
I was pleased when FITARA was enacted, but while the
legislation itself has been of aid, I believe it has been the
oversight of Congress that has been the driving factor in
getting Federal agencies to improve their IT management.
In particular, the spirit of bipartisan has made a
significant positive difference, starting with the drafting of
FITARA, and it continues today with leadership from the
subcommittee. Yet even with the progress, much work remains to
reach the state of IT management best practice.
The hearing held by this subcommittee just two weeks ago
showcased the need to continue to focus on IT modernization.
But even if we had unlimited funds to invest in IT, many
agencies would still struggle as they do not have the
management maturity and skills to effectively deliver large
scale IT modernization.
In 2015, GAO placed the whole Federal Government on its
high-risk list for improving the management of IT acquisitions
and operations. In GAO's latest report, it recommended that 12
agencies identify and plan to modernize and replace legacy
systems, yet only three of the 12 agencies had implemented
GAO's recommendation and made progress in even planning to
modernize their legacy systems.
Given the success of the scorecard, it should continue as a
tool to measure agency progress. I recommend changes to the
scorecard to sharpen the focus on IT management and
modernization, all of which are provided in my written
testimony.
Some highlights of my recommendations include: One, add an
IT planning category. Meaningful IT modernization starts with
good planning and support by agency leadership. Hence, this
category should reflect the maturity and focus on IT
modernization within the agency's planning function and
enterprise architecture.
Two, combine the incremental delivery and transparency and
risk management categories into a broader delivery of IT
programs category.
Agency IT modernization occurs through the successful
delivery of IT programs and, as such, there should be a
category that measures the ability of agencies in being able to
manage such programs.
No. 3, evolve the managing government technology category
to a broader IT budget category. This category should keep the
element of an agency having an IT working capital fund. In
addition, agencies should much better understand the cost
element of the agency's IT budget. The Federal Government has
adopted a Technology Business Management, TBM, taxonomy to
support this effort.
Agencies should be measured on their adoption of TBM, along
with the use of benchmarking of their IT services, so that they
can compare themselves to other similar-sized agencies and
private sector corporations.
Evolve the cybersecurity category. Agencies should be
conducting meaningful enterprise cybersecurity risk management
to ensure they are focusing on protecting their most sensitive
data and critical systems. NIST has developed such a risk
management framework called the NIST Cybersecurity Framework,
the CSF, and its use is mandated by Federal agencies. Hence,
the cybersecurity category should start with measuring whether
an agency is properly executing the seven process steps of the
next CSF.
Add a customer satisfaction category. IT organizations have
customers. A core measure for all agency support organizations
should be customer satisfaction. It would be best practice to
administer a standard customer satisfaction survey to all
agencies so this category can be added to the FITARA scorecard.
To determine the specific measures for a category and what
additional data would be required for agencies to collect so
the category could be graded, I recommend that Congress convene
an advisory group that would develop recommendations to evolve
the FITARA scorecard. This advisory group should be headed by
GAO but include representatives from the Federal CIO Council,
the Office of the Federal CIO, and from the private sector.
Such an advisory group could make recommendations to Congress
within three to six months.
Given the scorecard works, let's commit ourselves, as the
Federal IT community, to evolve the scorecard to support and
drive agencies to more rapidly adopt IT management best
practices and move aggressively to modernize agency processes
and systems.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you so much, Mr. Spires.
And thank you, all three of you for your very thoughtful
testimony. And I assure you, we'll be glad to work with you and
take cognizance of some of the changes you propose in the
metrics and in the scorecard itself.
The chair now calls on Mr. Palmer for his five minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Palmer?
I'm informed Mr. Palmer is having a bandwidth issue. In
Alabama maybe, huh?
Well, let me ask all three of you a series of questions.
One is, how important is it that the CIO have the ear of the
agency head? That's one of the categories we've actually added
to the scorecard in terms of the reporting sequence, because
from our point of view, it's about empowerment. If you're going
to make decisions and make them stick, you know, the rank and
file need to see that that CIO is empowered by the agency head,
the boss.
In your experiences, how important is that, from your point
of view? Maybe we start with you, Mr. Spires.
Mr. Spires. Yes, thank you, Chairman. Yes, I had the
situation of reporting to the, if you will, agency head, a
large bureau in the IRS when I was CIO, and not the case at
DHS, actually. I reported to the Under Secretary of Management.
So, I've seen both situations in government, and I think it
makes a significant difference. And not to take away from the
Under Secretary for Management in DHS, but that individual who
I served under had no IT background and there was a lot of lost
translation. And, frankly, I don't feel like--not that I wasn't
able to develop a relationship with the Secretary and Deputy
Secretary of DHS, but it was not nearly as strong a
relationship as I was able to develop with the IRS
Commissioner. And I would say that, in my view, I was able to
be more effective, significantly more effective, because I had
a good relationship with the head of agency.
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Council?
Ms. Council. Yes, I also agree with Mr. Spires. I actually,
during my time in VA, even though it wasn't the norm, had a
direct reporting relationship with the Secretary, who was
Robert McDonald. Part of the reason for that was we had a short
period of time to get a lot of things done. He understood I
understood large enterprises. I had come from Johnson &
Johnson. He had been at Proctor & Gamble. And it allowed us to
sync very quickly.
It also is a way for the CIO to have the kind of support
enterprise-wide that they need when an agency head is aligned
with them. It doesn't mean that you don't include others in the
conversation. It just means that everyone knows this mandate is
a mandate. So, I totally agree with that alignment.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
And Mr. Powner.
Mr. Powner. Yes. So, I will third the importance of
reporting to the agency head. I think it is very important the
discussions we're having about mission modernization and
tackling legacy where we have--where CIOs have relationships
with the business leads and also a strong relationship with the
CFO, so that there is the budgetary support to tackle these
big, complex legacy modernizations.
So, having the support at the top so that they can be a
business partner with the business unit and also having that
strong relationship with the CFO is critical to tackling these
big challenges the Federal Government faces.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Powner, while I've got you, maybe you
heard the previous panel, our conversation about data centers
and the attempt by OMB to maybe dilute the definition of data
centers, which could have the unintended effect of losing
savings and even compromising security.
Would you comment on that? Because you remember how
important, the premium we put on data center consolidation when
we actually began this process with the scorecard.
Mr. Powner. Yes. No doubt, Mr. Chairman. So, a couple
comments here. I knew when that memo came out that there was
going to be a rub between OMB policy there and where you were
going with data center consolidation. Do I think that we have
had great success with data center consolidation? Yes, $4.7
billion in savings. Do I think there's opportunity to still do
more? Sure, and populate with the capital funds.
I think what really needs to occur is I think there needs
to be a really--there needs to be some type of agreement
between OMB and what they're doing and what Congress wants to
do, so you guys get more on the same page. Right now, right,
we're at different ends of the spectrum here. I do think
there's probably some coming together where you could tackle
some data center. There's a lot that's already done, but
there's still some opportunities.
That's why I think that the infrastructure category on the
scorecard where you could still include data centers, but you
also look at modern networks like with the EIS vehicle, is a
good way to think more broadly about the infrastructure rate
and how we tackle that.
Mr. Connolly. You will remember, perhaps, that the very
first hearing we had on this subject was when John Mica was
chairman of this subcommittee, different kind of configuration.
We had a field hearing at George Mason University in my
district, and that forced people to look at how were they
complying with this brand-new bill, FITARA, on data center
consolidation. And what happened was we got much better at
identifying thousands of data centers we didn't know we had,
but we made zero progress on consolidation. Out of that hearing
actually grew the idea of a scorecard, so we actually could
create metrics and force action.
So, I hope we don't go back to that. It's distressing to
learn that this action alone would take 2,000 existing data
centers and basically take them offline. That's not the
language of the statute and it's not the intent of the statute.
So, it's worth watching.
And my time is up.
Mr. Hice, I recognize you for five minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Real quickly to each of you, and I don't want a long
answer, just kind of get at your basic feel here, but I'd like
to hear from each you as to how you think FITARA, the
scorecard, has it been successful in driving change within
agencies? From your perspective, is this thing working, and
real quickly, why or why not?
Mr. Spires. I'll start, sir. Yes, it is definitely working.
And as I mentioned in my testimony, the point is we've always
had good people, good CIOs, you know, people that want to do
the right things, but the environment in many agencies, the
culture, as LaVerne was talking about, makes that difficult at
times.
So, you shining a light on aspects of IT and IT management
as congressional oversight, I think, is really critical, and it
does force agencies----
Mr. Hice. Real quickly. I've got some other questions. I
want to hear from the others. Yes or no?
Ms. Council. Yes. This is Ms. Council. I think it is
working. I think it is working very well. I also believe that
people manage what's measured. And because it's managed and
because it's measured and because it's clearly transparent, it
gets people focused on the right things.
Mr. Hice. OK.
Mr. Powner. I agree with Ms. Council on, you know, what
gets measured gets done. And I think what's really important to
look at is your persistence and consistency. In most of these
areas, it took at least four scorecards and two years to see
significant change. We've got to stick with it in order to
drive change, with some of the cultural issues that Ms. Council
mentioned earlier; it just takes time.
Mr. Hice. OK. I don't know which one of you is most
equipped to hit on this, but several of you or a couple of you
brought this up with the CIOs. What's the biggest challenge
that a CIO is facing in the attempts to try to deliver large-
scale IT modernization? What's the wall they're running into?
Ms. Council. I can take that one. Large implementations are
just that, they're high risk and they're costly and they
include people. And when you put all those together, you end up
in the situation where you can't control all the aspects, and
it requires a really focused effort of all hands on deck.
One of the biggest issues you run into, especially with
one-, two-year money, even with the working capital fund, is
that you may have multiple sets of these systems in the same
environment. I can only speak to VA, but you're talking about
one of the most complex environments in the world, not just in
the U.S. Government.
So, when you go after trying to effectively change one of
these, you've got to realize you're impacting an entire
enterprise. None of these things are in isolation. None of
these things easily are changed without engaging the entire
whole. So, they are tough, but can they get done? Yes, they can
get done. They require a lot of focus. They require everyone's
intent.
And I think that's one of the reasons we think that the
alignment needs to be the top of the house, so that everyone
understands they have to have a stake in making it successful.
Mr. Hice. OK. Mr. Spires, are you there?
Mr. Spires. Yes, I am.
Mr. Hice. OK. You mentioned in your testimony--I'm sorry,
my time is running out here, but you mentioned recommendations,
if you will, regarding next steps for the scorecard, and
specifically you brought up trying to phase in the metrics and
obtain a buy-in from the stakeholders. Can you kind of walk me
through what you have in mind when you make those comments.
Mr. Spires. Sure, Mr. Hice. I believe that we need to try
to get better alignment. And Mr. Powner mentioned this earlier
in an answer to a question about trying to get Congress working
effectively with OMB, effectively with GAO. Let's come up with
a set of metrics we all agree with.
They won't ever be perfect, but I think we can come up with
a really good set of metrics. We've got to figure out how we
measure them, that's important, and get the data. But if we do
that and we can get better alignment--and this is a bipartisan
issue, so I think we can work to do that. And I think we can
make significantly more progress in driving IT modernization,
because too often we're not going after it.
We're doing things that help, don't get me wrong, but some
of the really big modernization efforts that do require that
whole-of-agency effort agencies are just scared to go after,
and we need to change that dynamic, because it's really
important to our country that gets done.
Mr. Hice. Well, thank you. And I hope you're right. I
agree, we need to--the metrics have been great, the question of
the scorecard have been moving it forward to get more to the
bottom line of what we need to get to. I think we can get there
as well. I thank you for your answers and appreciate it.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the ranking member. And our hope I
think eventually is to move to sort of a scorecard that is a
digital hygiene kind of scorecard, but it's important to note
what Mr. Powner noted.
The only reason, in theory, we've made the progress we've
made is because we have stubbornly insisted on the metrics
contained in the scorecard for five years. And it took five
years to get everyone finally better than a D and no Fs, five
years. So, we want to be cautious about sliding back or
assuming progress where it, frankly, has not yet been
completely achieved.
So, I want to thank all of our panel for being here. There
are so many other areas we could expand upon and----
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Connolly. Oh, Mr. Palmer, are you still with us?
Mr. Palmer. Yes. I swiped myself off a little while ago.
Mr. Connolly. Sorry. Welcome back. And you are recognized
for five minutes, Mr. Palmer.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to go back to something Mr. Spires said about some
additions to the scorecard, and this has to do with security.
The Federal Acquisition Regulations are really written in such
a way that cheapest is best, and it goes back to something that
we talked about in that first panel about the fact that we're
dealing with antiquated legacy systems, and about 51 percent of
what we're buying is sourced from China.
So, I'm wondering if it makes sense to add to the scorecard
and to encourage agencies to avoid buying--as much as possible,
avoid buying from China. Mr. Spires, since you raised the issue
of adding to the scorecard.
Mr. Spires. Yes. In the cybersecurity area, certainly I'm a
huge believer in looking at enterprise risk. And there's no
doubt today that cybersecurity supply chain risk is a very
significant risk that we need to address.
So, I'm not in a position to say exclude--you know,
shouldn't buy anything from China that's related to IT, but I
think it is something that agencies need to take seriously as
they look at their enterprise risk strategy. And I know that's
certainly something DHS is looking at for all of government
right now.
Mr. Palmer. Yes. I'm not saying that they can source
everything outside of China, but we ought to encourage them to
do as much as they can, because I think there's a gap,
particularly when it comes to security, especially around this
multitiered supply chain. And it's really mentioned nowhere or
addressed nowhere in these acts.
So, let me ask it this way: Does it make sense to amend
FITARA to assess the global supply chain security risk tied to
the Federal IT acquisitions? Maybe that's where we start, and
then we put that in--add that into the scorecard. Does that
make sense?
Mr. Spires. Again, I go back to it is a key risk for
enterprise cybersecurity for an agency, and it should be
addressed as such. Whether or not that needs to be in
legislation or just part of the scorecard, I think that's--I
think that's why you should have an advisory group with some
experts that are really--you know, that study this particular
field, what would be best for the Federal agencies and how to
handle this particular enterprise risk.
Mr. Palmer. OK. And I'm not totally familiar with all of
the agencies, but I know there are a number of areas that are
considered high risk. I don't know in the GAO's assessment if
that includes high risk for security breaches in the context of
where they sourced their materials.
Mr. Powner, do any of you--do you know?
Mr. Powner. This question about high risk has come up a
couple times, Representative Palmer. I think one of the key
things we probably need to do here, whether it's supply chain
or just high risk in regards to other aspects of high risk, you
know, where there's risky acquisitions that are out there, it
sounds like there's probably some clarification that OMB might
need to look at in terms of their policies that they currently
have in place so that we're all kind of singing off the same
sheet here, because there seems to be a lot of confusion around
this risk. And I would recommend that OMB take a good hard look
at this high risk and look at what their policies say in those
areas and perhaps clarify that.
Mr. Palmer. That's a great point. We will followup on that.
And I think--I've been on Oversight since day one, I took a
leave for most of this Congress, but I've done a lot of work
with the GAO, and the thing that I want to commend the chairman
and the ranking member on is we continue to work together in a
bipartisan way to improve the quality.
In the previous panel, Chairman Connolly mentioned the fact
that some of these agencies are still operating on COBOL. When
I was in college, I was a COBOL consultant. And my concern is
that there are not many people left who would know how to
correct something if something went wrong with that.
So, there's a lot of vulnerabilities that exist. And I
think what we're trying to do here, in a bipartisan way, is not
only enhance our security, but also improve the quality of the
work product by--what I think we need to be doing is replacing
antiquated systems, and not only doing it at the Federal level
but at the state level too, so that we've got that
interoperability that we desperately need.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for recognizing me
being back and being back on the committee, and I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Palmer. Thank you so much.
Very thoughtful.
Let me ask one last question, if I may, of all of the
panelists, because given your experience. One of the things
that concerns many of us is, especially those of us who are
also in the private sector in IT, is that there's this gap,
knowledge gap, experience gap, between the Federal Government
and, let's say, the private sector, especially vendors who
provide services to the Federal Government in this sector, and
that that gap is almost growing. And to try to reverse that,
we've got to be able to attract technology specialists and
experts who can help the government manage its IT, procure its
IT, and even as simple a task but not so simple, even writing
the terms of reference for a complex IT contract.
I'd love to hear, as the final part of this hearing, your
observations briefly about that problem, if you agree it's a
problem, and what you think we ought to do about it.
Ms. Council, why don't you start.
Ms. Council. Thank you for the question. This is actually a
question that impacts the governmental aspects as well as
private industry. We don't have enough technologists anywhere.
We don't have enough data scientists anywhere. We don't have
enough architects anywhere. The need for technology, the need
for people that really understand information technology and
how to make it scale has constantly been there, but I can tell
you now it's even tenfold.
As you see the now normal that we go through since COVID,
technology is everywhere and it's everything. It allows us to
be where we need to be, and when we can't be there physically,
it allows our ideas to be there.
So, getting people to come work in the Federal Government,
one, is really hard. I talked about that often when I was in
the role. I wouldn't know how to get a job in the Federal
Government. It's not a straight line. It's not sending a resume
and you start talking to someone, as you would in a commercial
entity.
It also requires that you know--you have to understand how
to navigate. And I will tell you some of the best and brightest
in our universities today, they are interested in working on
technology, want to work on the newest things possible. They
want to work on the hardest things possible.
So, I think the more we can give them that kind of
environment, the faster we can get up on technology, the faster
we can get new technology through FedRAMP, Chairman Connolly,
the more excited young people will be, as well as some old
people--don't count us all out. We know how to program, some of
us do--will be more than willing to come in and help the
Federal Government, no doubt about it.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mr. Spires.
Mr. Spires. Yes, thank you. And great answer by Ms.
Council. I'll build on that a little bit by saying that I
really feel like--I mean, I came in mid-career into government
at the IRS first, and I'll tell you the sense of mission is
really palpable. And I don't think--I think we could do a much
better job of enticing younger people if we would market
ourselves better as Federal agencies.
I recognize that sometimes you don't have the latest
technology that you can offer all of them, but I'll tell you,
the opportunities that younger people can have that are
talented, that really want to build a career, I think we're
missing a big opportunity to be able to entice people. And I
think if we marketed this more effectively, we could attract
people.
Now, you're going to lose a lot of them, there's no doubt.
I mean, maybe you have a program where you try to keep them for
four or five years and help you. And some will stay. A lot will
go back into the private sector, and that's OK. But we need to
do something different. And I don't think we're going to be
able to buy our way out of this with increased salaries, but I
do think we have a wild card here that we need to play, and
that's that sense of mission and the opportunities we can offer
younger people.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mr. Powner, final word.
Mr. Powner. So, I agree on the sense of mission. Many
times, IT departments in the Federal Government have this
compliance focus, and that compliance focus isn't going to
attract anyone. If you look at where Ms. Council was at, you
know, who doesn't want to help the vets in our country or who
does not want to help secure the homeland, where Mr. Spires
worked.
Those are the types of missions we really need to get out
front and to talk about the challenges that we face as a
government and attract those young hard-chargers that are out
there. It's not going to be easy because of the salary
differences, but I do think--and we've seen it when you do have
this mission focus. Like, why do some folks who are seasoned
come back into government? Ms. Council did. Mr. Spires did.
They come back because, you know, they're sold on the mission,
and they want to actually help deliver on these missions.
It's no different with the younger folks we need to
attract. We really need to sell the mission hard, because a lot
of things in government are really important, and I think there
would be a fair amount of people who would get behind that.
Mr. Connolly. So, a little inspiration wouldn't kill us?
Mr. Powner. Absolutely, absolutely.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
With that, without objection, all members will have five
legislative days within which to submit additional written
questions for the witnesses to the chair which will be
forwarded to the witnesses for their response. I ask all of our
witnesses to respond as promptly as you are able. And I want to
thank all three of you for really thoughtful contribution to
this conversation and to the scorecard on FITARA.
And, with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:33 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
