- U.S. CYBERSECURITY PREPAREDNESS AND H.R. 7331, THE NATIONAL CYBER DIRECTOR ACT

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. CYBERSECURITY PREPAREDNESS
AND H.R. 7331, THE NATIONAL
CYBER DIRECTOR ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 15, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-102

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABL IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on: govinfo.gov,
oversight.house.gov or
docs.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
40-844 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2020

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND REFORM

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York, Chairwoman

Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of   James Comer, Kentucky, Ranking
Columbia                             Minority Member
Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri              Paul A. Gosar, Arizona
Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts      Virginia Foxx, North Carolina
Jim Cooper, Tennessee                Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia         Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois        Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Jamie Raskin, Maryland               Gary Palmer, Alabama
Harley Rouda, California             James Comer, Kentucky
Ro Khanna, California                Michael Cloud, Texas
Kweisi Mfume, Maryland               Bob Gibbs, Ohio
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Florida    Clay Higgins, Louisiana
John P. Sarbanes, Maryland           Ralph Norman, South Carolina
Peter Welch, Vermont                 Chip Roy, Texas
Jackie Speier, California            Carol D. Miller, West Virginia
Robin L. Kelly, Illinois             Mark E. Green, Tennessee
Mark DeSaulnier, California          Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota
Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan         W. Gregory Steube, Florida
Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands   Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Jimmy Gomez, California
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, New York
Ayanna Pressley, Massachusetts
Rashida Tlaib, Michigan
Katie Porter, California

David Rapallo, Staff Director
Emily Burns, Chief Counsel
Mark Stephenson,  Chief Counsel
Amy Stratton, Clerk

Contact Number: 202-225-5051

Christopher Hixon, Minority Staff Director
------

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page
Hearing held on July 15, 2020....................................     1

Witnesses

Panel 1
The Honorable James R. Langevin, Member of Congress,
Commissioner, U.S. Cyberspace Solarium Commission
Oral Statement...............................................     7
The Honorable Mike Gallagher, Member of Congress, Co-Chair, U.S.
Cyberspace Solarium Commission
Oral Statement...............................................     9
Panel 2
The Honorable Michael J. Rogers, David Abshire Chair, Center for
the Study of the Presidency, and Former Congress and Chairman,
House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (2011-2015)
Oral Statement...............................................    18
J. Michael Daniel, President and Chief Executive Officer, Cyber
Threat Alliance,White House Cybersecurity Coordinator (2012-
2017)
Oral Statement...............................................    21
Amit Yoran, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, TenableFounding
Director, U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT)
(2003-2004)
Oral Statement...............................................    22
Suzanne Spaulding, Senior Adviser, Homeland Security,
International Security Program,Center for Strategic &
International Studies, Commissioner, U.S. Cyberspace Solarium
Commission
Oral Statement...............................................    24
Jamil N. JafferFounder & Executive Director, National Security
InstituteGeorge Mason University
Oral Statement...............................................    28

Written opening statements and witnesses' written statements are
available at the U.S. House of Representatives Repository:
docs.house.gov.
INDEX OF DOCUMENTS

----------

The documents entered into the record are available at:
docs.house.gov.

* Letter of Endorsement of National Cybersecurity Director by
US Chamber of Commerce; submitted by Rep. James R. Langevin.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Daniel; submitted by
Chairwoman Maloney.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Jaffer; submitted by
Chairwoman Maloney.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Rogers; submitted by
Chairwoman Maloney.

* Questions for the Record: to Ms. Spaulding; submitted by
Chairwoman Maloney.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Yoran; submitted by
Chairwoman Maloney.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Daniel; submitted by Ranking
Member Comer.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Jaffers; submitted by
Ranking Member Comer.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Rogers; submitted by Ranking
Member Comer.

* Questions for the Record: to Ms. Spaulding; submitted by
Ranking Member Comer.

* Questions for the Record: to Mr. Yoran; submitted by Ranking
Member Comer.
.................................................................

U.S. CYBERSECURITY PREPAREDNESS
AND H.R. 7331, THE NATIONAL
CYBER DIRECTOR ACT

----------

Wednesday, July 15, 2020

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Reform,
Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 12:16 p.m., via
WebEx, Hon. Carolyn B. Maloney [chairwoman of the committee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Maloney, Norton, Lynch, Connolly,
Raskin, Rouda, Khanna, Mfume, Sarbanes, Welch, Speier,
DeSaulnier, Tlaib, Porter, Comer, Jordan, Gosar, Massie,
Grothman, Cloud, and Keller.
Chairwoman Maloney. Good afternoon. The committee will come
to order. Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare
a recess of the committee at any time.
I recognize myself for an opening statement.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you all for being here today.
As our Nation reckons with the monumental human and economic
toll of the coronavirus crisis, we must look critically at the
warnings we had and the decisions made about them.
The most recent Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S.
Intelligence Community, released in January 2019, warned, and I
quote, ``The United States and the world will remain vulnerable
to the next flu pandemic or large-scale outbreak of a
contagious disease that could lead to massive rates of death
and disability, severely affect the world economy, strain
international resources, and increase calls on the United
States for support.''
We must ask ourselves what other warnings are going
unheeded, and what can we do right now to protect the American
people from other catastrophic threats? Before the unthinkable
happens in the future, how can we exercise strategic, decisive
foresight to the best of our ability today to ensure we are a
nation prepared tomorrow?
That same Worldwide Threat Assessment lists cyber attacks
as a top global threat, with China, Russia, Iran, and North
Korea waging a silent war capable of shutting down critical
infrastructure, breaching sensitive information systems, and
jeopardizing critical sectors in America and globally.
The report states, and I quote, ``Our adversaries and
strategic competitors will increasingly use cyber
capabilities--including cyber espionage, attack, and
influence--to seek political, economic, and military advantage
over the United States and its allies and partners.''
Cyber-attacks are a critical, complex, prevalent, and
growing threat to the Nation's safety and economic security,
touching nearly every aspect of our lives. This assessment was
upheld by recent findings from the U.S. Cyberspace Solarium
Commission, which was established by the 2019 National Defense
Authorization Act to review the state of our cybersecurity
posture and develop bipartisan solutions for defending America
against cyber-attacks.
This commission of congressional, executive branch, and
private sector cybersecurity leaders sounded the alarm that, in
addition to millions of intrusions that disrupt operations in
America on a daily basis, we remain vulnerable to catastrophic
attacks on critical infrastructure and economic systems that
could cause widespread damage and death.
A number of the commission's recommendations fall within
the legislative jurisdiction of this committee. This includes
one that has sparked a high level of interest on both sides of
the aisle, the recommendation for a centralized cybersecurity
position at the White House to develop and streamline the
Federal Government's strategy, coordination, and response to
cyber-attacks.
This role was first formalized during the George W. Bush
Administration and then elevated and expanded during the Obama
Administration. But in 2018, then-National Security Adviser
John Bolton eliminated the role, reportedly to cut ``another
layer of bureaucracy.''
The move generated widespread bipartisan concern. In 2019,
the United States was rated as the fifth most cyber-secure
nation in the world. In 2020, it dropped to the seventeenth.
Today, we will review H.R. 7331, which would implement the
commission's recommendation to establish a National Cyber
Director in the Executive Office of the President. This new
position would restore that cyber coordination and planning
function to the White House. In addition, for the first time,
it would be backed with resources and statutory authority to
lead strategic planning efforts, review cybersecurity budgets,
and coordinate national incident response.
A challenge as complex and pervasive as cybersecurity
requires that our Government be strategic, organized, and
ready. Democrats and Republicans agree we need a National
Cybersecurity Director to ensure we are fully prepared for, and
coordinated in, our response to cyber-attacks as our Nation
fights this silent war. Our mission today is to gain a detailed
understanding of the threats we face and to thoroughly examine
H.R. 7331 as the vehicle for preparing our country against
those threats.
I now recognize the distinguished ranking member for his
opening statement. Representative Comer?
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, for holding this
hearing to address our Nation's cybersecurity posture and to
explore the merits of U.S. Cyberspace Solarium Commission's
recommendations to establish a National Cyber Director office
within the Executive Office of the President.
The Federal cyber domain, we can all agree, is dynamic and
dispersed, with varying jurisdictions and expertise across the
Federal Government. These agencies are organized to combat
cyber-crime, defend against national security intrusions, and
support the security needs of the private sector's critical
industries and commercial interests.
Our Nation has continuously become more and more reliant on
technology over the last three decades. Our reliance on
technology and interconnected information systems is more
important than ever, with the pandemic forcing organizations to
quickly build out remote operations and our Nation's work force
pivoting to a work from home posture. Increasingly, foreign
state actors, extremist groups, domestic agitators, and
criminal enterprises all have a vested interest in exploiting
U.S. networks.
The remote operations of the pandemic have created new
cyber vulnerabilities for these malicious actors to take
advantage of. These are the same actors who also target our
private sector partners and state and local institutions.
Breaches in Federal and commercial networks by foreign
governments have exposed sensitive intelligence data,
proprietary military designs, and Government personnel data.
Because of cybersecurity risks, we must all do our part to
maintain a safe and secure national cyber infrastructure, and
by continuing to foster relationships across the private sector
and our state and local partners, we can share vital cyber
threat information that helps secure our critical
infrastructure.
We will hear today from notable subject matter experts who
have deep experience navigating the Nation's cybersecurity
environment. They also have experience with efforts to combat
damaging cyber-attacks from foreign adversaries like China.
Historically, China has hacked into the FDIC, stolen valuable
U.S. R&D, and paid our university professors to improperly
share valuable intellectual property. I would welcome the
opportunity to work with the majority to hold China accountable
for these bad acts, as well as their deceptive tactics over the
course of this pandemic. That would be a great hearing, Madam
Chairman.
Today, however, we look forward to evaluating the proposal
to establish a National Cyber Director to oversee the
cybersecurity policy, planning, and operations of the Federal
Government. In evaluating this legislative proposal, we have a
duty to the American people to be a good steward of taxpayer
dollars and not create more bureaucracy. Establishing a clear
and convincing rationale for establishing such a critical
position requires the kind of due diligence and thoughtful
assessment that our committee's hearing processes afford. The
current and projected cybersecurity landscape is complicated
with many actors and operations that must work in harmony.
While there have been more than several high-profile
cybersecurity incidents over the past decade, I must note that
recent attempts at targeting our Nation's coronavirus
biomedical research activities and use of remote work platforms
have been taken very seriously by Homeland Security and law
enforcement officials within the Trump administration. The
administration has done what is expected of cybersecurity
professionals. It has prioritized defending against potentially
harmful cyber incidents wherever and whenever threats are
found.
I think we all want our Nation's cybersecurity to be
effective, both defensively and offensively. To this end, it is
imperative that Congress and this committee fully evaluate the
reasons why the commission recommended the statutory creation
of the National Cyber Director.
The main questions I have toward this goal are, ``Is it
necessary to create another Federal office to have someone
truly in charge, and if so, will that official, in fact, have
the authority to make the decisions that need to be made? Will
everyone else fall in line and work in harmony?
We know that multiple Federal agencies have a piece of the
cybersecurity pie. So, by authorizing a new oversight and
coordinating official, are we legitimately creating a system
that will be more prepared to face growing cyber threats? Will
the National Cyber Director utilize the existing cyber
leadership and expertise in our Government, or do we risk
making that bureaucratic pie bigger and creating duplicating
functions? Will a National Cyber Director add value to this
Nation's cybersecurity infrastructure, or should we align and
support systems already in place?
I look forward to hearing about tangible examples of how
this National Cyber Director would actually respond to a cyber
incident and how that might be better than the system already
in place. In a fluid environment, when response time and
expertise are paramount, we cannot afford to introduce
inefficiencies or bureaucratic hurdles to the Government's
ability to respond to a national cybersecurity incident in real
time.
Madam Chairwoman, I think we agree our Nation's
cybersecurity enterprise deserves a supported public policy
that will not hinder dynamic, focused, and strategic planning
and operation. I am pleased to be working with you on this
issue, but again, I want to ensure that we are not fostering
redundant efforts across the Federal cyber sector. In
establishing a Senate-confirmed cybersecurity leader, we need
to be comfortable in limiting Presidential prerogative to
implement preferred policies on behalf of the American people.
Again, I appreciate this opportunity to review this
recommendation and hear from these expert witnesses. I yield
back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Comer.
I now recognize the distinguished chairman of the
Subcommittee on National Security, Mr. Lynch, for an opening
statement.
Mr. Lynch. Now thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
convening today's important hearing on H.R. 7331, which allows
for the creation of a National Cyber Director, which is an idea
that is not only reasonable, but necessary and long overdue
given the world in which we live.
I am well aware of the lengthy review and study that Mr.
Langevin has engaged in over the years on this issue. He has
been nothing short of relentless in his mission, and I thank
him and our friend and colleague Mr. Gallagher for their
bipartisan commitment to defending our Nation's cybersecurity
and for their testimony before our committee.
I also want to take a minute just to thank Mr. Katko, Mr.
Ruppersberger, and Mr. Hurd, who are also original co-sponsors
of H.R. 7331.
Now for years, foreign policy and national security experts
have considered cyber to be the battlefield of the future. And
for anyone paying attention, that future is already here. Back
in 2014, hackers, likely affiliated with the Chinese
government, breached the information system of the Office of
Personnel Management, compromising the personal data of at
least 22 million people, including, most notably, Federal
employees who had either applied for or received security
clearances for access to classified information.
We are also well aware of Russia's sweeping and systemic
efforts in 2016 to interfere in the Presidential election by
hacking the computer network of the Democratic National
Committee and attempting to penetrate the election
infrastructure in all 50 states.
To speak to some of Mr. Comer's concerns, most recently our
National Security Subcommittee staff, which I chair, we held a
briefing with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the
Cybersecurity Infrastructure Security Agency to discuss the
latest uptick in cyber-attacks during the coronavirus pandemic
against the Federal Government agencies, research and academic
institutions, and even private citizens. During the briefing,
our committee was told that every institution or agency
conducting coronavirus vaccine research is a target for--is a
current target for foreign cyber attackers.
As our intelligence agencies warned before 9/11, the system
is blinking red. Yet only two years ago, then-National Security
Adviser John Bolton dismantled the national cyber coordinator
position at the National Security Council, leaving the U.S.
cybersecurity policy rudderless and disjointed.
The need for greater leadership, strategic planning, and
policy coordination to ensure the security of our Nation in the
cyber domain could not be more urgent or important. So, I am
pleased to support H.R. 7331, which will allow for the creation
of a National Cyber Director, and I would encourage all of my
colleagues to do the same.
Again, I want to thank the chairwoman for her willingness
to hold this hearing today, and I want to thank all of our
witnesses for testifying. I look forward to the discussion and
for building even greater bipartisanship and consensus around
the importance of H.R. 7331.
Last, I am also currently in a markup over in T&I--I am at
the Capitol today--where I have an amendment pending. So, I am
going to have to jump out and then jump back in. I apologize
for that, but that is our schedule. I yield back. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Lynch. I now recognize
Mr. Grothman for an opening statement.
Mr. Grothman. OK. Can you hear me?
Chairwoman Maloney. Yes. We can hear you.
Mr. Grothman. Good. I appreciate this opportunity in my
role--first of all, it is good to see we got our witness on
here from Wisconsin. So, I thank you for bringing him in. I
appreciate this opportunity in my role as ranking member of the
National Security Subcommittee on Oversight to address an issue
with major national security ramifications.
As Ranking Member Comer addressed in the opening comments,
our Nation's adversaries will stop at nothing to steal our
secrets, commercial expertise, and sensitive information held
on a sprawling computer network connecting both public and
private sector organizations. Chief among these cyber offenders
is the Chinese government.
Unfortunately, despite a desire to play by the rules in
international commerce, as President Trump says, we have been
treated unfairly by the Chinese. Oftentimes, this well-
intentioned global posture costs the United States our valuable
intellectual property, which flows out of our Nation's research
institutions into Chinese hands. The hearing today will help us
determine whether our Federal Government needs support in
defending against these high-stakes malicious cyber attacks and
continual intrusions.
One of the proposals by the Cyberspace Solarium Commission
was the formation of a new National Cyber Director office and a
Senate-confirmed official inside the White House. While I
appreciate the commission's desire to ensure that the Federal
Government's cybersecurity infrastructure includes a one-stop
shop for cyber guidelines, I wonder whether we might be too
quick to create yet another new bureaucracy by not carefully
considering potential downsides to this reform.
We must keep in mind the Trump administration's success in
protecting our last mid-term elections from disruptive cyber
incidents, and the administration's strong stance against those
who wish to take advantage of international attempts to exploit
the technology challenges presented by the pandemic. Would we
be doing a disservice to various agencies which already
effectively coordinate cybersecurity responses for our Nation?
I want to keep an open mind on the merits of any proposal
to improve our national cybersecurity, and I appreciate today's
witnesses and the time and attention they have each dedicated
to protecting our Nation's information and critical
infrastructures.
I look forward to the witnesses' testimony and their
perspectives on whether the creation of a National Cyber
Director will add value to the current multi-agency cyber
framework to properly de-conflict and coordinate effective
responses to cyber attacks against our Government and private
sector.
Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney and my counterpart on the
National Security Subcommittee, Chairman Lynch, and Ranking
Member Comer, for all of your interest in these pressing
issues. I look forward to working with each of you to ensure
that we strengthen America's cybersecurity against all types of
threats and any foes from abroad who wish to do Americans harm.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Grothman.
I will now introduce our first panel of witnesses
consisting of our colleagues here in the House of
Representatives who served on the U.S. Cyberspace Solarium
Commission--Congressman Jim Langevin of Rhode Island,
commissioner of the Cyberspace Solarium Commission and chairman
of the Emerging Threats and Capabilities Subcommittee of the
House Armed Services Committee, who has been championing this
effort for many, many years, and Congressman Mike Gallagher of
Wisconsin, co-chair of the commission and a proud new father of
Grace Ellen Gallagher. Congratulations on truly life's greatest
experience of becoming a father, and it is the best job in the
world. So, we are very pleased to have you both here today.
With that, Mr. Langevin, you are now recognized to provide
your testimony.

STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF RHODE ISLAND AND COMMISSIONER, U.S.
CYBERSPACE SOLARIUM COMMISSION

Mr. Langevin. Very good. Well, thank you, and good
afternoon, Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer, and
distinguished members of the committee. It is always humbling
to sit on this side of the table, the witness table, even when
it is virtual. I want to begin my remarks by thanking all of
you for the important work that you do. I particularly want to
thank Chairwoman Maloney for convening this hearing and for her
partnership in raising the issue of creating a National Cyber
Director.
I join you today as a representative of the Cyberspace
Solarium Commission. I am proud to be joined by my colleague,
Congressman Mike Gallagher, one of the co-chairs of the
Solarium Commission.
I also want to congratulate him on being the newest father
in the House to his daughter Grace. Congratulations, Mike. I
know you are coming off paternity leave to be here for this
hearing, so thanks, and I commend you for your work.
In the 2019 National Defense Authorization Act, Congress
charged the Solarium Commission with developing a consensus on
a strategic approach to defending the United States in
cyberspace against cyber attacks of significant consequence. In
our first meeting, however, outside experts on congressional
commissions told us that we were attempting the impossible. We
were trying to have a 9/11 Commission-level of impact without
the precipitating event of a September 11.
Well, Madam Chair, I reject that cynical view. I believe
that if we come together in a nonpartisan fashion to implement
the Solarium Commission recommendations, we can alter the trend
that sees our cyber risk grow year after year. We can push back
on our adversaries, who see the cyber domain as the ultimate
realm for asymmetric operations in the gray zone short of war.
We can seize the initiative and ensure that we are not left to
wonder the day after an attack what more could we have done.
So, that is how I view the work of the Cyberspace Solarium
Commission. That is the urgency I bring to the table. And more
so than any of the other 82 recommendations the Solarium
Commission proposes, the National Cyber Director is essential
to seizing the initiative from our adversaries.
It is essential because cybersecurity permeates every
aspect of our society and every aspect of our Government. Every
department and agency, from the Department of Agriculture to
the Department of Veterans Affairs, relies on secure
information technology to conduct business, yet very few of
them have cybersecurity as part of their mission, nor is it
their primary focus.
Because cybersecurity is difficult to measure, we end up
with misaligned incentives. People skimp on cybersecurity
because they would rather invest in operationally relevant
programs in their department. We need a strong leader in the
White House to defeat the inertia that pushes investments in
cybersecurity down the road or until a devastating breach
occurs. We also need as strong cyber leader in the White House
to coordinate strategy.
Beyond Government systems, our national and economic
security rely on critical infrastructure, most of which is
owned and operated by the private sector. Where once we could
rely on two oceans and friendly neighbors to insulate us, today
our banks, hospitals, and power plants are on the front lines
of shadow campaigns to undermine our way of life. Only within
the White House can we break down agency silos to ensure that
we have a ``whole of nation'' effort to protect our networks.
Finally, Madam Chair, we need a National Cyber Director in
the White House to coordinate incident response. We are living
through a public health crisis right now, the likes of which we
have not seen in over a century. When our adversaries strike us
in cyberspace, we must be prepared to defend early, to stamp
out the infections from computer viruses, to quarantine
affected networks, and to inoculate uninfected machines by
patching them. This is only possible with a National Cyber
Director.
This idea, of course, is not new. I worked on it with the
CSIS Commission for the 44th Presidency in 2008. But as my
friend Mr. Gallagher has taken great pains to describe at
length, the Solarium process pioneered by President Eisenhower
has a way of refining one's thinking. We debated the proposal
for a National Cyber Director extensively, and we were very
deliberate in our decision-making.
We chose an office in the White House because only the
White House can truly reach across departments and agencies to
manage a risk so pervasive as cyber. We chose a Senate-
confirmed position because congressional oversight and buy-in
is critical to the success of the office. We chose to preserve
a coordinative rather than operational bend to the role because
our cyber defenders need strategic guidance, not tactical
advice.
Madam Chair, just to conclude, there are some who argue
that the National Cyber Director is congressional overreach.
There are those who say that the President is the ultimate
arbiter of the Executive Office of the President and that
Congress has no business interfering in these Article II
affairs. Those people, respectfully, disregard history, as
Congress has helped to guide White House structure in the past
when the moment demanded it, such as when Congress created the
Office of Science and Technology Policy or the U.S. Trade
Representative. But more concerning to me, these people
implicitly endorse the status quo, and that scares me.
It scares me because every day I wake up and see our
adversaries making gains in cyberspace. I saw it under
President Bush, I saw it under President Obama, and I see it
today under President Trump. I see our adversaries stealing our
intellectual property, shaping norms that suit their interest
on the international stage, striking out at our partners and
allies, and attempting to undermine our elections.
Madam Chair, it is time we seize the initiative. It is time
we set the agenda, pushing back on our competitors and shaping
their behavior by improving our resilience and in strengthening
the cyber ecosystem. It is time we empower the National Cyber
Director at the White House.
Madam Chair, with that, serving on the Cyber Solarium
Commission with Mr. Gallagher has been one of the most
rewarding experiences of my life. His leadership and that of
Senator King, the contributions of our fellow commissioners,
and the enormous dedication of our immensely talented staff are
all reflected in the bill that we are discussing today. It is
an honor to have the opportunity to present it before you, and
I look forward to answering any questions that you may have.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you so much, Congressman
Langevin, and thank you for your leadership and passion for the
security of our Nation. I now recognize Mr. Gallagher.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE GALLAGHER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF WISCONSIN AND CO-CHAIR, U.S. CYBERSPACE
SOLARIUM COMMISSION

Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney and the rest
of the committee, and thank you for the kind words about my
newborn daughter. If I pass out during this hearing, it is not
only because I am nervous to be on the wrong side of the
hearing here as a Member, but because I haven't had much sleep
in the last two weeks. But we are truly blessed, and I
appreciate the kind words.
As Dwight Eisenhower said, ``We do not keep security
establishments merely to defend property or territory or rights
abroad or at sea. We keep the security forces to defend a way
of life.''
And right now, emerging technology empowered by stronger
and more capable digital networks is being infused into every
part of our Government, economy, and our way of life. How we
navigate the resulting opportunities and challenges will
determine the effectiveness of our Nation to deal with future
cyber-driven or cyber-enabled contingencies. For the past 20
years, commissions, initiative studies, and even four
Presidential administrations have been challenged to define and
establish an effective national-level model for coordinating
cyber strategy, policy, and operations.
I believe it is imperative that the executive branch have a
strong, stable, and expert-led cyber office and leader within
the White House. Whether to create the position of a National
Cyber Director, however, and what that position would entail
was one of the most spirited and important debates we had over
the course of the commission.
My colleague Jim Langevin was absolutely incredible in his
thought leadership and his dedication to the integrity of the
Cyberspace Solarium Commission process, and I learned a ton
from him throughout. And due to Jim's leadership, we really
considered, one, how to address the gap in national leadership
and coordination and consistent prioritization; two, whether to
recommend Senate confirmation; and three, the size, structure,
and scope of authorities for the coordinator and leadership
office.
Ultimately, we decided that the Federal Government would be
better equipped by strengthening existing department and agency
efforts in cybersecurity, including the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, rather than the creation of a
new department, as many advocated for. Therefore, without a new
agency, the commission deemed the institutionalization of a
cyber coordinator position in the White House within the
Executive Office of the President to be essential to give the
position a high enough level of prominence to effectively
coordinate national strategy and provide much-needed leadership
internationally, with state, local, tribal, and territorial
governments, and with the private sector.
And in recognition of that need for better collaboration,
the Chamber of Commerce recently endorsed the National Cyber
Director Act, our bipartisan legislation that Representative
Langevin has led.
The commission spent an enormous amount of time weighing
the pros and cons of this position and in contemplating the
stature of the position. We determined that requiring it to be
Senate-confirmed, similar to the way in which the U.S. Trade
Representative is Senate-confirmed, would not only signal that
Congress is committed to cyber issues but also afford us, as
legislators, a level of access to that conversation, but also
the person that occupies that position a level of political
support that bipartisan endorsement would bring while
maintaining the discretion of the President in selecting that
candidate.
Making the role Senate-confirmed, in other words, would
provide greater permanence by institutionalizing the position's
existence and ensuring the role would endure throughout
Presidential transitions and not just be dependent on the whim
of a particular President or a particular National Security
Adviser.
I understand there are those, particularly my Republican
colleagues, who may be skeptical that this is an added layer of
bureaucracy. I just would say to you that I came into this
discussion with that as my ideological prior. But unless you
believe that the status quo is, indeed, getting the job done,
unless you believe that we are, at present, well-structured to
avoid a cyber 9/11, as my colleague referred to, then you have
to consider how we can make a meaningful reform of the status
quo.
Indeed, rather than creating an entirely new agency, which
would take years to create, which would be much more complex
and would further muddy the bureaucratic waters, I view the
creation of a single focal point in the White House, a single
person--or to quote my co-chair Angus King, a single throat to
choke--someone who is responsible for this effort, to be the
least bureaucratic, the least onerous, and the most efficient
of all possible options. It also gives Congress a greater
window into this discussion, as I alluded to.
I believe, in closing, that we in Congress must
sufficiently enable the Federal Government to create a cohesive
national strategy and defense in the cyber domain, as we do in
all other domains of battle, and we must do so today. So, I
urge you to support the commission's recommendation on the
creation of a National Cyber Director so that, in Ike's words,
``When we fight, we will fight in all elements as one single,
concentrated effort.''
With that, I will close my comments. I thank you for your
time and consideration.

Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Gallagher. This is truly
a bipartisan goal to protect our country.
We will be limiting questions for the first panel. I now
recognize myself for five minutes for questions, and Mr.
Gallagher, I want to start with you.
The current coronavirus crisis has created a systemic shock
that has exposed a number of critical ways in which our country
failed to prepare for what many would call the ``inevitable.''
In our increasingly connected and technology-driven world, many
experts warn that a large-scale cyber-attack is also
inevitable.
The Solarium Commission recently released a white paper
examining cybersecurity in the context of the pandemic, and Mr.
Gallagher, your white paper lays out some interesting parallels
between lessons learned during the coronavirus pandemic and how
these lessons can inform our preparation for significant cyber-
attacks. Can you share some of these parallels and your
recommendations with us?
Thank you.
Mr. Gallagher. Absolutely. You know, obviously, they are
not perfectly analogous events, but I would highlight a few
similarities. There are really three stand out in my mind that
we analyzed in our white paper, our pandemic annex. First, both
the pandemic and a significant cyber-attack can be global in
nature, requiring that nations simultaneously look inward to
manage a crisis as well as work across borders to contain its
spread. Both are difficult to contain across borders as well.
Second, I would argue that both the coronavirus pandemic
and a significant cyber-attack require a whole of nation
response effort and are likely to challenge existing incident
management doctrine and coordinating mechanisms, as we are
discovering right now with every state, every county, every
city government, and a bunch of nonprofits having to figure out
how they can all work together in order to slow the spread of
the disease.
And finally, and perhaps most importantly, I would argue
the similarity is that prevention is far cheaper and pre-
established relationships far more effective than a strategy
based solely on detection and response. That is why if you read
not only our pandemic annex but our broader Cyberspace Solarium
report, which we had the unfortunate timing of releasing on
March 12, 2020, the last week we were in session in the House
before shutting down, you will see that a lot of what we are
trying to do is to get left of boom, for lack of a better term,
figuring out how we can force the Federal Government--in
partnership with Congress, in partnership with state
governments, tribal governments, territorial governments--to
think through the unthinkable. Think through how we can rapidly
restore our economy in the event of a cyber-attack, to be able
to come back stronger and strike back against our enemies and,
therefore, restore deterrence.
So, you know, I will be cautious about extending the
similarities between the pandemic and a cyber-attack too far,
but those three stand out in my mind.
Chairwoman Maloney. Well, thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Langevin, the commission recommends establishing a
National Cyber Director to coordinate the Federal Government's
incident response activities. Can you share examples of how the
coronavirus pandemic and shifts to remote services have led to
additional cybersecurity challenges?
Mr. Langevin. Sure. Thank you for the question, Madam
Chair.
Certainly, the pandemic influence has shown the challenges
of needing a coordinated response, and when you have a diffused
response and many people in charge--for example, just so you
can get to the states as we have--it makes it more challenging
to have a cohesive direction in which to go. So, we want to
make sure that with respect to a cyber incident that we are
both having someone that thinks about this in terms of pre-
planning, so looking at the most vulnerable areas, say, of
potential cyber-attacks on critical infrastructure, which is
owned and operated in the private sector, and figuring out how
we can make our cyber networks more resilient and how we would
get them back up and running more quickly.
But in the actual incident, if it were to occur, that you
have a single point of contact that is both the principal
adviser to the President, he or she is the coordinator to bring
the interagency together, or the National Security Council
together, or the Economic Security Council together to lay out
options for response and have a more coordinated, cohesive, and
effective response.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. How would establishing this
role have made a difference in our response to the COVID-19
pandemic?
Mr. Langevin. Well, I think it is probably more analogous
to how we would, say, respond to a cyber-attack or intrusions
on our elections, but certainly, there are elements of cyber
response to COVID. For example, what we know of the Chinese and
other entities trying to steal intellectual property for the
development of a coronavirus vaccine or therapeutics. We would
have a much more focal point in which the Cyber Director would,
again, be able to coordinate the relevant departments and
agencies or private sector entities to effectively coordinate
the response that needs to be taken to protect those networks
and prevent intellectual property, hopefully, from occurring in
the first place.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
Now for both of you, is it your opinion that establishing a
National Cyber Director is an essential step in ensuring the
U.S. is in the best position to prevent and, if necessary,
respond to a crisis induced by a significant cyber-attack?
Mr. Langevin. I certainly feel that that is the most
effective way to both prevent and also respond to a cyber
incident of significant consequence. We thought this through
very clearly, and as my colleague pointed out, of the various
ways we could have gone having this at an existing department,
existing agency, or having the authority in a new cybersecurity
agency, or having it in the Senate-confirmed Executive Office
of the President position, we felt this was the best way to go
of the various options we would have recommended.
Again, it doesn't create an excessive new bureaucracy. I
believe it is very streamlined, very focused. It gives
strategic guidance and both advice to the President, but it is
going to--the coordinating authority to make sure all the oars
are pulling in the same direction in the event of a cyber
incident.
Chairwoman Maloney. Well, thank you.
Mr. Gallagher. I would second----
Chairwoman Maloney. Mr. Gallagher, do you want to add to
that?
Mr. Gallagher. Well, I just would second Jim's remarks and
say I think of it as a necessary, but insufficient
recommendation. It is part of a broader suite of
recommendations. I think, if you read our final report, what
you see is a genuine attempt from commissioners on both sides
of the aisle to elevate and empower existing agencies rather
than create a bunch of overlapping new bureaucratic structures.
And I do want to commend the work of a lot of great leaders
we have at the NSA, at CISA, who have really learned a lot of
lessons in the last four years and come a long way. We are not
saying they haven't done good work. We view this as a way to
better empower them and build upon the lessons of the last few
years.
Chairwoman Maloney. Well, I agree with the commission and
my bipartisan colleagues in Congress that we need a centralized
cybersecurity position at the White House to develop and
streamline the Federal Government's strategy, coordination, and
response to cyber threats and strengthen all activities that
are taking place now. I thank you all for your hard work and
your testimony today.
I now recognize the distinguished ranking member for five
minutes for questions. Representative Comer?
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Chairwoman. I had a very good
conversation with Jim yesterday about this legislation, and I
am going to direct my questions to my good friend Mike
Gallagher. Will the National Cyber Director legislation create
budgetary hurdles in how it works with the Office of Management
and Budget, OMB, that might artificially constrain a
President's cyber policy decisions?
Mr. Gallagher. We examined that in depth. Ultimately, I
don't think so. We are giving--in our construct, giving the
National Cyber Director budget certification authority, which
effectively means he has the ability to look at various
executive branch agencies when it comes to cyber elements
within their budget and flag effectively for the President
something of concern, but the President still retains the
ultimate authority to adjudicate that dispute.
If, for example, there was a disagreement between OMB and
the National Cyber Director, just as there is often a
disagreement within different executive branch agencies, the
President, and working through his National Security Adviser,
can adjudicate those disputes, and he can choose whether or not
to follow the advice of the National Cyber Director. So, while
the National Cyber Director would have that budget
certification authority, he can't go in and mess the entire
process up, for lack of a better way to describe it.
Mr. Comer. OK. I have heard different people describe what
they view this might entail, but would the new office comprise
a large new staff? I have heard between 75 and 100 new
staffers. Obviously, that would create a new bureaucracy, and
we are always careful about creating new bureaucracies.
So, what is the prediction of a budget? How much will this
cost? How many staffers are we talking about here?
Mr. Gallagher. I would say, as we estimate, 75 is about
right, and I understand your concern. That is not nothing. That
would replace about the 15 that are there right now.
I just would say if you look right now at the, let us say,
the comparison of people and resources we devote for its
offensive operations with NSA and Cyber Command versus what
CISA has to do defensive operations, you will see a dramatic
imbalance in terms of the personnel that we have, thousands of
personnel difference. So, even though we would be adding
anywhere between 75 to 100, that would be a small step toward
perhaps correcting that imbalance, giving the White House
better purview into defensive operation.
What the budgetary impact of that would be, we think it
would be in the low, you know, about $10 million to $15
million, but some of that depends on whether these people are
detailees from other agencies. But I am not suggesting it is
nothing. It is a growing of an office within the organization,
but that is also consistent with precedent for other Senate-
confirmed offices within the Executive Office of the President.
Mr. Comer. And I certainly understand the concern and
appreciate the effort here to alleviate that, but if this is
staffed by career officials or detailees from other agencies,
why won't it become another bastion for employees who refuse to
honor the policy prerogatives of an incumbent President,
something that this President has been battling, as you know,
for the last 3 1/2 years?
Mr. Gallagher. Well, I don't doubt that that is a problem
within the executive branch, and having worked in the executive
branch, I think there is always a tendency, you know, for--if
you are a bureaucrat, you sort of believe in the status quo.
The old saying goes, ``Where you stand depends on where you
sit.''
But at the end of the day, that is a broader cultural issue
where everybody that works in the executive branch, whether
they are wearing a uniform or they are a civilian, needs to
understand that they work for the President, regardless of that
President's party. So, I don't think this would solve that
problem necessarily, but I don't think it would make it
dramatically worse.
Mr. Comer. Just out of curiosity, have you had any
conversations with anyone in the White House to gauge their
level of support or opposition for this proposal?
Mr. Gallagher. I have had conversations with the White
House.
Mr. Comer. OK. Well, good deal. Well, my time is about to
expire, and I have the utmost respect for you, Representative
Gallagher. You and Will Hurd on our side certainly are the
foremost experts on cybersecurity. I appreciate what you are
doing here and look forward to further conversations. With
that, Madam Chairman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. I understand that--right now? Thank
you, Mr. Comer.
I understand Representative Chairman Lynch is at another
meeting. So, I now recognize the distinguished ranking member
for the Subcommittee on National Security, Mr. Grothman, for
his questions.

[Pause.]
Mr. Grothman. Can you hear me? Can you hear me now? Can you
hear me?
Mr. Gallagher. Yes, loud and clear.
Mr. Grothman. OK. OK, did the Solarium Commission take a
position on whether our Nation's cybersecurity posture has
improved over the years? Are things getting better or worse, I
guess?
Mr. Gallagher. I will offer my view. I think after a year
of extensive conversations with General Nakasone, Chris Krebs,
and a lot of talented people in DOD, many of whom participate
in the commission, I think we have gotten a lot better. And a
lot of that is due to legislation that we have passed in
Congress. On the Armed Services Committee, we have effectively
devolved greater authority down to lower levels so that people
can operate in cyber with the speed and agility that is
necessary to have an effect.
I think if you look at sort of lessons learned from 2016,
there was a concerted effort in 2018 to protect our democracy.
So, I have actually been very impressed with the work of
General Nakasone and a lot of other dedicated cyber warriors in
this space.
Mr. Grothman. OK----
Mr. Langevin. Now if I could add, and I would agree with
my--again, as the chairman of the Intelligence, Emerging
Threats, and Capabilities Subcommittee, I oversee both NSA and
U.S. Cyber Command. I see the extraordinary work that General
Nakasone and his team are doing at U.S. Cyber Command. Also
sitting on the Homeland Security Committee and on the
subcommittee that helps to oversee CISA, we are getting better
and better and more effectively organized to combat this
growing threat.
So, we have gotten better, and I support, for example, the
administration's new guidance on cyber, NSPM-13, so we are more
forward leaning. So, defending forward, if you will. I think we
were probably too reserved in past years, and now under the
current construct, we are more forward leaning. So, as Chris
Engels liked to say, it is defending early, or you could say it
is often said defending forward. But I think it is the right
strategy.
But our enemies and adversaries are getting more and more
effective and more successful and sophisticated in their
ability to carry out cyber-attacks of significant consequence.
So, we need to continue to evolve, and that is why this new
added position is helping us to get even better. Going from the
category of, say, good, better, best----
Mr. Grothman. We are moving to get better even faster. Is
that what you are saying?
Mr. Langevin. Yes.
Mr. Grothman. We are only going to get better faster. Do we
have a data bank of breaches or incidents that we feel we are
going to try to prevent in the future? I mean, can you like
rattle off the top 5 problems we have had in the last three
years, say?
Mr. Langevin. Well, just by way of example, and this is an
example that I use pretty frequently, we are trying to prevent
the next OPM breach, for example. The breach that occurred at
the Office of Personnel Management happened because there was a
Department of----
Mr. Grothman. That is one. Why don't you rattle off like
the three or four worst breaches in the last, say, four years
that you feel concerned about?
Mr. Langevin. Well, there was the WannaCry incident that
occurred, the Sony breach that occurred that North Korea
carried out. Of course, the WannaCry was probably one of the
most costly cyber incidents that occurred in world history, and
it cost FedEx and Merck and Maersk billions of dollars in lost
revenue when their computers were wiped out or damaged. So, the
amount of intellectual property theft that has occurred over
the years, it has cost U.S. jobs and economic competitiveness
to the tune of hundreds of billions, if not trillions, of
dollars.
So, the list goes on and on, not to mention, of course, the
amount of personal private information that has been stolen. We
are getting better at responding to and protecting against
these things, but we are not----
Mr. Grothman. Well, why don't you just forward to me, you
know, six or seven ones that we are trying to prevent in the
future.
I missed something. One of you guys talked about John
Bolton dismantling some agency or commission or whatever. Could
you go over that a little bit?
Mr. Langevin. Yes, if I could jump in on that? I know Mike
is going to want to comment. But under every administration, we
were making forward progress on cybersecurity. John Bolton was
the first person really in an administration to take us
backward when he eliminated the cybersecurity coordinator
position.
Now that wasn't Senate-confirmed, didn't have policy or
budgetary authority, but at least it was there. In fact, one of
the people on the second panel, Michael Daniel, was the
cybersecurity coordinator under President Obama. Rob Joyce
under the Trump administration----
Mr. Grothman. It just hits me as odd. I wonder what his
logic was. Why did he do that?
Mr. Langevin. I think he sold the President a bill of goods
by eliminating the position. I think he did a disservice to the
President.
Mr. Gallagher. I think he might argue he is streamlining
the overall NSC process, and indeed, his predecessor--or his
successor has tried to continue that process. I think what we
are arguing is that even that status quo ante with a cyber
coordinator was not sufficient really to get the overall
interagency, interdisciplinary oversight you need of cyber, as
well as develop long-term expertise.
Again, to go back to the Senate-confirmed bit, you know, we
want this person to not only have the ear of the President, but
be, you know, a single bellybutton that we, as legislators, can
push to get answers when it comes to Congress.
As for your earlier question, Glenn, I will send you on--
throughout our report, we really go through all of the major
infiltrations attributed to China, Russia, North Korea, and
Iran, as well as non-state actors, and lay it out. And just one
that always comes to mind for me as a defense guy, basically,
from 2006 to 2018 something called Advanced Persistent Threat
10, when China was conducting systematic cyber espionage
campaigns, stealing IP and compromising computer systems
containing personal information from over 100,000 U.S. Navy
personnel.
So, in addition to OPM--and I have the letter I received
from OPM framed somewhere here in my basement, saying my
records have been hacked--there has been a lot of these little
attempts to exfiltrate data directly from our military and
compromise the data of military personnel.
Mr. Grothman. I don't even know, Mike, if someone tries to
do that, do we find out right away? Or might all sorts of
things be going on, and we have no idea it happened?
Mr. Gallagher. It just depends. I mean, certainly there has
been lag time in detection for some of the major breaches we
have had. Again, I would say that we have gotten better in
detecting how this happens. We are going to have testimony from
a variety of true experts in this space, like our former
colleague Mike Rogers, who can speak to that.
So, I think we are getting better at rapid detection, rapid
attribution, and a better process for response. But as Jim
rightly pointed out, the threats are getting better as well and
better at anonymizing the origin of the threat.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you very much to my esteemed
colleagues for their tireless work on the commission and for
sharing their work with us today.
Would either Mr. Langevin or Mr. Gallagher like to stay for
panel two? You have been generous with your time, but we would
be very happy to waive you in. Would you like to stay?
Mr. Langevin. Yes, I would like to stay for a bit, Madam
Chair[SA1]. And if I could ask unanimous consent that a letter
of endorsement of the National Cyber Director by the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce be added into the record? Could I ask
unanimous consent to do that?
Chairwoman Maloney. Absolutely. Absolutely. So ruled.
Mr. Gallagher. I, too, have the T&I markup going on right
now. So, I may have to go in and out, as well as many diapers
that I have to change upstairs. So, if you will indulge me with
that, I may not be able to attend the whole second session.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. So, without objection, the
gentleman from Rhode Island will be permitted to join the
committee for this hearing on the virtual dais and question the
second panel.
Now I would like to introduce our second panel. The
Honorable--what? And the gentleman from Wisconsin. OK.
I will now introduce our second panel. The Honorable Mike
Rogers, former Member of Congress, chairman of the House
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence from 2011 to 2015.
Michael Daniel, president and CEO of the Cyber Threat
Alliance and former cybersecurity coordinator for President
Obama from 2012 to 2017.
Amit Yoran, chairman and CEO of Tenable; founding director,
U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team.
Suzanne Spaulding, Senior Adviser for Homeland Security at
the International Security Program at the Center for Strategic
and International Studies; commissioner, U.S. Cyberspace
Solarium Commission.
Jamil Jaffer, founder and executive director of George
Mason University's National Security Institute.
The witnesses will be unmuted so we can swear them in now.
So, please raise your right hand. Do you swear or affirm
that the testimony you are about to give is the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?
[Response.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Let the record show that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative. Thank you, and without objection,
your written statements will be made part of the record.
With that, Chairman Rogers, it is nice to see you again.
You are recognized to provide your testimony.

STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL J. ROGERS, DAVID ABSHIRE CHAIR,
CENTER FOR THE STUDY OF THE PRESIDENCY; FORMER REP. AND
CHAIRMAN, HOUSE PERMANENT SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE

Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Madam Chair. It's good to see so
many colleagues I had the privilege to work with and some new
ones as well and to be on a panel of very distinguished experts
in the field of cybersecurity and actually how we approach it.
This has been a very long journey for me, Madam Chair, to
get to where I would sit in front of the committee and say I
support a Cyber Director, as Congressman Langevin and my good
friend Congressman Ruppersberger both have reminded me over the
years how I was just wrong about this. Matter of fact, they've
invited me to dinner under the--under the understanding that
they want to watch me eat crow, as I testify today in my
support, my wholehearted support for the National Cyber
Director bill that you propose today.
I'll tell you why. I looked at it certainly when I was
chairman, prior to being chairman on the Intelligence
Committee, and now subsequently, in my private sector life
doing both policy work with the center and the study of the
presidency looking at all the machinations of how we can combat
this threat. And in the private sector, I am part of several
small cybersecurity startup companies that have had the
opportunity to view how the Government is doing some of these
things and offer products out into the commercial market to
help defend our private sector from aggressive cybersecurity
threats.
All of those things have led me to really change my mind. I
looked back and have a lot of the same arguments. If it was--
and if Congressman Langevin and Dutch Ruppersberger and myself
and Representative Comer sitting in a meeting probably in 2008,
I think it would have been two people on one side of the table
and two people on the other. I was worried about this
expansion. So, there was a lot of talk at that time about an
agency or a czar, and I just didn't think we should go there,
and we've had lots and lots of discussions.
What I find this bill does that I think was different than
previous discussions is that it doesn't expand government,
which I'm really concerned about, it focuses government. And if
we need anything now in the cyberspace, we need focus on what
our Government is doing, and does it have the right resources?
You know, we've taken some important steps in the past in
Congress. The Federal Information Security Management Act of
2002 kind of got it started. There was a modernization in 2014.
But here is the problem.
Imagine if you take the quarterback and not let that
quarterback train with the football team all year until the
first game you put him out on the field. We're going to have
problems. This is exactly how we have set up our ability to
monitor, to oversee the large enterprise which is the Federal
Government.
If you think about it, I know there's been a lot of talk
about incidents, and we certainly need to be prepared there.
And certainly, the NSA has that ticket. But think of these
agencies--I'm just going to read off three of them. I went
online on the Inspector General reports, and there are hundreds
and hundreds and hundreds of these agencies, by the way, who
are getting paid auditors to come in and do their basically
review of their cybersecurity programs, if they're meeting
Federal guidelines.
We think of the big ones, but we don't think of the Farm
Credit Administration, or we don't think of the Committee for
Purchase from People Who Are Blind or Severely Disabled. And
think of the information that those organizations have that are
pretty sensitive information, the Pension Benefit Guaranty
Corporation. So, when you look at this whole--and I have dozens
of these. I could go through them for an hour.
On all of the agencies who are absolutely under siege
today, think of it. Billions of times a day, somebody is
getting up in the morning with a sole purpose and job to try to
penetrate the U.S. Government at any level. That happens every
single day. Every agency I mentioned plus the hundreds others
are under siege from cyber either espionage or destruction of
data.
That's happening, and it's happening in a pretty big and
significant way. And we're going to need to do something, and
so we're looking at it from the wrong end. And I want to tell
you two reasons why here, and my testimony highlights some of
the threats that we've been dealing with. But I just want to
give you an example of why I thought, all right, we have to
change the way we're thinking. We can't continue to do it the
same way and expect a different outcome here.
There was an OIG inspection of a particular agency of which
we would all be concerned about if that data were exposed. And
what they found is they found about 25 serious changes that
needed to be made. This was in 2019. And here is the
conclusion. So, remember, outside firm hired to come in and say
these are the things you're doing wrong. We'll be back next
year to see if you've corrected them.
Next year, right? A year in cyberspace is a lifetime. A
quarterly report is a lifetime. That means we've got lots of
exposure there.
And this was the one that got me. Here is one of their
recommendations. If this agency continues a delay in corrective
actions, a material weakness in information technology security
control may be reported in 2020. That tells me we are not
prepared for the threat that is knocking on our door today.
And part of the reason is they have to coordinate through a
whole series of bodies. Let me just give you a little bit. It's
OMB. They have to do with DHS. They have to coordinate with all
of these different agencies to come up with what the guidelines
are to move out.
All of those agencies are under their own attacks, by the
way. They all have their own cyber operations, by the way. And
there is no person, no organization set over top of it to say
I'm going to be either the cavalry to help you in your
deficiencies, or I'm going to help you find out what's wrong
and how we fix it in a short order.
Nothing is steering that. So, yep, we're going to need--
we're going to need help on the fact that we are going to have
incidents, that we are one keystroke away from an incident that
has major consequences in the United States. Why? Because we
just under siege.
The Chinese has been highlighted in intellectual property
theft and now disruption. They're changing their policy. They'd
like to disrupt things. Remember, if American people stop
trusting their institutions to the point where it's not
governable, guess what? Bad guys win. China wins. Russia wins.
Iran wins. North Korea wins. And they all know it.
Matter of fact, I just want to read you this quick quote,
if I may, Madam Chair. And this was done by General Gerasimov
of Russia. ``A perfectly thriving state can in a matter of
months, even days, be transformed into an arena of fierce armed
conflict, become a victim of foreign intervention, and sink
into a web of chaos, humanitarian catastrophe, and civil war.
The role of nonmilitary means of achieving political and
strategic goals has grown.'' And he's talking about
cybersecurity and cyber influence operations and disruption
cyber activities for the public to lose trust.
``And in many cases, these tools have exceeded the power
and force of weapons in their effectiveness.'' That was 2013.
Fast forward, what's happened since 2013? We've watched the
Russians engage in aggressive information operations, including
the attempts to penetrate networks of which our concern to
disrupt things. And public reports show that the electric grid
was attempted to be penetrated. There are reports that they
tried to penetrate our stock market.
Why? Disruption leads to chaos, leads to distrust in
American institutions. This is as serious a problem as we can
get.
And that conclusion that I came to, and I'm going to have
to eat crow with my good friends Mr. Langevin and Mr.
Ruppersberger, is that if we don't have something--and I don't
agree with a big agency. If we don't have something that
doesn't expand Government but focuses our cybersecurity
efforts, we are going to be in for a long run.
We've had these conversations. We've admired the problem.
We've worshipped the problem. Now we have to do something about
it.
I think that this agency will help all of the agencies get
to where they need to go, and that's why I'm before the
committee today, offering my support for this legislation.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you so much, Chairman Rogers.
That was a very, very powerful and moving presentation.
And Mr. Daniel, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF J. MICHAEL DANIEL, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, CYBER THREAT ALLIANCE; FORMER WHITE HOUSE
CYBERSECURITY COORDINATOR

Mr. Daniel. Thank you. Good afternoon.
Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer, and
other distinguished members of the committee, for the
opportunity to testify before you today on the topic of this
legislation and the National Cyber Director.
I'm also happy to be on the panel with people that I
consider friends and colleagues, all of whom we've worked
together and have known each other for many years.
As you might imagine, I think about this issue a lot. I
served for 4 1/2 years as the special assistant to the
President and cybersecurity coordinator on President Obama's
National Security Council staff. And since then, I've served as
the president and CEO of the Cyber Threat Alliance, which is a
nonprofit threat and talent sharing organization.
And cybersecurity is a tough issue for almost any
organization to manage, and that is certainly true for the
Federal Government. Yet as our digital dependence continues to
increase, something we've actually talked about this morning--
this afternoon already, the imperative for the Federal
Government to get better at managing cybersecurity also
increases. The rapid shift of certain economic activities
online as a result of the pandemic has only heightened this
need.
One aspect that makes cybersecurity particularly tough for
the Federal Government is that it doesn't fit neatly into one
bureaucratic bucket. Cybersecurity is a national security,
economic security, commercial, intelligence, law enforcement,
public safety, military, foreign policy issue all rolled into
one.
Yet at the same time, cybersecurity is highly
interdependent. Just like the Internet, all of those aspects
that I just mentioned are all connected, and they all affect
each other. And they affect each other in some unanticipated
ways many times, and that means all of these disparate pieces
have to coordinate and work together in order for the whole to
be effective and not undermine each other.
And we've actually--to some of the questions and commentary
from the first panel, we have made excellent progress over the
last few years--actually, over the last two decades--in laying
the foundation for better cybersecurity. We've put in place
better policies. We've enacted laws that have been mentioned,
including like the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act from
2015.
We've put in place organizational structures like CISA at
the Department of Homeland Security and U.S. Cyber Command. But
we still face certain structural impediments to improving our
cybersecurity, and these include cybersecurity's cross-cutting
nature, the lack of incentives for coordination across
agencies, and the need for incident response coordination, as
well as the issue's complexity and its effect on major policy
decisions.
So, after wrestling with these issues for several years, I
have come to the conclusion that we need a strong position
along the lines of a National Cyber Director like the Solarium
Commission recommends and like the bill that Representative
Langevin is sponsoring. And I don't come to this conclusion
lightly.
Prior to serving as the cybersecurity coordinator, I spent
17 1/2 years at the Office of Management and Budget, and I have
a career OMBer's natural skepticism for creating new entities
in the Federal Government. But in this case, I think it's
really the only viable approach that we have. In particular, an
EOP-level organization is really the only one that's going to
be able to overcome a very significant factor in the Federal
bureaucracy, and that's the ``You're not the boss of me''
problem. And that is just rampant among the Federal agencies,
and only something centered at the White House can overcome
that.
That said, I would urge Congress to think through the scope
and authorities for this position very carefully. It would be
very easy to get something--to get it wrong and to end up with
something that does take up bureaucratic bandwidth and does not
focus things like Congressman Rogers recommended.
Most importantly, this position has to cover all of the
aspects of cybersecurity and not just some of them. It has to
have oversight of law enforcement, military, and intelligence-
related offensive and defensive cyber activities, in addition
to network defense. We cannot exclude those positions and
expect the position to be a success.
It has to tightly integrate with the OMB budget process and
the NSC policy process, or even in the EOP, it won't be
effective. It has to have a big enough office to get the job
done, but not so big that it is tempted to become operational.
And it needs to have a clear relationship with the Federal CIO
and the Federal CISO.
At the end of the day, we need a position like the National
Cybersecurity Director. Cybersecurity is not just a technical
problem. It's also an organizational problem. So, as a result,
we're going to need to take some additional organizational
steps to address it. We've taken the first few steps along that
path, and now it's time to create a position that can bring it
all together.
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to testify for you
today, and I'm looking forward to your questions.
Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. And now, Mr. Yoran, you are
now recognized.

STATEMENT OF AMIT YORAN, CHAIRMAN AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
TENABLE, FOUNDING DIRECTOR, U.S. COMPUTER EMERGENCY READINESS
TEAM

Mr. Yoran. Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer,
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today.
I'd like to thank Representatives Langevin and Gallagher
for their leadership on the Cyberspace Solarium Commission, the
development of the commission's report, and for introducing
H.R. 7331.
I'd also like to thank Chairwoman Maloney for serving as
cosponsor on the bill.
I'm Amit Yoran, chairman and CEO of Tenable, the world's
leading provider of vulnerability management technologies.
Tenable empowers organizations of all sizes to understand and
reduce their cyber risk. Our solutions serve just about every
department and agency in the Federal Government and many state
and local governments.
Our customers include over 50 percent of the Fortune 500
and over 25 percent of the Global 2000 and tens of thousands of
mid-sized companies in every major industry. Simply put, we're
instrumental to helping the Nation and organizations around the
world quantify and understand and reduce their cyber risk.
In H.R. 7331, the committee has the opportunity to
significantly improve the Nation's cyber preparedness. The
creation of the Office of the National Cyber Director within
the Executive Office of the President is a critical step
forward. My support for this office centers on the need for
stronger enterprise risk management practices across the
Federal Government and across the Nation.
A whole of nation risk requires a whole of nation response,
and indeed, a new, expanded attack surface stretches across the
entire nation. This includes every aspect of government as well
as private industry. None are immune from the threat of cyber-
attacks that imperil our national security, Government
services, and the critical functions that citizens rely on.
An accountable executive at the White House would also be
helpful in coordinating a whole of government understanding of
cyber risk and efforts to proactively reduce cyber risk and
coordinate responses when needed. A National Cyber Director is
needed to ensure that Government holds itself and industry
accountable for baseline standards of care with regard to
cybersecurity.
Today, there remains a lackadaisical approach toward
understanding cyber risk and proactively maintaining good cyber
hygiene, resulting in the vast super majority of today's
breaches and associated losses. This is negligent behavior
through learned helplessness on the part of individuals,
Federal Government agencies, and private industry.
Many of the needed authorities have been outlined in the
proposed legislation. In my written testimony, I recommend
augmenting the National Cyber Director's authorities under 7331
to include establishing a national encryption policy that
balances the needs of law enforcement with those of
cybersecurity and public safety; overseeing the vulnerabilities
equities process; coordinating with regulatory agencies to set
policies and practices which can improve understanding of cyber
risk, increase transparency, and implement plans to adequately
manage risk; focus efforts on cyber work force development
initiatives, with emphasis on greater inclusiveness; and
develop and maintain an international cyber strategy for the
Nation and lead international cyber engagement efforts.
It would be difficult to overstate the cyber risk that we
face today. Governments and businesses utilize cloud computing,
Internet of Things, and operational technologies. While these
technologies optimize production, drive innovation, and
increase sustainability, they also expand the overall
cybersecurity attack surface and need to be an integral part of
our risk management practices.
These risk management practices must include services and
industries essential to our public safety and well-being, such
as power, water, transportation, and healthcare, as well as our
industrial production. The risk is more than a technical one.
It's political, it's social, it's physical, and it's economic.
Cybersecurity can existentially threaten our way of life.
There are important steps that we can take to improve our
cybersecurity posture in advance of a national crisis, and
those steps include the creation of an Office of the National
Cyber Director at the White House.
I'd like to thank Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer,
and members of the committee for their attention to this
important topic, and I'll be happy to respond to your
questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Ms. Spaulding, you are now
recognized.

STATEMENT OF SUZANNE SPAULDING, SENIOR ADVISER, HOMELAND
SECURITY, INTERNATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAM, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC
AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES, COMMISSIONER, U.S. CYBERSPACE
SOLARIUM COMMISSION

Ms. Spaulding. Thank you, Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking
Member Comer, and members of the committee. Thank you for this
opportunity to be here today to testify in support of the
Cyberspace Solarium Commission's recommendation to establish a
National Cyber Director.
It's really an honor to be here with my fellow
distinguished witnesses and former colleagues, and it was a
particular honor to serve on the commission alongside
Representative Gallagher, Representative Langevin, and the
other commissioners and inspiring to see the bipartisan and
really nonpartisan approach that all of the commissioners
brought to the work of the commission. And this recommendation
is no exception.
As has been noted, the commission considered alternative
approaches to address what we all agreed was an urgent need for
stronger coordination across the many entities engaged in
cybersecurity for better integration of effort and for more
robust strategic planning and prioritization to guide those
efforts.
The first panel addressed the alternatives that we
considered. So, I won't go through all of them again, but I did
want to emphasize the arguments against the alternative of
pulling the various cyber entities out of the departments and
agencies where they currently reside and putting them together
in a new Department of Cybersecurity. I am strongly opposed to
the creation of such a department because it would not solve
our key coordination challenges and would cause huge disruption
with little to no gain.
The most important and challenging coordination issues in
the interagency in my experience arise between DOD elements,
including NSA; law enforcement, especially the FBI; and DHS.
DOD and the IC are not going to relinquish their cyber
activities to a new department. Nor is FBI going to turn over
its law enforcement activity. Thus, the new department would
still face those key coordination challenges.
A National Cyber Director, on the other hand, could and
must be empowered to address these key coordination challenges,
with the backing of the President. To do this, the NCD must
have the authority to convene and get information from law
enforcement, the military, and the intelligence community, as
well as DHS and the sector-specific agencies, about their
operational plans and strategies.
Another important reason I have opposed a new cybersecurity
department is the risk that it would become singularly focused
on technology. I watched this happen with our WMD efforts in
the 1990's when I was at the Central Intelligence Agency, where
folks working nuclear nonproliferation, for example, focused
entirely on the technical aspects and failed to adequately
integrate the regional experts and those studying the
leadership and political dynamics within the various countries.
I see these same tendencies in cyber. We tend to turn to
technical experts, and they, not surprisingly, focus on the
technical aspects, even though we know that understanding and
mitigating cyber risks requires a much broader approach that
fully recognizes the human element, integrates cyber and
physical risks, including knowledge of the operational
environment--whether it's financial services, electricity, or
election infrastructure--and that incorporates knowledge of
each of our adversaries and what drives them.
I've always warned that a new cyber department would be
staffed by technical experts and too focused on technical
aspects. This could happen to the Office of the National Cyber
Director as well, and it is something we must guard against.
But sitting within the White House structure, having
responsibility for interagency coordination, and working
closely with the other elements like the NSC and the Council of
Economic Advisers should help guard against that tendency.
Another of the key recommendations from the commission is
strengthening and reinforcing the great work that is being done
by the group I used to lead at DHS now called Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, or CISA. But at present, one of
CISA's greatest barriers to effective operations is that
numerous Federal departments and agencies often compete for
resources and authorities. The NCD can support and enable CISA
by pushing to a decision those ongoing battles that cloud the
Federal Government in cybersecurity.
The NCD is not intended to direct or manage day-to-day
implementation of strategy by any Federal agency, but
responsible for overall integration and execution of defensive
strategy across the executive branch through strategic policy
operations and budget. A National Cyber Director should do only
what the agency and department leads cannot do themselves, de-
conflict and align cyber missions with national priorities,
ensure visibility across the interagency on operational
activities, and help push the process to active--into actual
decisions.
The NCD will fail if it adds further stovepiping and
bureaucracy to our Nation's efforts to reduce cyber risks.
Instead, the NCD needs to help empower, prioritize, and provide
much-needed support for existing cyber entities within the U.S.
Government.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to your questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Mr. Jaffer, you are now
recognized. What?
Voice. Go to questions.
Chairwoman Maloney. Go to questions?
Voice. Yes.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK. I now recognize myself for five
minutes for questions.
Thank you very much to all of the panelists for your
testimony, and I want to dig a little deeper into the 2017
malware attack executed by North Korea. This attack disabled
hundreds of thousands of computers in hospitals, schools,
businesses, and homes in more than 150 countries. It even shut
down a portion of Britain's National Health Service for a week.
So, Chairman Rogers, can you describe the potential effect
a cyber-attack on critical infrastructure like this could have
in the United States?
Mr. Rogers [continuing]. Fortunate it was North Korea. It
was a ransomware-based attack that in some ways didn't even
have a way to pay back the--pay the ransom. So, it was probably
the least-capable actor, even at a high end, that was able to
infect these systems.
And it was--it had a global-wide impact, and sometimes
surgeries were turned off because they couldn't actually access
the right and appropriate records for the surgeons to do a
surgery. So, you can imagine it had both health impacts of that
sort, financial impacts, and as you said, schools. It was
really, really dangerous, and it was very widespread. And part
of it was they couldn't control it. It kind of fed on itself
and spread without them directing it, which is a whole problem
of probably not a top-tier nation-state actor.
They've gotten better since then. That's the scary part.
So, I would say that when you look at what the threats are, we
know where our biggest adversaries are coming. So, China uses
all of its state power to do and set themselves up for
influence around the world. They use diplomacy.
And if you look at the fact that they've confiscated masks
from rightful contract owners that they were going to be
delivered to, gave them to entities in China so they could
deliver them in a way to try to get credit for their influence
operations. They use military, defense, and intelligence cyber
operations. They use cyber operations for espionage.
I would look at all the ways they're coming at us. What we
know is they'd love to get access to people's data from a
nation-state perspective, but also cyber criminals, organized
cyber criminals and others who would love to get the data that
the U.S. Government collects from U.S. citizens. Everything
from food stamp participation--think of all the information you
have to give in order to get that program and qualify for that
program. It's sitting in a repository at the Federal
Government. That's valuable to a cyber thief.
So, I would look at this. I mean, that was a massive attack
by a nation-state, but we have all of these other attacks
underneath it. And again, that's my argument for the Cyber
Director is you want somebody not just to incident respond, you
want somebody for pre-crisis.
How do you help these agencies? Not hurt them, not hit with
a club when they're not doing it right. But help them through
what they need to look like in their cyber shops and the kind
of tools that we do, and by the way, can we do this with a
collective defense mentality so that when one gets attacked,
everybody knows what that threat is moving forward?
That's the way I would look at this. Let's try to be pre-
crisis. And having that Director whose sole job every day is to
get up and she needs to think through all of those problems, my
argument would be we're going to be better off.
Because there is lots of talent. I think Mr. Gallagher and
Mr. Langevin highlighted it, lots of great talent out there. We
need to now coordinate it. Remember, not expanding it in
Government, but focus it on the problem that helps us the most.
Chairwoman Maloney. Mr. Yoran, I was shocked by the
statistic from Tenable's 2019 report that 90 percent of
critical infrastructure operators witnessed at least one
damaging cyber-attack in the past two years. I understand that
much of our Nation's critical infrastructure is managed by an
array of different companies that are responsible for different
parts of the process.
Mr. Yoran, what would happen if one of these companies was
compromised? Can you talk about these attacks and enlighten us
more?
Mr. Yoran. Yes, I think the effects of the attack can
vary--of these attacks vary greatly. In many cases, outage can
certainly ensue. In other cases, it's more of a preparation
where systems are being compromised, information is being
stolen, but the adversary has no desire to create an outage,
unless perhaps it's during time of crisis.
So, I think the impacts here could vary greatly, and it's
one of the reasons why we need a systemic understanding of risk
and why a National Cyber Director needs to work closely with
the regulatory agencies that do exist to make sure that we're
implementing a standard of care that makes sense, that we don't
see the continued sort of negligent behavior where enterprises
are not maintaining good hygiene of their systems. They're not
providing patches and updates and doing the maintenance that's
required to keep them in a secure state.
And this sort of poor hygiene results in a vast super
majority of the breaches, including the ones that were cited
earlier perpetrated by North Korea and a lot of the damaging
ones that we've read about in many of these high-profile cases.
Chairwoman Maloney. Do you believe that this bill, H.R.
7331, would help the Federal Government address these concerns
more effectively?
Mr. Yoran. I think there's no question in my mind, having
done cybersecurity now for over 25 years and having spent time
in multiple departments of the Federal Government, as well as
serving with cybersecurity products to private sector and now
also helping the Federal Government with technologies to
protect itself. A role like this would help provide a
coordinating capability and bring the maximum understanding and
appropriate resources to bear in a coordinated fashion as the
Federal Government.
So, I think it was either Representative Langevin or
Gallagher who said, you know, the preparation work that we do
now can have a significant impact on the crisis that we face or
how we deal with the crisis we might face down the road. So, I
think the creation of the office and this role are absolutely
critical steps forward.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.
I now want to call on Jamil Jaffer--who disappeared for a
while, but he is back with us--for his testimony. Mr. Jaffer?

STATEMENT OF JAMIL N. JAFFER, FOUNDER AND EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
NATIONAL SECURITY INSTITUTE, GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY

Mr. Jaffer. Ms. Chairwoman, thank you so much for the
opportunity, and apologies for the technical difficulties.
Chairwoman Maloney, Ranking Member Comer, members of the
committee, thank you for inviting me here today to discuss our
Nation's cybersecurity preparedness and the proposed
legislation to establish a new Cyber Director.
As the members of this committee all too well know, the
cyber threats facing the United States, including our public
and private sector, are, in a word, massive. It is no
overstatement to say that for all practical intents and
purposes, we are at war in cyberspace. And unfortunately, as a
Nation, we remain woefully underprepared to deal with this
serious and ongoing conflict.
Now lawyers may quibble with whether we're actually at war,
and they may point out that the United States nor any of our
enemies actually declare that we're at war, but the fact is
that for the better part of a decade, our Nation has been
involved in a consistent and ongoing series of conflicts in
cyberspace, albeit fairly low level. And regardless of whether
we call this a war or not, there can be no question that it's
had a huge impact on our Nation and its allies.
Cyber-enabled economic warfare conducted by China,
primarily focused on the U.S. private sector, drains private
companies of billions of dollars a year, with total damages
ranging into the trillions. Former NSA Director General Keith
Alexander says that this activity represents the greatest
transfer of wealth in human history.
Chairman Rogers on this panel nearly a decade ago called
attention to this economic threat posed by China and referred
to the fact that we were actually in an economic cyber war
nearly 10 years ago. And that there are two types of companies
in this country, those that have been hacked and know it, and
those that have been hacked and simply don't know it yet.
We have also seen countries like North Korea and Iran
engage in the destruction of data and bricking of computer
systems here in the United States in the last half decade. We
know that the DNI has told us that Iran is actively preparing
for cyber-attacks against the U.S. and our allies. We've seen
the highly corrosive effects of Russia's ongoing active
measures campaign on the American body politic, undermining our
elected officials, our rule of law institutions, including the
Justice Department, the FBI, and the intelligence community.
And to be sure, while we played a role in some of this, the
Russians have paid very little price for this, and the Chinese
and Russians both know this. We've already seen them mucking
around with more covert operations on the COVID virus and the
killing of George Floyd.
Now we may see these same players become more active in the
upcoming election cycle. In fact, as Chairwoman Maloney noted
over three years ago, cybersecurity poses a greater and greater
risk to the safety and soundness of our financial system. We
know what a serious threat cyber poses to our economy and to
our people, and with the current coronavirus situation and the
new work from home environment with over 300 million workers
around the globe working from home, including 90 percent of
banking and insurance employees, these efforts represent a
uniquely challenging threat to our economy and to our way of
life.
So, then the question becomes what should we do about it,
and how much of a role can creating a new Cyber Director at the
White House play in this process? While I completely agree with
all the members of my panel as well as Congressman Gallagher
and Congressman Langevin, who I've had the pleasure to work
with in the past, that having a key strategic leader at the
White House is critically important, I'm skeptical of the need
for a large office of 75 people, fully one-third of the size of
the existing entire National Security Council, and the need to
have that individual Senate-confirmed.
We know that almost any White House, whether Republican or
Democrat, this administration or another, regardless of what
you think about this administration, will be opposed to the
creation of a new, yet one more Senate-confirmed individual in
the White House office.
Indeed, there are other alternatives for the committee to
consider, right? The committee may consider creating a position
in the White House office, but not making it Senate-confirmed.
They may consider creating an office that is smaller and more
leadership oriented, a 5-to 10-to 15-person office.
The committee could work with the President to ensure that
that person has the rank and stature of a Deputy Assistant to
the President and is able to effectively work through the
National Security Adviser, has full responsibility for the full
range of issues in this space to ensure that we have unity of
effort.
There is no doubt with all the cooks in the kitchen from
DHS, CISA, to NSA, to U.S. Cyber Command, to the FBI, better
coordination, more aggressive coordination with the White House
is necessary. The only question for the committee to consider
is whether that requires Senate confirmation and a 75-person
office. On that note, I am somewhat skeptical, but I recognize
that there is a lot of--a lot of my friends and colleagues, my
former boss Chairman Rogers, who support this, and I have a lot
of respect for that position.
With that, thank you, Ms. Chairwoman. Again, apologies for
the technical difficulties earlier, and I yield back the
balance.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Thank you for your
testimony.
And I would like to ask you about the 2017 Russian cyber-
attack known as NotPetya. It froze computer systems around the
world in exchange for ransom. And in Ukraine, the attacks hit
hospitals, power companies, airports, banks, and practically
every Federal agency. The U.S. was not immune. This attack hit
FedEx and the drug company Merck, costing each more than $300
million in lost business and clean-up.
So, Mr. Jaffer, how great is the risk of a large-scale
ransom attack hitting the United States today?
Mr. Jaffer. Chairwoman Maloney, I think it's a huge issue.
What you see there in that case was a very carefully crafted
attack by Russia against Ukraine. So, a sophisticated actor.
What happened was we had collateral damage, right? These
American companies, $10 billion worldwide, the most destructive
attack in the history of humankind. And as you mentioned, over
five international companies, mostly in the West, who suffered
between $250 million to $350 million of damage.
What that demonstrates is that even if you think as a
company you're not likely to be affected by a nation-state
attack, the reality is you may very well be because you may be
collateral damage in an attack by a sophisticated attacker
against another nation-state as was the case of NotPetya,
Russia against Ukraine.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. OK, thank you. And a
centralized cybersecurity coordinator at the White House seems
essential to ensure the swiftness and agility needed to respond
to cyber-attacks.
I now recognize the Ranking Member Comer for his questions.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Chairwoman.
My first question would be for Mr. Daniel. Could you walk
me through how a major cyber incident currently proceeds
through the Federal Government and how it might change with the
advent of a National Cyber Director?
Mr. Daniel. Sure. I think that right now, it really depends
on who first becomes aware of that incident, right? It depends
on if that incident is actually disclosed by a private sector
entity and how it comes in, whether they disclose it to CISA or
to the FBI or to the NSA.
But then at some point, if it gets big enough, that those
entities would eventually probably share that information with
some of the other elements of the U.S. Government. And then the
Government would need to do an assessment on how--whether that
incident actually represents something that is more systemic.
In other words, is it going to turn into a WannaCry or a
NotPetya, where it is going to proliferate across more of the
economy, or is it more limited?
And then the Government would need to do an assessment on,
you know, whether or not a response is warranted, based on that
incident. I think in that case, that's where you would want--
when you start to look at how the U.S. Government responds,
that's where you really want that coordination, that intense
level of coordination to actually come together.
Just because an attack comes through cyberspace does not
mean that the only response needs to be back at the adversary
through cyberspace. You might want to use other policy tools
and means to respond, and that's why that coordination factor
across all the different elements of national power is so
important.
Mr. Comer. OK. My next question will be for Mr. Jaffer.
Earlier this month, in a joint public service announcement by
the FBI and DHS's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency, the FBI reported it is investigating--and I quote--
``targeting and compromise of U.S. organizations conducting
COVID-19-related research, PRC-affiliated cyber actors, and
nontraditional collectors.''
So, in other words, there is reason to believe China is
attempting to exploit the recent pandemic to hack into U.S.
businesses conducting research on the very virus originating in
its own country. So, Mr. Jaffer, could you please explain some
of the methods China is using to try to steal our Nation's
critical research into this virus or, if you have no insight
into current methods, the various ways China accomplishes its
many cyber intrusions?
Mr. Jaffer. Thank you, Ranking Member Comer.
You know, the Chinese have been engaged in this effort to
steal American intellectual property for the better part of a
decade and a half. We didn't talk about it publicly for a long
time, and it was only until Chairman Rogers and General
Alexander came out and started talking about what was happening
with China that the public became really aware of it.
And it's only in recent weeks and months that we've really
become aware of our supply chain dependence upon China when it
comes to things like PPE and pharmaceuticals. We now realize
that that has also expanded well beyond the semi-conductors,
quantum, and the like. So, what China is doing is they have
literally built their economy on the backs of American
innovation, on the backs of American R&D.
You wonder why a Huawei router often looks like a Cisco
router? It's because, sir, it essentially is a Cisco router.
They stole intellectual property, re-purposed it in China, and
then sold it as a good.
Now they've built on that for sure. They are trying to do
the same thing in the COVID arena. They're trying to get out
ahead of this, trying to have the vaccine first, and
essentially grow their economy on the backs of our challenges,
and they're going to steal our intellectual property to do
that. We simply cannot allow that to happen.
This has been a national-level issue. The President has
been very aggressive in pursuing China on this front. We ought
not let a trade deal get in the way of ensuring that we hold
the line and stop the Chinese from conducting this continuing
effort of economic espionage that has allowed them to build
their economy on the backs of American R&D.
Mr. Comer. Madam Chair, we had this hearing, and it has
become--you know, it has always been clear that cybersecurity
is a huge threat to the United States. We talk about China
being one of the worst actors with respect to cybersecurity
threats and cybersecurity violations. You look more at China,
and you see they've been stealing our patents for years, our
intellectual property.
Who knows what all they've done with respect to COVID-19? I
think we would like to get to know that. I know the Select
Committee is delving into that supposedly.
We spend a lot of time in this committee investigating
Russia. I believe that the American people, the American
taxpayers would be better served if we spent a little bit of
time investigating China. So, in closing, I would really
encourage you to consider devoting a little bit of time on this
committee to investigating China, whether it be COVID-19,
whether it be our intellectual property or our patents, whether
it be cybersecurity hacks, threats, things of that nature.
So, that is my encouragement to you as we proceed and
hopefully work together in a bipartisan way. But I want to
thank all the witnesses for being here today, and I look
forward to further discussion on this proposal. With that, I
yield back.
Voice. Thank you, Mr. Comer.
Next we will go to Ms. Norton. Ms. Norton, you are unmuted.
Ms. Norton. I want to thank the chair. Can you hear me and
see me? I want to thank the chair for this really important and
timely hearing.
Because I represent the Nation's capital, I have a special
interest in this hearing. We are, of course, like most big
cities, but we are not just any big city. And my question goes
to what has already happened to some big cities.
I don't know who is going to answer this. Perhaps starting
with Mr. Rogers, I am not certain. But we have already seen
that another big city, New Orleans, has actually had its--
ransomware shut down altogether, grounding all their operations
to a halt. Imagine if that happened to the capital of the
United States.
So, I must ask if we are fortified here in, for that
matter, the Nation's capital and in other cities against
similar shutdowns of all operations, blacking out the city
altogether? So, I would--any number of you are likely to be
qualified to answer this question, but I would begin with Mr.
Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Congresswoman. I appreciate the
question.
You know, we've seen this ransomware activity for multiple
years now, and it became more aggressive and more aggressive,
meaning that it was spreading amongst organized crime,
international organized crime groups and others seeking to gain
revenue from this, including, by the way, the North Koreans,
who used ransomware attacks to gain revenue for the government.
Early on, I hate to say about my brethren in the FBI, their
early recommendations to some of these companies were you
probably should just pay it because we don't have any way to
intercede in the interim to do anything about it. So, you had
major hospital organizations, the Los Angeles hospital system
comes to mind on one of the early, early cases, where they
ended up, you know, distastefully to have to pay for this.
So, it is a real threat. And this is one of the problems
with cyber protection writ large. We have to remember that the
NSA doesn't protect the private sector in the country. It's a
common myth that they're protecting everybody. They're not.
They're protecting the Government, and then they're doing
collection activities targeted at our overseas adversaries
trying to do something bad to the United States.
So, we have this really uneven ability to stop this in
cities across America. And candidly, Congresswoman, I think
most cities in America are not prepared for this, and they have
old systems. They have legacy systems. They haven't spent the
money to upgrade their systems and then provide a level of
protection that would keep that data safe.
That's why people are going to cities because they believe
that they're the most vulnerable. And again, remember it's not
the NSA's job to protect New Orleans or Detroit, Michigan.
That's not what they do. So, it is really up to the private
sector and those cities trying to develop systems that they can
put in place, private systems much like the companies I'm
involved with who are looking at collective defense and other
things to try to protect it.
This is why, in my mind, a coordinated effort out of the
White House with all of our agencies in the right direction and
maybe even helps the Department of Homeland Security get the
word out to these cities the problems that they really have.
So, we are a long way, I guess is the short answer to this.
We're a long way from those cities being protected.
And as more international organized crime organizations
take on nation-state quality tradecraft, meaning you say the
Russian tradecraft depended on the method used, the more
susceptible we are. And we're seeing that. We're seeing that
leaching of nation-state quality in the tradecraft in
cyberspace leach into these organizations.
I argue we're up for a really bumpy road coming up in cyber
the next few years outside of the U.S. Government across both
private sector and local and state governments.
Ms. Norton. I guess New Orleans did pay off. I mean, it is
really unnerving to hear you say at the moment the
vulnerability is so great that you pay off----
Mr. Rogers. Exactly. And we all know what happens, Madam--
Madam Congresswoman. When you pay it, guess what? More people
are deciding they want to get into the business and try and
extract you from your money, and that's the problem we're
running into.
Ms. Norton. Exactly. That makes us all now vulnerable to
paying up.
Mr. Rogers. Yes.
Ms. Norton. In the time I have remaining, I really can't
help but ask about the election. We have already had perhaps
most of our primaries, and I am wondering if any of you,
perhaps beginning with you, Mr. Rogers, have seen any
interference, any evidence of interference with our elections?
I mean, we have seen it with financial institutions worldwide.
How about interference with our elections such as, for example,
any alteration in election results would occur?
Mr. Rogers. I can tell you in my work in some of the
private work that I do, including being vice chairman of Mitre
Corporation, we haven't seen any, you know, flip one vote to
another vote. Have not seen that.
We have, in fact, writ large--let's talk about writ large--
seen going into 2018 that our adversaries, nation-state
adversaries tried to influence elections by creating chaos, and
I think we need to be really careful about saying Republican
versus Democrat. What they're trying to do is create chaos.
They don't care.
They don't like Democrat Americans any more than they like
Republican Americans. They don't like either one. So, they're
trying to create this chaos in these elections.
General Nakasone and his team I thought did a phenomenal
job in 2018 kind of playing that whack-a-mole game to push them
back, but we know it's a tactic of which they will use because
they've announced that they, the Russians, the Chinese have
said, hey, this is very effective, very low consequences. So,
we're going to kind of ramp up our engagement in trying to
create this chaos going forward.
It is something that I think we absolutely have to pay
attention to. Remember, it's very cheap for them. They don't
have to go out and buy a new carrier. They don't have to
develop a naval fleet and then stock it with----
Ms. Norton. Are states and cities--are states and cities
aware enough so that when they see this, right now it is just
interference. It has not had consequences. Are states equipped
to fight back in November? We only have a couple of months to
be tested.
Mr. Rogers. Yes. I think it's difficult for states and
local governments to do this. I do think we need to look--we
need to ask ourselves what do we want our high-tier performing
national, Federal agencies to do for us?
I think this is where the National Security Agency and
other high-level performers can be very helpful in trying to
stop this across the United States, mainly because it is a very
sophisticated nation-state actor activity. Now there are some
other groups out there that are trying to get into this game
that are just--that are worrisome. But I think we should employ
all the tools that we have.
And this is where I think congressional oversight is so
important. Know what it is, talk to them about what they're
doing, and then encourage them because it's not always going to
go the way we want. But you have to encourage them to get out
there and help push back on these activities.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Mr. Yoran. Yes, just we've got a lot----
Chairwoman Maloney. I now call on----
Mr. Yoran. Sorry. I just wanted to followup on that. I
think we have a lot of tools at our disposal. I would just be
careful to try and solve all problems with the NSA. I know the
Department of Homeland Security and CISA in particular, working
with nonprofits like the Center for Internet Security, have
done a tremendous job laying the groundwork for paving election
security and election security response capabilities for the--
each of those jurisdictions.
But there are other things. I mean, the state and local
governments have very significantly limited expertise. They
have limited resources, and those that have resource
restrictions have been exacerbated by their response to corona
and with a heightened threat provided. So, I think this is an
area where even a modest amount of funding, additional
coordination, and policy directed from the Federal Government
can have a disproportionately huge impact on better protecting
the Nation.
Ms. Norton. Thank you very much.
[Pause.]
Ms. Norton. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Mr. Gosar?
Mr. Gosar. Thank you, Madam----
Chairwoman Maloney. Can staff tell me who I should call on
if Mr. Gosar is not here?
Mr. Gosar. I am here.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK, good. Good. You are recognized.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you, Chairwoman.
I am going to go back to you, Mr. Jaffer. I want to have
you walk through. You made some--gave us some ideas of maybe
this wouldn't be appropriate at the Presidential level. Can you
walk us through that a little bit more?
Mr. Jaffer. Sure. So, Mr. Gosar, as you may know, there are
four Senate-confirmed individuals today in the White House
office--the Director of OMB, the U.S. Trade Rep, the head of
the Office of National Drug Control Policy, and the head of the
Office of Science and Technology Policy. Of those, two really
focus on things that Congress and the President really share--
trade, on one hand, and the power of the purse, OMB, right?
That's why those two have been very successful. The two
that have been a lot less successful, ONDCP and OSTP, are
largely less successful because they're not really a shared
relationship. On this one, the challenge you have is that this
is an area where the President feels strongly. This is a
national security responsibility. Like this is like war-making
in a lot of ways, right, and there are non-war making
components.
The idea that any President--Democrat, Republican, Trump or
otherwise--would be willing to give up a significant portion of
authority I think is going to be a challenge. I think you're
going to face significant challenge with the White House.
So, I think the better approach here is to find the path
forward to work with the President, emphasize the importance.
Look, the Congress did this here just in the last few years
with the issue of interference in elections and the like, and
they've prioritized it. They put statutory language in. They
made it a responsibility of the National Security Council, and
they required a coordinator to be appointed by the President.
That's a good example of the way that Congress was able to
work with the White House on solving these problems rather than
trying to get a Senate-confirmed individual with a large 75-
person office.
Mr. Gosar. Gotcha. So, Mike Rogers, you know, looking from
the outside, you have been part of the matrix of Congress. Do
you agree with anything that Mr. Jaffer has brought forward in
that aspect?
Mr. Rogers. I mean, I do. I had the same sensitivities
about do we--do we really want to impose on a President some
structure on national security within the National Security
Council at the White House? And I wrestled with this a lot.
The reason I think I have come full circle on this is
because I have seen it from the private sector side as well as
being chairman of Intel when, candidly, I thought, no, we can
do this. And this really isn't a Republican or a Democrat
thing. The Bush Administration had an effort at this. The Obama
Administration had an effort at this. The Trump administration
took a very different take on how they wanted to do it. And my
argument is none of it really worked to our advantage.
So, when you look at the series of challenges--and this is
why. This is not, to me, some kind of semantic argument about
should we or shouldn't we? Every major adversary--China,
Russia, North Korea, Iran--there are others, but those are our
main cyber adversaries--are ramping up the use of cyber because
they know it has low consequence and high impact.
And if you look at Kim Jong Un, who said the thing that's
going to keep me in charge are nuclear weapons and
cybersecurity, offensive cybersecurity. So, he's investing in
it. We know that the Chinese are spending billions of dollars.
Matter of fact, they've announced they're going to spend $1
trillion to try to have a technological edge in quantum
computing, 5G buildout, AI and AI research, including, by the
way, cyber capability and data control.
So, they're looking--they're moving away from building
large defensive military posture, and don't get me wrong, I'm
for that. But what they're doing is trying to spend it
targeting us. And my concern is if we keep doing it the same
way, we are going to keep having the same response. And the IG
response that we have now is basically I caught you for the
last 12 months doing something wrong. I'll come see you in the
next 12 months to see if you get it right.
That is not working. It will not work. We will get our
lunch ate. I argue we are getting our lunch ate under that
plan. Let's have some office that has that authority--and by
the way, it takes it. You have some big personality DOD, NSA
organizations. I'm not talking about the individual leaders.
It's just they're big personalities to deal in this.
Nobody wants to listen to anybody. You have to have a
committee to settle on the way forward. I think you need
somebody to say I'm here to help you. We're going to get that
piece right. We're going to fix this piece. We're going to
coordinate resources. I'm going to reach over to NSA talent and
who knows? Department of Agriculture figured this out last
week. We're going to--we're going to include all that to help
all.
We don't have that today in that really in that regard. And
that, to me, has to change. If we could figure out another way,
great, but I like this idea because it is a radical change and
really puts it at the feet of an individual to fix this
problem.
Mr. Gosar. OK. Now I am going to finish with my last
question to you. Then looking at the legislation as is, do you
see any additions or subtractions to it that would keep it on a
desired pathway, Mike?
Mr. Rogers. I mean, and here is where I agree with Jamil.
And he and I had these conversations often when we were working
together in the Intelligence Committee. You want to make sure
we're not propping a bureaucracy here. If everybody in this
bureaucracy gets to say no and everybody gets to sign off, we
lose. It has to be smaller and more agile. I would worry about
the body count.
Now maybe 75 is right. I don't know. Maybe it's 50. I don't
know. But we need to make sure that it is agile enough in its
strategic advice that it can actually do something. It needs to
say, ``Department X, you haven't performed. Not that I'm going
to beat you with a stick or have you hauled before Congress,
I'm going to help you get where you want to go.'' That's what
this needs to be.
And you know, how it looks in text and legislation, as we
all know, the devil is in those details. And I would flyspeck
those to death. I'm for that. But if we don't do something
pretty radical, we are already behind the eight ball.
And I'm talking even offensive policy, defensive policy,
and then all these agencies that nobody even knows are out
there working that have all this sensitive data that nobody
thinks that loves them are great targets for cybersecurity. So,
all of that I think--that's why you need somebody to pay
attention to it every single day.
Mr. Gosar. Thank you, Chairwoman. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Chairman Connolly? Chairman Connolly is recognized.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you to
our panel. Fascinating conversation.
And I don't know if Jim Langevin is still with us, but
congratulations on the work of the Cyberspace Solarium
Commission and this piece of legislation.
I want to go to practicality. I have spent all 12 years of
my life in Congress focused on Federal IT, modernizing Federal
IT. And you know, we spend $96 billion a year on IT at least,
80 percent of which is spent simply maintaining legacy systems,
many of which cannot be encrypted. They can't be updated for
21st century cyber protection.
And I want to raise some concerns, and Mr. Daniel and Ms.
Spaulding, you both kind of touched on it, as did Mr. Jaffer.
Mr. Daniel, you were in the White House. We have a CIO in the
White House. We have a CTO in the White House. We have a Chief
Information Security Officer in the White House, and we have
the Office of Science and Technology Adviser. All right?
All four of those offices right now, their responsibility
in some measure for IT investments in the Federal Government,
they're trying to modernize and to protect in terms of cyber.
How will the creation of a cyber czar work with those other
offices, and what authority will he or she have to help
upgrade?
I mean, to upgrade a legacy system is going to cost at
least billions of dollars multiple years. We have been trying
for five years through the FITARA legislation that came out of
our committee to exhort Federal agencies to make those
investments. Will the cyber czar have superseding authority
with respect to the kinds of investments that they make? Will
he or she be required to coordinate with the CTO or the CIO,
who are charged with setting certain sets of goals for the
Federal Government that include cyber, but are not limited to
cyber?
And I say all of this supportive of the attempt in the
legislation, but worried about its execution, worried about
overlap and what could go wrong with this in terms of
coordination. And maybe I could start with you, Mr. Daniel,
given your experience. Presumably, those are real concerns. Do
you share them, and what protections can we take in creating
this position to avoid the inevitable conflict, bureaucratic
conflict that could ensue?
Mr. Daniel. Well, thank you, Congressman.
I certainly agree that this position would need to work
very closely with the Federal CIO and the Federal CISO, and the
way that I look at it is that you would want to have this
position work with--those offices are designed to focus
exclusively on the security of Federal networks, and that would
be one, one element of a National Cyber Director's portfolio.
So, what you would want is you would want that position
working very closely with those individuals to be able to
highlight the threats to Federal networks across the broader
policy space, to advocate on behalf of investments. Certainly
one of the challenges that agencies have is that it is
relatively easier to get operational money to keep the old
stuff going, and it's much, much harder to get procurement
money to actually upgrade things.
So, there's a structural problem in the budget process for
how we--how we go about funding, you know, upgrades in IT. And
that creates an incentive for agencies to keep old stuff around
forever, which is inherently harder to secure.
What you would hope is that a National Cyber Director would
also be able to help bring in expertise from the private sector
to help the Federal Government do better. And then, last, to
look at what are the structural changes we can make across the
Federal Government? At some level, it's kind of ridiculous to
expect the Denali Commission to really focus and be good at
cybersecurity. We need to continue working on much more cross-
agency support for cybersecurity so that we're not expecting
every agency to be really, really good at their cybersecurity
and instead think about the--you know, the economic principle
of comparative advantage.
Mr. Connolly. Well, I certainly agree with you that we
would hope and expect that they would work closely together.
But we are addressing a bill here. We are codifying a position.
And I want to do more than hope that they coordinate. I want to
make sure we get it right so that this person, this position
can hit the ground running with defined responsibilities.
Because if we don't get this right, you're going to buildup
bureaucratic resistance. So, instead of getting cooperation in
cybersecurity, you actually get bureaucratic resistance. We
certainly have seen that in CIOs. You mentioned bringing people
in from the outside. We have done that with CIOs, and their
lunch gets eaten.
You know, the bureaucracy just gangs up on them because
they are outsiders. They are alien. They are grafted on. They
are presuming to tell me what to do, and as a result, they
fail. Not all of them, but you know, I----
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired, but
the gentleman----
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. Just wanted to share that
concern. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Chairwoman Maloney. OK. The gentleman's time has expired,
but the witness can respond to your question.
Mr. Daniel. Well, thank you. Yes, I mean, I certainly agree
that, you know, requiring some coordination with the Federal
CIO and the Federal CISO, whose job it is to focus on Federal
agency cybersecurity, you know, could be useful because it's
those individuals who should really focus specifically on that
task. And that--again, this would just be one aspect of
something that a National Cyber Director would have to be
concerned about.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Mr. Massie is now
recognized.
Mr. Massie. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
My first question, which I think should be everybody's
first question, is what is the budget for this proposed Office
of the National Cyber Director? And the second part of that
question is, in addition to the 75 employees that are
anticipated, how many--what percent of the money is going to go
to contractors?
And anybody can answer that question, if there is an answer
to it.
Mr. Jaffer. Well, Mr. Massie, it's Jamil Jaffer.
We don't know what the budget is. There's no authorization
for appropriations in the bill, as far as I can tell, and we
don't know what the committees will give it. That being said,
the 75 FTE that are in there are a significant number. There is
also authority to bring billets in from other parts of the
Government, as well as to hire outside experts and the like.
So, this number, 75, could actually grow beyond that.
Now to be fair, the legislation does just say ``up to 75''
for the full-time equivalent, but there's a lot of other room
in there. And depending on what the various committees of
jurisdiction appropriate and authorize, that may make a big
difference, sir.
Mr. Massie. OK. That is a question I would like to get an
answer to. Let me go on to my next question. This is for Ms.
Spaulding.
You were on the commission that recommended this position.
Is that correct, Ms. Spaulding?
Ms. Spaulding. That's correct, yes.
Mr. Massie. OK. Was there an advocate for civil liberties
and privacy on that commission, and if so, why is there not in
this proposed legislation? I know you probably didn't write the
legislation, but there is two Deputy Directors, but I don't see
a Deputy Director for Civil Liberties or an advocate for
privacy in here. Should there be one, and was that discussed in
the commission?
Ms. Spaulding. So, it's an excellent question, Congressman,
and I have a long record of being an advocate for civil
liberties and for privacy throughout my career. I think a
number of us on the commission came to the table with those
sensitivities and those equities very much in mind. There was
no specific person designated for that, but a number of us, as
I say, brought those sensitivities to the discussion.
And I think, you know, certainly privacy is one of the
values and interests that cybersecurity is very much intended
to protect. So, I think in many respects privacy is very much
built into the efforts to strengthen our cybersecurity. But
there are times in which the way in which you approach security
issues may have implications in other contexts for privacy and
civil liberties, and I think your point is very well taken.
And I think there ought to be an emphasis. I'm not sure a
Director specifically for that, but certainly, when I was at
the Department of Homeland Security as the Under Secretary for
what is now CISA, I valued very highly having a specific
individual and staff focused on privacy and civil liberties
issues, as did the Department as a whole, and found their input
and insights extremely important and valuable.
Mr. Massie. Well, I would like to see that, if we create
this office, defined legislatively because there always seems
to be a bias in the other direction. So, I think we need an
advocate there. Thank you for being one.
Mr. Jaffer, what does it mean to have a list of trusted
vendors when those vendors are putting backdoors intentionally
into their hardware and software? How can you have a secure
cyber system in the Government when we were actually even
sometimes encouraging those vendors to put backdoors in?
Mr. Jaffer. No, I think it's an important question that you
raise, Congressman Massie. At the end of the day, you know, we
have legislation that permits the Government to obtain certain
access to telecommunication systems, the Communications
Assistance for Law Enforcement Act. That's typically the way in
which law enforcement gets access to telecoms.
Now if we're talking about other systems, that's a harder
question. More often than not, what typically happens in
Government is, is the Government will come to a provider with a
court order, either from the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Court or from a Federal court or a subpoena authorized by
Congress to get access. It's not typically happening in a
cooperative manner. Typically, it's through some sort of legal
process because the companies have learned that it's important
to have that kind of process that if they ever get--if it comes
out or they're sued, they have the protection of the law to
help protect them.
So, that's typically how we see it happening. There is
usually a judge involved. If not, some sort of administrative
process that Congress oversees, sir.
Mr. Massie. OK. Well, I think there is a little bit of an
oxymoron of creating a list of trusted vendors and then asking
them to put backdoors in their products. So, I am concerned
about that.
My final question is, what is the real responsibility of
the Government to provide security for a company like Sony, who
has over 8 trillion yen in revenue every year? And yes, Mr.
Jaffer?
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman may answer the question.
Mr. Jaffer. Yes. So, it's a great question, Congressman
Massie. You know, one of the challenges we have is that today
in our country, we expect every company, whether it's a large
Sony, the JPMorgan Chase, or the small mom-and-pop bake shop,
we expect every single one of those companies and all that part
of American small business that run our economy and that are
the real engines of innovation, we expect all of them to defend
themselves against nation-sanctioned actors in Russia, China,
Iran, North Korea that have virtually unlimited human and
monetary resources to throw at this problem. It's an unwinnable
battle.
We've got to get those companies to come together with one
another to create a collective defense structure with multiple
industries working with one another, and the Government,
frankly, takes all this intelligence it collects and provides
it back to industry in an actual form to help them defend
themselves. If we're going to put them on the front lines, we
owe them better, and we're not doing that right now, sir.
Mr. Yoran. Well, if I can interrupt here? I think that
there is maybe a misperception being created here. I don't
think they're dealing with sophisticated adversaries. Many of
these companies are falling victim through simple negligence.
They're not applying a standard of care with their system, and
I think the line of questioning is important.
And why I think it's important to have this Cyber Director
position is to balance the equities of law enforcement where
there are proposals, sponsored proposals to create backdoors
and weakness, and weaken the encryption in commercial products.
There are intelligence gain/loss decisions that are made on a
daily basis. There are law enforcement considerations in
creating norms of behavior and interactional norms of behavior
here.
And all of these things are being done without having a
national policy thought through at the White House level that
can balance and consider all of these different equities. It's
sort of each department and agency off and running on their own
in a fairly uncoordinated fashion.
Mr. Massie. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. Representative Raskin is now
recognized.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I want to salute
our colleagues Mr. Langevin and Mr. Gallagher for an extremely
compelling presentation and for their hard bipartisan work on
this legislation.
I am kind of puzzled by the history of this, and I was
hoping that Mr. Rogers might start off by clarifying some
things for me. We got hit in 2014 with the massive cyber breach
at OPM by China, and that caused massive damage to our country.
In 2016, we experienced a sweeping and systematic cyber-
attack on our election by Vladimir Putin's Internet Research
Agency that caused incalculable damage to our democracy and to
social cohesion in the United States of America.
Now, of course, in 2020, we have been caught totally
unaware and seemingly unprepared for the coronavirus epidemic,
which was denied and dismissed and trivialized and wrapped in
magical thinking. And now we lead the world in case count and
death count. While our European allies totally have the virus
on the run, we are spiraling out of control.
So, if everybody is responsible for something, nobody is
responsible. And it seems overwhelmingly compelling and clear
to me that the purpose of this legislation is absolutely right.
We need someone who is coordinating our cyber defenses at a
time when all of these weaknesses and vulnerabilities have been
repeatedly demonstrated by different attacks.
So, I guess my first question for you, Mr. Rogers, is why
has it taken us so long to get to this point? What has slowed
us down?
Mr. Rogers. Oh, boy, that may be the million-dollar
question, Congressman. When we went back and looked--think
about this. The first time that China was publicly named as
this increased actor in cyber intellectual property theft, even
though we had known it was going on for years, was 2010.
Why? Because the Bush Administration had said, oh, we
can't. No way. Not disclosing it yet. Even the early days of
the Obama Administration, they said it's too early. We've got
to figure out a way around it. So, Dutch Ruppersberger and I at
the time, we gave a pretty forceful argument about making this
public. So, we've only been talking about it publicly for 10
years, and I think the public is slowly coming around.
Now there was a recent Gallup Poll I think last week that
said 81 percent of Americans believe that there will be a
cyber-attack of significance on the United States. We didn't
have anything like that in 2010. People thought we were crazy.
I mean, they didn't even understand what we were talking about.
So, public opinion has been slow to catch up.
I think we're in a very different place now. Public opinion
is probably more with us now than it's ever been to try to
defeat this thing. And remember, there is no system out there
that is completely impenetrable, none. I mean, if it's
connected to the Internet, you are vulnerable.
So, any time we break up our efforts to try to do this,
meaning if the NSA has one mission set and the FBI has another,
and they're not talking to each other, guess what? That scene
means somebody is going to win, and that happens in private
sector, it happens in local and state government, and it
happens in the Federal Government.
And if you look at what the Chinese were able to do, this
was very typical in the OMB breach, a typical espionage
activity where they're going to take I think it was--I forget
what the number is now--17 million records of SF-86, right, the
very sensitive information to get a clearance. I got a letter
saying mine was breached. All of that information was taken
back, and think about what they're doing now with their ability
through AI algorithms to collate that data and find out people
that they're interested in spying on.
Either you're with the Government and have a
classification, or you've moved on to the defense realm and
have a classification. That was, unfortunately, a brilliant
government espionage activity. So, we have to--we really have
to change the way we think about these threats. They are
looking at----
Mr. Raskin. Can I followup with you just for 1 second?
Mr. Rogers. Yes.
Mr. Raskin. I have got time for maybe one more question. I
mean, what is terrifying to me is that our failed response to
the coronavirus pandemic has exposed a lot of vulnerabilities
to foreign governments that may mean to do us harm, and they
may figure we don't have the governmental preparedness, we
don't have the social cohesion to respond to a massive threat
on our infrastructure.
So, if you would just put this in a geopolitical
competitive context, what is the imperative here to act now?
Mr. Rogers. Well, I think that's two conversations. One is
on the supply chain and security of the supply chain.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired, but
the witness may answer the question. Answer the question.
Mr. Rogers. Whoops. Security is, I think, a very important
discussion Congress is going to have to weigh in on. I wouldn't
kill international trade, but I would protect our ability to
surge on critical items.
Second, the other reason on this is that these nation-
states, our big adversaries, have refocused their efforts.
Remember the quote I used from Gerasimov in Russia? They've
realized I don't need to build an aircraft carrier. I'm going
to invest in cyber operations. If I can shut down their
electricity or I can cause distrust of the American people with
their government, we win. It has an outsized impact on what
they're trying to do.
And all of them have stepped up their game. Russia, China,
Iran, North Korea, others. That's why, to me, this is so
important.
And candidly, we're in a cyber war today. Most people don't
realize it. And folks who say it's not really a war, I don't--I
disagree. They are causing destruction, disruption, and adding
chaos. I don't know what else you call it. And we need to act
that way, and I think we ought to have one focus on this so
that we can coordinate all the good activities around the
Government and focus--don't expand Government--focus it on the
solution.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Spaulding. If I could just very quickly? The other
lesson from the pandemic, of course, is the--is what happens if
we don't have strong coordination and a coherent response in a
crisis.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Mr. Grothman? Mr. Grothman?
[Pause.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Congressman Grothman, are you there?
Mr. Grothman. Can you hear me? Yep, can you hear me? Can
you hear me?
Chairwoman Maloney. Yes. Yes.
[Pause.]
Chairwoman Maloney. Unmute. Unmute. Can you unmute?
Mr. Grothman. Can you hear me now?
Chairwoman Maloney. I can hear you now.
Mr. Grothman. OK. OK, I have a question here. First
question is when we confront China or Russia about this, what
do they say? You know, what is their response when we bring
this up to them?
Mr. Daniel. Well, Congressman, I can--having engaged them
on this topic directly, I can tell you that most of the time,
of course, they deny it. And they say that----
Mr. Grothman. And we never catch them red-handed, either
them or China?
Mr. Daniel. Oh, of course. And you know, naturally, they
deny it, and they will--at most, they would say it must be--we
must be mistaken, and could we please provide them all of the
detailed evidence for how we, you know, found that out so we
could expose our intelligence methods to them so they could
prevent us from doing it in the future. And you know, then at
most they might say it's some sort of rogue element that they
weren't really in control of, and it wasn't really them.
They, of course, never will accept responsibility for doing
that. That said, we have engaged with them in other ways to try
to push forward and push back on their activity.
Mr. Grothman. That is fine. Now I have a question for Ms.
Spaulding. We asked this earlier, how a major cyber incident
proceeds through the Government. I want to kind of expand a
little bit on that. I want to know step by step, based on your
experience, what happens when an incident is reported by either
the private sector or a Government agency?
You know, what happens from discovery to response? Kind of
walk me through the U.S. Cyber Command authorities that are
triggered, and how would this change if we got a National Cyber
Director?
Ms. Spaulding. Thank you, Congressman.
As Michael Daniel explained, some of it depends on how this
information first comes into the Government. So, it might come
in first to the NCCIC, which is the National Cybersecurity
Communications Integration Center, or the ops center, at the
Department of Homeland Security. We would often get reports,
usually from private sector companies, that they are seeing
malicious activity. But it's equally likely to come into the
FBI, for example.
And then the players, the DHS, the CISA, the Bureau--FBI--
and usually the NSA would get on the phone together, though
there are often reps sitting at the ops center at DHS. But the
information would be shared.
And then a decision has to be made very quickly, depending
on the nature of the event and if the Government is going to
step in, on what is most important. Do we go first--and
sometimes you will try as you can to do these at the same time,
but you often have to prioritize. Are we going to try to go in
and mitigate the problem, address the malicious cyber activity
and the damage that's being done to that private sector
business, for example? Or are we going to put our priority on
getting law enforcement in there to do attribution, to figure
out who's behind this?
And both of those are legitimate equities, but sometimes
they can't both happen at once. So, conversations ensue to
determine how to prioritize that.
The advantage that a National Cyber Director can bring to
bear on this, obviously, is to deconflict those competing
equities quickly. Time is of the essence to make sure that we
can get in there and do what is most important first, even as
we're trying to accomplish all of the other equities.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. Next question.
One of you mentioned, you know, you talked about Russia and
China, North Korea and Iran, and then you said ``other
countries,'' one of you. Can you expand what other countries we
have to worry about other than those four?
Does anybody want to take it?
Mr. Rogers. Yes, I mean, I can take it, take a shot at
that.
Mr. Grothman. One of you said there was more than the four,
so I just ask.
Mr. Rogers. There are--there are countries who are engaged
in ramping up their cyber capabilities that might not be
friendly to the United States. I think Belarus comes to mind.
Leaked nation-state capability from Russia into former Eastern
Bloc criminal organizations perform like a state. They may not
look like a state, but they perform like a state when it comes
in cyberspace.
And there are other countries that are probably best not
discussed in an open forum that some aren't very friendly
countries, and you would----
Mr. Grothman. OK. We won't discuss them, if you don't want
to discuss them.
Next question. One of you said they were involved in this
George Floyd incident, that some of our enemies were involved
in that. Could you expand on that?
Mr. Jaffer. It was me, Congressman. What we've seen is
we've seen some reporting that the Chinese--you know, you saw
the Chinese Foreign Ministry from the platform in open setting
refer to the plight of black Americans. Obviously, we know the
Chinese don't actually care about black Americans. They are
interning a million Muslims in the Xinjiang Province. So, we
know that these people actually don't care. It's an effort to
influence our own--our own discussions here in the United
States.
We know what they're doing overtly. We have seen them
operate covertly in very similar related spaces, and we have
every reason to believe that both they and the Russians, having
watched the Russians do it successfully in our 2016 elections,
are involved in this effort. They're essentially gaslighting
these debates, playing both sides----
Mr. Grothman. Could you give us a specific example? Could
you give us a specific example?
Mr. Jaffer. So, I don't--I don't know that we've seen sort
of, you know, point-on-point examples, but I would bet dime to
dollars that in the next six months we will see very specific
examples coming out of Facebook, Twitter, and the like. I can't
prove it to you right now today, sir, but I'd put my--I'd put
my life on it.
Mr. Grothman. OK.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired, and
now----
Mr. Grothman. Thank you much.
Chairwoman Maloney.--Congressman Rouda is recognized.
Mr. Rouda. Madam Chair, did you recognize me?
Chairwoman Maloney. Yes, I did.
Mr. Rouda. Thank you, too. I apologize. I did not hear you.
But thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for convening this hearing,
and I would also like to thank the commission for their
detailed report.
And I want to focus on one key area that had been
previously discussed, but I would like to dig in a little bit
deeper, and it is about the loss of hundreds of billions of
dollars in intellectual property theft to nation-state
sponsored cyber espionage. Obviously, the chief country
responsible for that cyber IP theft has been China.
We know China actively works with both state-owned and
civilian corporations and universities to steal IP from foreign
sources, including the United States. And according to a 2018
report released by the United States Trade Representative,
theft of U.S. intellectual property by China cost our economy
up to $600 billion a year. Let me repeat that, $600 billion a
year.
The long-term damage of these losses, however, simply
cannot be fully quantified. So, Ms. Spaulding, let me turn to
you first. In developing your recommendations for the National
Cyber Director, did the commission structure the role and its
office with this persistent problem in mind, and can you
provide any specifics as to how the Director would address this
issue?
Ms. Spaulding. Yes, absolutely, we did. And the situation
that you've described really is addressed by a number of
recommendations in the report. The private sector and the
Government both have a critical role to play in stopping this
theft of intellectual property, and it requires a true
collaboration.
We need to--we are the ones in Government that have the
national technical means and the exquisite intelligence
capabilities to collect information about what nation-states
like China are engaged in and the kind of tactics and
techniques that they're using, as does the private sector
research community. The private sector businesses that are--
that are developing this intellectual property are in the best
position to defend their networks, armed with information from
the Government.
So, we have a number of recommendations to make sure that
we are--that the Government is obligated to get that
information to those private sector companies, and the National
Cyber Director will have a key role in making sure that that's
happening. That has to be part of the metrics, right, that is
evaluated by this National Cyber Director.
We need to have proactive plans, strategies for addressing
this, and that planning capability across the interagency has
been lacking. That is another key role for this National Cyber
Director, largely using the joint planning organization at
CISA.
Mr. Rouda. Thank you. Chairman Rogers, you have talked
about how long America has been struggling to protect its IP.
Virtually every administration deals with this issue, has dealt
with this issue, and candidly, we have not been successful. Do
you envision this bill would finally allow us to successfully
defend and protect our IP?
Mr. Rogers. I think it would put us in a better position. I
would hate to say ``finally.'' I think this is something we're
going to have to continue to invent a better way to defend
ourselves as we get into 5G and what that means for pushing
what we use to defend the core out to the edge of a 5G network,
quantum, AI. All of that is going to change the way we look at
security.
So, I think it gives us the best possibility to take all
these new challenges and bring everyone in the Federal
enterprise up to snuff. Everybody keeps talking about that one
incident. We want to prevent that incident.
And here is the other piece, and I agree with Ms. Spaulding
on everything she said. I would argue if you look at the recent
level of arrests by the FBI for Chinese espionage in the United
States, the number--the interesting high level of taskings for
those assets, those spies targeting America or American
enterprise, is to steal credentials to get around firewalls so
they can steal more information.
It's really interesting. The nature of espionage is
changing dramatically. They don't want you to just steal the
secrets. They figure that's probably maybe too hard to do. They
want you to steal the guy next to you's credentials to get into
the network so that they can be passed back for a more
sophisticated penetration of your network. That's what makes
this----
Mr. Rouda. Thank you.
Mr. Rogers. Yes, this is what really makes it hard to put
your arms around.
Mr. Rouda. One last question for Mr. Jaffer. Is there a
concern that if we, as a country, are unsuccessful at providing
appropriate protection that we could see companies move their
IP and businesses to foreign countries that do provide
protection?
Mr. Jaffer. Thank you, Congressman.
Look, I think that there are so many benefits to being an
American company, whether it's our labor laws or our tax
policies or our investment base, that it's unlikely to see a
tremendous flood of intellectual property that comes out of the
United States. That being said, we have to recognize this is
the core of our innovation base in this country. We have moved
to an innovation economy.
If we allow it to walk out the backdoor, whether to China
or anywhere else, we are undermining the capability of our
economy to survive and make it to the next stage. So, even as
we think about rehoming American technology and bringing some
of those jobs back here and starting to build stuff here, we've
got to protect that core thing that makes America so productive
as a country, which is that innovation, that ability to invent
and reinvent and modify ourselves over time. If that walks out
the backdoor, we've got nothing.
Mr. Rouda. Thank you. I yield back, Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired.
Representative Ro Khanna is now recognized. Ro Khanna, are you
with us?
Mr. Khanna. Yes, I am. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I appreciate and want to just thank Representative Langevin
and Representative Gallagher for their extraordinary work in
helping come up with such a detailed proposal and their work
with the commission on a bipartisan basis. I know in particular
Representative Langevin has been working on this for many, many
years, and this is a passion of his that he has talked about
often. So, I am glad to see it come to fruition.
Let me ask the panel, are there additional authorities that
you think the National Cyber Director should have?
Mr. Daniel. Well, certainly, Representative, I think that
it is important that as we structure this position that we make
sure that it not be just restricted to looking at network
defense. It's got to be able to have the full suite of
capabilities that the Federal Government can bring to bear.
So, including military operations and intelligence and the
law enforcement and all the way across the board. We cannot
just restrict this position to looking at the kinds of things
that CISA already does. Chris Krebs does not need another boss.
You know, he's got one in the Secretary of Homeland Security.
This really has to be able to look across the entire Federal
Government and all of the tools of national power that we have.
Ms. Spaulding. And if I might, Congressman? I totally agree
with Michael on this point, and I think the distinction here is
between having visibility. The National Cyber Director has to
have visibility across the entire Government cybersecurity
activities in order to make sure and deconflict even between
offensive and defensive operations.
That's different from giving the National Cyber Director
directive authority, right? You don't want law enforcement
activities being directed out of the White House, for example.
Mr. Khanna. No.
Ms. Spaulding. And you don't want this Director either in
the way of warfighting plans or daily intelligence collection,
those kinds of activities. But it's critical that they not be
excluded from the meetings and the conversations at the White
House where these offensive, for example, activities are being
discussed and that they have visibility.
Because they need to be able to deconflict. They can never
deconflict in this way, and I'll give you an example. Let's say
our banks are fending off--they're in the middle of fending off
lots of malicious activity from North Korea trying to steal
money from their system. That might not be--in the midst of
that crisis might not be the best time to ask the banks to
impose sanctions, to implement sanctions to implement--new
sanctions against Iran because we know Iran retaliated in the
past against our banks with malicious cyber activity.
So, that kind of deconfliction is something that the
National Cyber Director needs to be at the table to help with.
Mr. Khanna. Right. Thank you. And are there additional
cybersecurity recommendations that you think we should be
considering, including for many that the Solarium Commission
report came up with?
Mr. Jaffer. Yes, I think, Congressman, there are a couple
of really important ones, in particular the ones that revolve
around collective defense like establishing a joint
collaborative environment where both NSA and DHS can come
together and share classified and unclassified information and
then share that in real time at meetings with industry. That
was something we've been talking about forever.
Information sharing isn't enough, though. You've got to
collaborate in real time. That's something that the commission
was very focused on, too. I think that part of the report is
really critical. I think more work could be done there, and the
commission has got some great recommendations in that space, as
well as on continuity of the economy and a variety of other
areas. The critical infrastructure entities also, I think some
good recommendations there from the commission.
Mr. Rogers. I 100 percent agree. Just a couple of things
that we just haven't talked about. The interim, the brush-
cleaning that we can do to make us more competitive would be
huge. Congress needs to pay attention. Chairman Pai has done
the spectrum clearing. Outrageously important if we're going to
compete in 5G and push back on Chinese expansion there.
Rip and replace. We have lots of gear around the country,
and I know people want to beat on them for it. It was legal at
one point. There's lots of great effort in Congress today about
how do we get rid of that? It does two things. Helps our own
infrastructure ecosystem, people who are trusted vendors, to do
that, No. 1. And No. 2, it gets out Huawei gear much, much
quicker.
Those are kinds of things that we can do almost immediately
that are in the process that you're all dealing with now that
would have a huge advantage for us, putting us in a competitive
position to do all the things that my other panelists just
talked about.
Mr. Yoran. As Suzanne Spaulding said, each organization,
each enterprise, each company is in the best position to defend
themselves. They understand which of their systems are most
critical and represent the greatest risk.
There are opportunities, and I think some of the
recommendations of the commission, things like increasing
transparency, having the interpretation by the SEC requiring an
attestation from public company CEOs not on the level of
security they have, but just the fact that they've looked at
their cyber risk and that they are adequately or proactively
managing cyber risk associated with their business.
When you get things like that in place, you will have--you
will increase the level of hygiene, increase the level of
attention. It will increase each enterprise's ability to defend
themselves, and the amount of noise and the amount of economic
loss will go way down. It's probably the single greatest move
that we can do as a nation to improve our cyber resilience and
preparedness.
Mr. Khanna. I appreciate all of your expert testimony. I
just want to thank again Representative Langevin and Gallagher.
Representative Gallagher had come out to my district, and I
remember at Stanford they were talking about a ``cyber Pearl
Harbor'' as the big fear. So, many of the companies have talked
about how we shouldn't have every company in this country
required to have basically private armies to safeguard
ourselves. We need a national response.
So, I certainly will be supporting this legislation and
appreciate everyone who helped put it together.
Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. And Representative Sarbanes,
you are recognized. Representative John Sarbanes?
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much, Madam Chair. Can you hear
me?
Chairwoman Maloney. Yes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Excellent. Well, I appreciate the panel. I
certainly want to thank my colleagues, Congressman Langevin and
Congressman Gallagher, not just for their testimony this
morning, but for their efforts on this proposal, which I
support very strongly.
I want to welcome back Chairman Rogers and thank the rest
of the panelists for their testimony.
Obviously, one key responsibility of the National Cyber
Director is establishing and implementing a National Cyber
Strategy. In 2018, the Trump administration released a National
Cyber Strategy that aims to ``integrate cyber into all elements
of national power.''
Chairman Rogers, could you speak to how the 2018 National
Cyber Strategy has been successful or not successful in that
goal, and how would the National Cyber Strategy that is
required by this bill that we are talking about today be
different from that? So, could you maybe compare and contrast
those a little bit for us?
Mr. Rogers. I think what that strategy was meant to do in
2018 for sure was bring us to a better place about coordination
and understanding that our adversaries are using all the
nation-state power they can bring to bear. So, diplomacy,
military defense, intelligence, cyber, and kind of using that
capability--oh, and economic. The most--I argue probably the
most important.
So, we know that China steals economic data to try to
influence its trade negotiations as an example. So, they're
using cyber and intelligence as a way to influence all of those
pressure points that a government has to bring to bear on a
country, and it's my understanding that that 2018 rule was to
say, OK, we're finally getting to understand that it is multi-
domain, right?
We tend to separate diplomacy and the economy to a great
degree in this country. So, how do we try not to do that? How
do we have everybody rowing the boat in the same direction,
understanding our adversaries are using that against us? I
think that's what they were trying to do.
I think it's still a work in progress. And a part of that,
by the way, we debated when I was chairman, and prior to me
being chairman--and Mr. Langevin can comment on this as well,
and certainly, Jamil was part of those discussions as well--
about what is offensive cyber? Are we allowed to protect
ourselves if we know they're going to shoot at us in
cyberspace?
And I have seen lots of folks say we've solved that
question over the last 15 years. I don't believe we have yet
today solved that question. We had a piecemeal policy, and I
think that 2018 policy was trying to say is we're going to,
again, use all the nation-state groups of power that I know our
adversaries are using and then try to understand what tools in
our toolkit do we have?
And I'm not saying every cyber-attack should be--you know,
we should have another cyber-attack back. I'm not saying that
at all. But we really didn't, and I don't think still to this
day have, a good definition of what we can do to prevent, you
know?
And I've heard the terms go through the years. Now we call
it aggressive defense. OK, whatever we want to call it, but we
need to understand what that is.
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes. I'm interpreting you to say that the
administration's strategy released back in 1918 was heading in
the direction that now this Cyber Director with the strategy
required under 7331 takes to a new and better and more
coordinated and more structural place.
One key difference of the role as envisioned by this bill
is that the position would be empowered with new statutory
authority to monitor implementation across the Federal
Government in terms of strategy, which would include
recommending changes to OMB regarding agency organization,
personnel, resource allocation. I think that makes a lot of
sense. As well as certifying that the annual budget proposal
for each Federal department or agency is consistent with the
strategy. Again, that makes a lot of sense in terms of
coordination.
Mr. Daniel, I understand you spent 17 years at OMB before
assuming the cybersecurity coordinator role. Do you think it is
important for the National Cyber Director to have this
statutory authority, and how do you think the relationship with
OMB would actually work in practice?
Mr. Daniel. Yes, sir. Thank you.
I think that it is critically important that the office
have a very good understanding of the budget and be empowered
to actually work in that budget process. A former OMB Director
once said, ``Policy without resources is a hallucination.'' So,
you know, clearly, the ability to influence and shape how we
allocate resources is absolutely critically important.
As a practical matter, I think what you would want to see
is very close collaboration between any staff associated with
this office and the program, the line program examiners at OMB.
OMB is at its most effective when it works very closely across
the entire White House complex with NSC, with OSTP, with ONDCP,
any of those White House elements, to make sure that the
budgets support the President's policies.
So, you might even imagine a situation where you have
program examiners from OMB detailed over to this office to help
provide that connectivity and that reach-back, and you would
want them working hand-in-glove with each other to shape that
President's budget. So, that's why I think having this lever of
the--having a lever like that statutory authority that's in
7331 would be very, very helpful to the position.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thanks very much. I yield back.
Chairwoman Maloney. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
yield to Katie Porter. Representative Porter?
Ms. Porter. Hi. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Under H.R. 7331, the first duty listed for the National
Cyber Director is serving as the principal adviser to the
President on cybersecurity strategy and policy. Mr. Daniel,
having essentially worked to achieve many of those functions
yourself, can you give me any concrete examples of how having a
principal cybersecurity adviser was essential to the
President's work and why it is important to formalize that
role, as proposed in the bill?
Mr. Daniel. Yes, thank you, Representative Porter.
I think that when you look at an issue like cybersecurity
that is so cross-cutting, that affects so many different policy
areas, from national security policy to our economic policy,
you want the President to have an adviser who focuses on this
issue as part of her time. You know, the main thing that they
focus on every day because it pervades so many of our policy
issues now.
So, if you're trying to decide what the U.S. policy should
be on everything from 5G to relations with China to how we're
dealing with the Middle East, cyber shoots through all of those
things. And so you want to be able to have the President be
able to draw upon somebody with expertise in those areas that
can bring that cyber perspective to those issues so that you
make a decision knowing what the effects on our cybersecurity
might be, for good or for ill.
Sometimes you're going to make decisions that maybe have a
negative effect on that for a greater positive gain somewhere
else, but you do that with full knowledge and not by accident.
And that's why it's so critically important that a senior
adviser in the White House focus on this issue, just given its
breadth across so many different policy areas now.
Ms. Porter. Yes, I appreciate your flagging the importance
of expertise in this cybersecurity role, and I want to ask some
more questions about how Senate confirmation would help us
assure that.
Mr. Jaffer, do you remember anyone who the President
appointed as one of his cybersecurity advisers when he took
office in 2017?
Mr. Jaffer. Yes, sure. Rob Joyce, obviously, was an
excellent appointee, and Tom Bossert, who Rob worked with, was
also an excellent appointee. Both very good on cyber.
Ms. Porter. Yes, both very, very good, and I would agree
with you about the importance of expertise. I think the
President also appointed Mr. Giuliani, and I think like so many
of us--and I think we are seeing this during work from home--
technology is frustrating and hard, and we are all struggling
to get our level of expertise up to where it needs to be to be
cybersecure.
So, I completely relate to the fact that Mr. Giuliani,
after being appointed one of the cybersecurity advisers, got
frustrated with his iPhone and went into a public Apple store
in San Francisco within a month of being appointed a principal
cybersecurity adviser because he had entered his password wrong
10 times and was locked out of his iPhone. I think this really
indicates the gap between the rest of us, who are trying to do
our very level best, and the need for a true expert at the very
top of this.
Would you agree with that?
Mr. Jaffer. I completely agree. In fact, we're working on a
program funded by the Hewlett Foundation at George Mason, where
we're bringing technologists from around the country to D.C. to
train them on how policy works so we can get more technologists
talking to you about the problems that you have and challenges
that you face in policymaking. I mean giving you real advice
from people who actually do the work, the data scientists, the
coders, and the like.
So, you're exactly right. Having real--there's no
substitute for having real experts in this area.
Ms. Porter. Yes, thank you so much.
Ms. Spaulding, I wanted to turn to you briefly and ask you,
I know that H.R. 7331 would require the National Cyber Director
position to be Senate-confirmed. Can you explain why the
Solarium Commission made that recommendation, and whether you
think--or how you would respond to concerns that that has the
potential to create distrust between the President and the
National Cyber Director, or do you think that concern is
misplaced?
Ms. Spaulding. Thank you, Congresswoman.
Yes, you know, with respect to that latter question about
the potential impact on trust in the National Cyber Director
within the White House, I would point out that there are lots
of Senate-confirmed, a number of Senate-confirmed positions
within the White House, including the OMB Director. And I don't
think anybody questions really the level of trust there with
respect to that OMB Director.

So, I don't think--I do think that concern is misplaced.
And we talked a lot about whether--the pros and cons of having
this person Senate-confirmed, and ultimately, the consensus
was, yes, we should recommend Senate confirmation.

I think it's critically important that Congress have
effective oversight. And given the decentralized nature of
cybersecurity, if Congress doesn't have really the ability to
hold someone accountable and really to have somebody that they
can turn to get a coordinated and coherent picture of what's
happening, it's going to be very hard for Congress to do
effective oversight. So, I think that's important. That Senate
confirmation gives Congress a greater ability to conduct
oversight of those activities.

Ms. Porter. I really appreciate it, Ms. Spaulding, and I
think it's important to note that that's bipartisan oversight
that Congress would be conducting. So, unfortunately, my time
has expired. So, I yield back.

But thank you so much.

Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.

Representative Comer, would you like to ask an additional
question or make a closing comment? Representative Comer?

Mr. Comer. I think that just to wrap it up, I want to thank
the witnesses again for their testimony. This is certainly an
issue that is bipartisan that we all care about when we are
talking about cybersecurity. But the question that many of my
colleagues have is whether we want to create another Government
bureaucracy and what is the total cost going to be? And how is
this bureaucracy going to be able to work with the
administration, whichever administration that would be moving
forward?

So, I do think this was very helpful. I appreciate the
conversation, appreciate the questions.

Again, Madam Chair, with all due respect, I hope that we
can focus on China. There is a huge demand across America to
hold China accountable for not just COVID-19, but also the
cybersecurity breaches that are at the hands of China. So,
again, I would encourage future hearing with a sole focus on
investigating China and determining a path forward to hold them
accountable for their violations.

But again, thank you for the hearing today, and with that,
I yield back.

Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you.

Because this August marks 100 years of women's suffrage, I
want to close with one final question. Mr. Yoran, your written
testimony addresses the lack of diversity in the cybersecurity
sector and how it contributes to the overall shortage of talent
in the cybersecurity work force.

For example, you point out that women make up just 14
percent of the cybersecurity work force in North America. You
say, ``The Nation needs a bold, new cyber work force strategy
that develops and advances the ranks of people from all walks
of life.''

How would the Federal Government--my question is, how would
the Federal Government's effort to promote diversity in the
cyber work force benefit the private sector? And I mean more
minorities, gender diversity. So, how would it benefit the
private sector, more diversity?

Mr. Yoran. Well, the most important thing when it comes to
cybersecurity is recognizing the fact that what we're doing
isn't getting the job done. We can't just have a continuation
of the same mode of thinking, the same solutions, the same
approach that we've used in years past to deal with the threats
that continue to evolve. And as we deploy new technologies,
they have new exposures and new vulnerabilities.

So, we need experts to come from diverse backgrounds, and
that certainly means people that are trained in the discipline
of cyber, but diversity of thinking. People with diverse
backgrounds--from minorities and other groups which are
underrepresented in the cyber field and in the cyber domain.

I think the Government has an opportunity and a
responsibility to help promote the diversity of thinking and
the diversity of talent available to the private sector. It
will help us innovate faster, think outside the box, and
outmaneuver our adversaries. So, there's a series of programs.
Love to have a conversation with you about it in perhaps a
followup.

Chairwoman Maloney. Thank you. Ms. Spaulding, do you
believe such an effort would advance innovation and give us a
competitive edge globally?

Ms. Spaulding. Absolutely, Chairman. I couldn't agree more
with Amit's comments. And of course, the commission has a
series of recommendations on building that cyber work force,
including diversity.

And I would say just from a very basic perspective from my
time at DHS, and we see it, we have an urgent need to build the
number of cyber-talented people that we bring--that we have
available to come into the work force. We cannot afford to
leave any part of our population on the sidelines of this
effort.

Chairwoman Maloney. Well, I agree with you. We can and must
do more in this regard.

I truly want to thank all of my colleagues for their
participation, particularly Congressmen Langevin and Gallagher
for their leadership, and all of our witnesses for your passion
and your knowledge and all the information you gave us today.
The creation of a National Cyber Director is not something any
of us take lightly. After what we have heard here today, I
think it is clear this is something we cannot afford to delay.

I also want to thank all of my colleagues across the aisle
particularly, for their questions and engagement. It is not
every day that we can find areas of bipartisan consensus that--
and we have it here. We have to agree on our national security,
protecting our innovation, and protecting our people. So, I
look forward to working together to get this bill passed and on
other items that were brought up today.

Without objection, all Members have five legislative days
within which to submit additional written questions for the
witnesses to the chair, which will be forwarded to the
witnesses for their response. I ask our witnesses to please
respond as promptly as you are able to.
And this hearing is adjourned. Thank you all.
[Whereupon, at 3:11 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
