- MARKUP OF: H. RES. 1298, "OF INQUIRY DIRECTING THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO TRANSMIT CERTAIN DOCUMENTS TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES RELATING TO THE ROLE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY IN THE PAYCHECK PROTECTION PROGRAM OF THE SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION."; H.R. 8844, "STEP IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2022"

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MARKUP OF: H. RES. 1298, ``OF INQUIRY
DIRECTING THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO TRANSMIT CERTAIN DOCUMENTS
TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES RELATING TO THE ROLE OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF THE TREASURY IN THE PAYCHECK PROTECTION PROGRAM OF THE SMALL
BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION.''; H.R. 8844, ``STEP IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2022''

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
SEPTEMBER 21, 2022

__________

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 117-068
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-807                WASHINGTON : 2022

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Chairwoman
JARED GOLDEN, Maine
JASON CROW, Colorado
SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas
KWEISI MFUME, Maryland
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
MARIE NEWMAN, Illinois
CAROLYN BOURDEAUX, Georgia
TROY CARTER, Louisiana
JUDY CHU, California
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
ANDY KIM, New Jersey
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
SCOTT PETERS, California
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri, Ranking Member
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
PETE STAUBER, Minnesota
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York
YOUNG KIM, California
BETH VAN DUYNE, Texas
BYRON DONALDS, Florida
MARIA SALAZAR, Florida
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska

Melissa Jung, Majority Staff Director
Ellen Harrington, Majority Deputy Staff Director
David Planning, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Nydia Velazquez.............................................     1
Hon. Blaine Luetkemeyer..........................................     2

APPENDIX

Additional Material for the Record:
Amendment to H. Res. 1298 Offered by Hon. Luetkemeyer........    36
Amendment to H. Res. 1298 Offered by Hon. Van Duyne..........    38
Amendment to H. Res. 1298 Offered by Hon. Meuser.............    40
Amendment to H. Res. 1298 Offered by Hon. Williams...........    42
Colorado Office of Economic Development & International Trade    44
State International Development Organization Letter submitted
by Larry Collins...........................................    46
State International Development Organization Letter submitted
by Andy Karellas...........................................    47
State International Development Organization Letter submitted
by Alyssa Tracey...........................................    49

MARKUP OF: H. RES. 1298, ``OF INQUIRY
DIRECTING THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY TO TRANSMIT CERTAIN
DOCUMENTS TO THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES RELATING TO THE ROLE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
IN THE PAYCHECK PROTECTION PROGRAM OF THE SMALL BUSINESS
ADMINISTRATION.''; H.R. 8844, ``STEP
IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2022''

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 2022

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:06 a.m., in Room
2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Nydia M. Velazquez
[Chairwoman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Velazquez, Golden, Crow, Davids,
Mfume, Phillips, Newman, Bourdeaux, Carter, Chu, Evans,
Houlahan, Andy Kim, Craig, Peters, Luetkemeyer, Williams,
Stauber, Meuser, Tenney, Garbarino, Young Kim, Van Duyne,
Donalds, Fitzgerald, and Flood.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Good morning. A quorum being present,
I call this morning's meeting of the Committee on Small
Business to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 13 and House Rule XI, Clause 2,
the Chair may postpone further proceedings today on the
question of approving the measure or adopting an amendment on
which a recorded vote is ordered.
I would like to begin by noting some important
requirements. Let me begin by saying that standing House and
Committee rules and practice will continue to apply during
hybrid proceedings. All Members are reminded that they are
expected to adhere to these standing rules including decorum.
House regulations require Members to be visible through a
video connection throughout the proceeding, so please keep your
cameras on. Also, remember to remain muted until you are
recognized to minimize background noise.
Today, we will be considering two legislative measures.
First, we will take up H. Res. 1298, a Resolution of Inquiry
directing the Secretary of the Treasury to transmit certain
documents to the House relating to the role of the Department
of Treasury in the Paycheck Protection Program which was
introduced by Ranking Member Luetkemeyer.
We also will be considering H.R. 8844, the STEP Improvement
Act of 2022, which was introduced by Representative Evans and
cosponsored by Ms. Kim, Ms. Newman, and Mr. Flood.
During the beginning of the pandemic, we entered into one
of the most perilous times for small business owners. With the
dangers of COVID-19 to the general public, small businesses had
to pivot to align their business practices to the new normal
during that period. As small businesses struggled, it was
incumbent on the federal government to step up and provide
financial support. This Committee took up the call that helped
create the Paycheck Protection Program. Nearly $800 billion in
low interest, forgivable loans were issued to keep small firms
afloat during the pandemic. Although the program was a
tremendous success, congressional oversight of a program of
this magnitude is imperative.
Moreover, the Economic Aid Act required the Secretary of
the Treasury and the SBA Administrator to testify before the
Committee not less than twice per year. Our attempts to have
Secretary Yellen testify before the Committee have
unfortunately been unsuccessful.
In general, I do not object to the minority's efforts here,
especially to determine what policies the Treasury,
specifically under former Secretary Mnuchin, could have
instituted to ensure that these loans were distributed
equitably in the beginning. However, I will note that the
Committee continues to conduct rigorous oversight of the
Paycheck Protection Program which is why this Resolution of
Inquiry is not needed.
For those reasons, I will be recommending that the
Committee report H. Res. 1298 to the House without
recommendation. The Committee will also consider legislation to
reauthorize the SBA State Trade Expansion Program for 4 more
years. The STEP Improvement Act reauthorizes this vital small
business program and makes improvements to the ground process.
This bill is just another example of the work the Committee has
done through this Congress to help small business owners and
entrepreneurs recover from the pandemic.
I want to reiterate that this measure has bipartisan
support and I urge Members to support the bill.
I would to recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Luetkemeyer,
for his opening statement.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
calling today's markup.
We have important work to do on behalf of America's small
businesses, entrepreneurs, innovators, and startups. This
morning's markup will highlight and showcase the work the
Committee is doing to enhance small businesses' ability to
trade their goods and services on the global stage while also
exercising critical important congressional oversight.
As you just stated, this is a very important issue from the
standpoint of providing oversight over this agency and the
Treasury from the standpoint of the PPP program.
Unfortunately, the Committee arrived at this juncture after
following two separate paths. One followed regular order, which
allowed Members on both sides of the aisle to discuss and
debate reforms of the Small Business Administration's State
Trade Expansion Program, also known as STEP, which aims to
assist small businesses with their exporting goods and needs.
After multiple congressional hearings, and after hearing from
the SBA's top STEP official, H.R. 8844, the STEP Improvement
Act, is set to advance during today's markup.
The second piece of legislative business today is a result
of the Treasury Department and the Secretary of the Treasury
ignoring this Committee and the nation's 33 million small
businesses. Despite having an important role within the
Paycheck Protection Program, and despite a legal and statutory
responsibility to testify before this Committee, Secretary
Yellen has decided it is beneath her to talk to us. Therefore,
I introduced the Resolution of Inquiry directing the Secretary
of the Treasury to provide us with important information and
communication regarding the agency's role within PPP. This is
about transparency and oversight. This is about holding this
administration accountable to not only Congress, but also to
America's small businesses and their millions of workers.
To conduct proper oversight on behalf of the American
taxpayers and to enact responsible legislative solutions,
Congress requires clear and comprehensive information. Without
it, they are just ideas that lack justifications.
Despite my concerns for how the SBA is functioning, the SBA
Administrator and her top deputies have testified before this
Committee. Madam Chair, I cannot say the same for the
Department of Treasury.
As I said earlier, these are important issues. Later today,
the Federal Reserve is once again going to raise interest
rates. Ongoing interest rate increases are the direct result of
persistently high inflation. Small businesses are being
challenged day in and day out, whether it is inflation, ever-
present supply chain issues, a labor crisis, or burdensome
regulations. They deserve our attention. They deserve SBA's
attention. And they deserve the Treasury Secretary's attention.
Anything less is unacceptable.
Madam Chair, I look forward to today's debate and I yield
back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
Does any other Member seek recognition for the purpose of
making an opening statement?
H. RES. 1298
Seeing none, we will now move to the consideration of H.
Res. 1298, a Resolution of Inquiry directing the Secretary of
the Treasury to transmit certain documents to the House of
Representatives relating to the role of the Department of
Treasury in the Paycheck Protection Program of the Small
Business Administration introduced by Ranking Member
Luetkemeyer.
I would now like to recognize the Ranking Member for an
opening statement.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Today, the Committee is considering a Resolution of Inquiry
directing the Secretary of Treasury to transmit documents to
the House related to the department's role in the Paycheck
Protection Program.
As the COVID-19 pandemic began to take hold here in the
United States, Congress moved quickly to assist Americans in
our economy weather the storm. The largest program enacted was
the Paycheck Protection Program, or the PPP. The PPP provided
small businesses with financial support in the form of
forgivable loans through private sector lenders. And that was a
key characteristic of this program. It was not a direct loan
program through the federal government; rather, community
banks, credit unions, and other financial institutions were
disbursing and interacting with the nation's small businesses.
While this program was administered by the Small Business
Administration, the Department of Treasury was charged with
expeditiously onboarding new lenders. With the program firmly
in the PPP forgiveness period, it only makes sense for
Congress, and specifically, this Committee, to perform its due
diligence and conduct oversight over the program.
Congress recognized our oversight need when funding these
programs by enacting testimony requirements for both the SBA
Administrator and the Secretary of Treasury. Not later than 150
days after enactment of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of
2021, and not less than twice each year or thereafter, the
Secretary of the Treasury was required to testify before this
Committee. We are now 513 days from the first testimony
deadline and Secretary Yellen has testified a grand total of
zero times before this Committee. The secretary's failure to
appear is not for a lack of trying for the Members of this
Committee. The requests were sent to Secretary Yellen on May
26, 2021; July 6, 2021; July 28, 2021, March 1, 2022, and June
13, 2022. The Chairwoman herself has even vocally supported
having Secretary Yellen testify.
Despite these outreach examples and requests, Secretary
Yellen has continuously ignored her legal requirement to
testify before this Committee. To make matters worse, to date I
have yet to receive even a written response from Secretary
Yellen to any one of my requests. It was not until I
communicated my concern about the lack of response to the
Treasury Department Office of Inspector General, that I was
finally informed that the Treasury admitted to mishandling my
letters. Yeah, right.
Lack of communication, whether that be in writing or
testimony before this committee severely obstructs our ability
to conduct oversight over critical pandemic relief programs
such as PPP. In the end, this administration and Secretary
Yellen are not just ignoring our Committee but they are also
ignoring and pushing aside America's main street businesses.
These are the businesses that transform and drive our economy.
These are businesses that are experiencing, just like the rest
of America, ongoing and persistent inflation price pressures
and an onslaught of punishing regulations. As such, I felt
compelled to take an unprecedent step for this Committee and
submitted this resolution of inquiry directed at Secretary
Yellen.
It seems like each day we get a stark reminder of just how
much fraud has occurred within our pandemic relief programs
whether it is a GAO report, an Inspector General investigation,
or another news article, we are facing what is being referred
to as the biggest fraud in a generation.
I have said it before and I will say it again in a
generation, fraud is fraud regardless of when it occurred. One
of the first steps we as a Congress can take to address these
issues is to shine a light on the problem to get a full
understanding of what is going on. Unfortunately, Secretary
Yellen seems intent on shielding her work and the work of the
Treasury Department from congressional oversight. Since day
one, I committed to use every tool at my disposal to conduct
robust and effective oversight over the programs within our
jurisdiction. This resolution is one such tool.
I ask each Member of this Committee to join with me in
standing up for Congress's legitimate oversight authority by
voting for this resolution. Although a motion to report without
recommendation generally indicates that a Committee believes a
resolution should receive consideration, I am disheartened that
my colleagues on the other side of the aisle would not join me
in making a stronger statement in support of Congress's right
to by reporting this measure favorably. A vote to report this
resolution favorably would have been a resounding vote for
transparency and the nation's small businesses. Because a
motion to report without recommendation can still indicate that
this resolution should receive floor time, I will vote yes on
this resolution.
With that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back. Thank you very
much.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
Are there any other Members who wish to be recognized for a
statement on H. Res. 1298?
I would now like to recognize myself briefly.
As I mentioned earlier, although the PPP program provided a
much-needed lifeline to small businesses, there were a number
of significant issues with the rollout of the program under the
Trump administration. In testimony provided before this
Committee in March, the Government Accountability Office
indicated that businesses owned by minorities, women, and
veterans, faced challenges obtaining loans in the beginning of
the program. During that hearing, GAO also testified that
approval rates were generally higher for firms with pre-
existing relationships with a bank and larger businesses were
more likely to have these relationships than the small
businesses. According to the SBA's Office of Inspector General
and GAO, there has been significant fraud associated with the
program due to the guardrails being lowered during the
beginning of the program. Moreover, there is a question whether
the largest PPP loans had a substantial positive employment
effect in the short or medium term. Currently, PPP is in the
forgiveness phase of the program which the Committee is
actively monitoring. As of May 8, 2022, the SBA made over 10
million full or partial forgiveness payments, representing 88
percent of all PPP loans, totaling over $725 billion in PPP
lending.
Because of these reasons, I generally do not object to the
minority requesting more documents, but the Committee's
oversight of this program makes this resolution unnecessary. I
hope my colleagues will vote with me to report the resolution
to the House without recommendation.
If there is no further discussion, the Committee will move
on to consideration of H. Res. 1298.
The clerk will report the resolution.
The CLERK. H. Res. 1298 of Inquiry directing----
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Without objection, H. Res. 1298 is
considered as read and open for amendment at any point.
Does anyone else seek----
Ms. VAN DUYNE. I seek recognition.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. For what purpose does the gentlewoman
from Texas seek recognition?
Ms. VAN DUYNE. To introduce an amendment, Ms. Chairwoman.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The clerk will report the amendment.
The CLERK. Amendment to H. Res. 1298 offered by Ms. Van
Duyne of Texas in the matter proceeding----
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Without objection, further reading of
the amendment will be dispensed with.
The gentlewoman from Texas is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Over the last 2 years, and in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, where states and local governments instituted
shutdown orders, over a trillion dollars have been appropriated
and disbursed to small businesses. At the worst times of COVID,
this relief allowed small businesses to regain their footing.
Not only in my district, Texas 24, but in districts across the
country, small business owners were able to keep their lights
on, open their doors, and had the ability to pay their
employees.
However, with the speed at which this money moved, fraud
did occur. Bad actors and criminals took advantage of many of
the small business relief programs and the estimates provided
by the Inspector Generals and the Secret Service pegged the
amount of potential fraud near the hundred billion dollar mark.
Some have labeled it the biggest fraud in a generation. This is
absolutely unacceptable and we must do everything in our power
to ensure that every dollar that was taken illegally is tracked
down and returned and that all criminals are held accountable.
Any and all federal agencies that had a role must be
working in tandem to safeguard and protect American taxpayer
dollars. This includes the Department of the Treasury and their
cooperating with the SBA in implementing the Paycheck
Protection Program. Thus far, American law enforcement
officials are making progress to bring justice to those that
broke the law, and I want to thank them for their efforts.
However, more work needs to be done. Recovered estimates
are changing constantly and at times communicated in the media.
My amendment is straightforward and increases transparency. It
directs the Treasury Secretary to provide more information on
the amount of fraud that has been recovered. No matter what
account the recouped dollars are placed at the Treasury
Department, Congress, and more importantly, the American
public, must have clear accounting figures readily available.
I am ready and willing to work with my colleagues to ensure
that we are using every tool within our toolbox to recover
stolen taxpayer dollars in a timely and orderly fashion. In
order to do that, we need the cooperation of the biggest
agencies within our federal government. The more information
that is flowing, the better.
I urge my colleagues to support my amendment, and I yield
back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentlelady yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on this amendment?
The gentleman, Mr. Flood, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. FLOOD. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I speak in support of adopting Member Luetkemeyer's
Resolution of Inquiry. I support my colleague's amendment.
Secretary Yellen has a responsibility to come in front of
this Committee. Her testimony was not optional, but in fact,
mandated by the CARES Act. As Members of this Committee know,
President Trump's Treasury Secretary came in front of the Small
Business Committee in 2020. He followed his statutory
obligation. There is no reason that Secretary Yellen should not
be here to do exactly the same thing.
In addition to questions about the Paycheck Protection
Program, I have a number of questions about President Biden's
policies. It would be helpful if Secretary Yellen would address
them.
For example, Secretary Yellen said Biden's so-called
Inflation Reduction Act would ``usher in the next phase of
America's future.'' If Secretary Yellen were to testify in
front of this Committee, I would love to know what she believes
this next phase of America's future looks like.
I hear from my constituents every single day that President
Biden's spending bill is a disaster and it will raise energy
costs. It will raise taxes. And ultimately spend billions of
federal dollars for wasteful government programs that our
children and grandchildren will be saddled with for years to
come.
Just yesterday, the Ranking Member's office received data
about where small businesses are, what small businesses are
thinking, and they are very pessimistic about our future. If
you look at the latest numbers, Americans are spending down
their cash, deposits in banks are going down, and loans are
going up. Surely, this is not the future that Secretary Yellen
would envision, and without her testimony, we simply do not
know what her vision is.
Staying on the subject of the so-called Inflation Reduction
Act, let's talk about the bill's enormous expansion of the IRS.
This has small business owners across the nation concerned that
they are going to be targeted by an out-of-control, weaponized
Department of Treasury. Last Thursday, Secretary Yellen touted
the $80 billion in funding for the IRS by claiming that the
money would go towards getting constituents' questions answered
more quickly.
I have heard from constituents and small businesses in my
district about their frustration with the IRS, and yes, they do
want their questions answered. However, the reality is the IRS
provision within the IRA was included as a pay-for. The IRS
funding is expected to raise $240 billion in additional revenue
for the bill to finance other Biden admin policies. That is why
the Biden administration wanted to include it in the bill. If
Secretary Yellen were here, I would love to ask why the bill
could not have spent maybe a half, a quarter, or even a tenth
of the amount on the IRS or kept its funding strictly focused
on customer service rather than using it to audit and harass
the American people.
I would also love to hear from Secretary Yellen on the
issue of inflation. Small businesses consistently rank
inflation as one of their top concerns in surveys. Secretary
Yellen called inflation ``transitory'' until finally admitting
she was wrong about the inflation crisis in comments to Wolf
Blitzer in a CNN interview in June of this year. Now that
Secretary Yellen has finally recognized the reality that
inflation is a serious problem that cannot be wished away, I
would love to hear what she plans to do about it. If Secretary
Yellen testified in front of this Committee, I would like to
ask her what the administration is going to do about inflation,
the very same inflation that is crushing Americans and small
business.
The small businesses of Nebraska would benefit from some
clarity from the Secretary on how the Biden administration
plans to get us out of this mess that it has made of its own
creation. I know they are not alone. The American people
deserve answers from the Treasury secretary.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on the amendment?
Mr. STAUBER. Madam Chair? Madam Chair, I move to strike the
last word.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Stauber is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. STAUBER. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Just yesterday, federal charges were brought against 48
people in the state of Minnesota for what is known to be the
largest fraud case in the United States related to COVID-19 aid
dollars. These individuals created shell companies and enrolled
in COVID relief programs, defrauded taxpayers of $250 million
to purchase luxury cars, houses, jewelry, and coastal resort
properties.
During COVID-19, the unfortunate reality is that oversight
mechanisms fell by the wayside. Now is the time for us and our
federal agencies to step up and try to recoup some of what was
fraudulently stolen from the American taxpayer.
That is why I am grateful for Congresswoman Van Duyne's
amendment. The congresswoman's amendment provides us, the
Members of the Small Business Committee here, an opportunity to
answer some important questions. How many bad actors are out
there? How much money was stolen? How much money can we expect
to recover? How can we make sure this never happens again?
We on this Committee have a job, a duty to demand
accountability no matter the party in charge. To all of my
colleagues, the American people are not our piggybank. Instead
of continuing to spend their hard-earned money, they demand we
find that fraudulent, stolen taxpayer money and bring it back
to the American people. I implore everyone on this Committee to
vote for the congresswoman's amendment as well as the
underlying ROI.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on the amendment?
For what purpose does the gentleman----
Mr. DONALDS. Madam Chair, I move to strike the last word.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Donalds, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. DONALDS. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Members, I actually am in support of the Van Duyne
amendment. I think it is critical that we get the necessary
information from SBA, from Treasury with respect to dollars
that have been fraudulently taken from the American people.
Everybody knows the reports. We are well aware of the issues,
but it is time to do the necessary investigations. The
amendment by the gentlelady from Texas will help us get the
necessary information this Committee needs to actually protect
the interests of taxpayers all across the United States.
Secondarily, I think one of the things that we definitely
have to make sure we do as well is make sure that the Treasury
Secretary lives up to her legal obligations. I stress for the
American people who may be watching, her legal obligations to
testify in front of the Small Business Committee. We are now
going on close to 20 months in the 117th Congress and the
Treasury Secretary has not made herself available even though
federal statute requires her to make herself available to this
Committee.
The Members have very serious questions for Secretary
Yellen. Number one on my list, frankly, is where did this
proposal come from in the Treasury Department that would allow
the Treasury Department to look into the private bank
transactions of the American people? When this proposal was
floated a year ago, people across the political spectrum--
Republican, Democrat, Independents--they all flipped out. Like,
they were all like, wait, what? That is insane. Where did this
proposal come from? I would love to hear the Secretary's
comments on that because it is important for the American
people to understand exactly the mindset of people who are
working in the federal bureaucracies, namely in the Treasury
Department, and what their goals and ideas are about future
plans they may or may not have. I think it is important for the
Treasury Secretary who, once again, as I state, is legally
obligated to testify in front of this Committee, to present
herself so she can actually fulfill her duties to the American
people.
Secondarily, and it has probably already been stated but I
would be remiss if I do not restate it, inflation is running
hot in this country at 8.3. I know the president thinks that it
has kind of calmed down, but what the president does not seem
to realize is that when inflation is still running at 8.3 year
over year, the highest in 42 years, that means that prices
across the board are strangling the American consumer and
American small businesses.
I was with several small businesses yesterday who were
visiting the nation's capital. Top of mind for them, the cost
of products needed in order for them to run their businesses.
Secondarily, the cost of diesel fuel and what it takes to
transport the goods that they need either to their storehouses
or for them to transmit it to their customers. Core inflation
is running at 6.3 percent. That is actually up higher on a
month-to-month basis. One of the key reasons for that,
obviously, is electricity prices. I would love to get the
Treasury Secretary's commentary on that as well.
I would also love to hear the Treasury Secretary's comments
on the administration's plans with the strategic petroleum
reserve. It is widely understood that President Biden's
decision to try to ``buy down'' gas prices was to distribute a
million barrels per day from the strategic petroleum preserve.
Now we are getting reports that that is coming to an end
because at some point the reserves run out. What are the
administration's plans to replenish the strategic petroleum
preserves? What are the administration's plans about the
additive needed for diesel fuel which is an additive that
actually comes mostly from Russia? What are the
administration's plans around that?
I think all these questions are questions at the heart of
what small business owners in the United States are facing
every single day. One member of the administration who is
legally obligated to testify in front of the Small Business
Committee has yet to make herself available. I think that my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle should be just as
concerned about her lack of testimony as I am and as my
colleagues on my side of the aisle.
With that, Members, we should be supporting the Van Duyne
amendment. It is a great amendment. We need to do the necessary
oversight so we can advocate for the small business owners that
live in every one of our communities all across this great
land.
With that, I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on the amendment.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. I move to strike the last word.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman, Ranking Member, Mr.
Luetkemeyer, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I would like to thank Ms. Van Duyne for an important and
thoughtful amendment. I could not agree more. I certainly
appreciate the comments of the other Members on our side of the
aisle with regards to this amendment and the other concerns I
have with Secretary Yellen. We need to know what kind of
thought process is going on. What kind of concerns the
administration and, all of the people within the administration
have for the issue that is in front of us. How are they
thinking about the fraud? How are they thinking about this PPP
program? How are they talking to each other about this? Are
they talking at all? Is there any concern at all about fraud or
about the concerns of forgiveness and how the program is going?
We have no idea. We are responsible for all that and yet we
have no idea of what the thought process is because we do not
know from Ms. Yellen because she will not show up.
Fraud is fraud. I think that no matter when it took place
or how, we need an all-hands-on-deck approach to deliver
justice and recoup whatever has been done fraudulently,
whatever has been stolen fraudulently. We keep getting a new
report every week. I think it was, what, the week before last
we had another report with regards to the EIDL program. Another
$1.3 billion that could have gone to foreign entities.
We have a job to do. We have to take that responsibly and
do our job responsibly and hold people accountable. That is
part of being a legislator. In order to do our job properly, we
have to have the cooperation of the administration's officials,
all the way down from the secretary of each cabinet position,
all the way down to the lowest member of each part of those
agencies. We need to be able to talk to those folks and get the
information from them. That is what Ms. Van Duyne has done in
her amendment. I certainly appreciate her advocacy of this.
With that, I thank you and I urge a yes vote.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
I now would like to recognize myself.
We all share the same concerns about fraud in SBA's COVID-
19 relief programs. In fact, earlier this year, the Ranking
Member and I both introduced companion legislation that we all
voted for and which is now public law, extending the statute of
limitations in PPP and COVID EIDL fraud cases. However, while
this amendment includes fraud and COVID EIDL, EIDL advance,
targeted EIDL and RRF, the Committee will continue holding
oversight hearings and working with the IG, PRAC, and DOJ, and
they are working right now to address fraud within SBA COVID
reliefs.
If there is no further discussion, the question is on the
amendment by the gentlelady from Texas.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it.
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Madam Chairman, I request a recorded vote.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentlelady has requested a
recorded vote. Pursuant to Committee Rule 13 and House Rule XI,
further proceedings on the amendment are postponed.
Are there any further amendments to H.Res. 1298?
Mr. MEUSER. Madam Chairwoman, I have an amendment at the
dais.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The clerk will report the amendment.
The CLERK. Amendment to H. Res. 1298 offered by Mr. Meuser
of Pennsylvania.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Without objection, further reading of
the amendment will be dispensed with.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. MEUSER. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
We all recognize that small businesses are the foundation
under which American prosperity rests. Madam Chair, I have some
bad news. There are cracks in this foundation. These cracks are
deepening and widening due to runaway inflation placing extreme
pressure on the most vulnerable, yet the most vital businesses
in our society. Small business owners are among the most
motivated in our communities; yet, despite every trick in the
book and deploying every resource available, small businesses
are no longer succeeding. They are barely surviving.
As Members of the Small Business Committee, we would be
derelict in our duty if we stand idly by watching as the
dominoes fall. In fact, it would be cruel not to act. While we
have limited tools to stem the rising tide of inflation, there
are some levers we can pull to create a less hostile
environment for the most important job creators of our economy.
One of those levers is government regulations. It is a fact
that government regulations have an outside influence on our
free enterprise in America, disproportionately hurting small
businesses. It is a fact that the federal regulatory behemoth
comes at an extreme cost to the American public, hampering
productivity, raising prices, holding back economic
development, pausing job creation, and impeding commerce.
Just one example of the harmful regulations being proposed
by this administration is the SEC's Climate Disclosure Rules.
This rule would implement even more burdens on American small
businesses at a time when they are already struggling to combat
record-high inflation, high energy costs, workforce shortages,
et cetera, et cetera.
What can be done to help small businesses navigate this
maze of regulatory red tape? The first step is knowledge. We
must collect the necessary information so we are all aware of
how small businesses are being held back. This is where my
amendment comes in. When the Department of the Treasury drives
economic policy in this country, policy which deeply affects
small businesses, we must be aware of what actions and
regulatory assistance is being provided by the Treasury to
small business which is what my amendment will do. By voting
yes on this amendment, we would begin repairing the cracks in
our economic foundation and I urge my colleagues to support it.
I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on the amendment?
Ms. YOUNG KIM. Madam Chair?
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentlelady from California, Ms.
Kim, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. YOUNG KIM. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I would like to speak in support and in favor of my
colleague Meuser's amendment. With inflation and prices at a
40-year high, it is imperative that we hear from Secretary
Yellen on how the administration's policies are impacting our
job creators, entrepreneurs, small businesses, and workers. The
Committee also needs to understand why the administration got
the fiscal policy wrong when she said other administration
officials described inflation as transitory.
The current inflation rate is anything but transitory.
Instead, it has been 513 days since Secretary Yellen missed the
deadline to be in front of this Committee. Our small business
owners are demanding answers. My constituents are demanding
answers. I hear this all the time as I travel throughout my
district. The ROI and the amendments offered by my colleagues
Van Duyne, Meuser, and others are some of the few tools that we
have at our disposal to request answers from Members of the
cabinet.
I hope my colleagues on the other side of the aisle join us
to discharge the ROI from this Committee and get a vote on the
House floor. We must get answers from Secretary Yellen because
it is long overdue.
I yield back my time.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentlelady yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on the amendment?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Madam Chair, I move to strike the last
word.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thanks to
Mr. Meuser for his efforts in offering this amendment. The
American economy is dependent upon the success of small
businesses, and right now these businesses are in deep trouble.
Government red tape and overly burdensome regulations choke off
economic growth and suppress job creation.
For example, I am deeply concerned about the SEC's ESG
greenhouse gas proposed rule and the unintended consequences it
will have for small businesses. I am glad to hear the SEC
Chairman is starting to clarify its intention for small
businesses but there are a lot of questions and concerns that
remain. Compound these pressures with out-of-control inflation,
it is no surprise that small businesses are struggling
everywhere. Whatever actions or assistance the Treasury is
taking to assist small businesses with addressing government
regulations, we need to know about. Congress needs answers and
small businesses need relief. The time to act is now, starting
with this amendment.
I think one of the things that concerns me is, and we
talked about this yesterday with the trade representative, and
I have talked about this with Administrator Guzman, are the
Small Business Administrator and her officials contacting and
talking to the administration? Is there any coordination? Is
there any communication of them talking with the administration
and explaining the concerns with regards to inflation, rules
and regulations, taxation? We can say this over and over again,
but if there is no communication, how can the administration
understand the impact of what they are doing to small
businesses which, my goodness sakes, 99 percent of the
businesses in this country are small businesses. If we do not
know the impact of all of this, the SBA is behind and derelict
in its duty. If we do not require these things to be done and
said and provide the oversight, we are derelict in our duty. It
is very important that we pressure the administration of the
Small Business Administration to contact and coordinate with
the administration as a whole and with Congress with regards to
how things are going. This is like driving a car down the road
with the lights off. You are going to wind up in the ditch.
This is extremely important that we have this kind of
oversight. That the coordination between these agencies is
there. Mr. Meuser's amendment is helping us to find how these
regulations are doing, the impact of those, who is
communicating doing what, is there communication at all?
With that, Madam Chair, I certainly support the amendment
and urge my colleagues to do the same. I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Now I recognize myself briefly.
When it comes to small businesses, federal regulations
provide clear rules of the road and level the playing field.
The bottom line is that big corporations, not small businesses,
benefit from the rollback of regulations. The SBA's Office of
Advocacy works with federal agencies to produce smart, well-
crafted regulation and smart, well-crafted rules have the
potential to unleash innovation and provide critical health and
safety and environmental protections.
Finally, this amendment has nothing to do with PPP and will
most likely destroy the resolutions privilege.
If there is no further discussion, the question is on the
amendment by the gentleman from Pennsylvania.
Seeing none, the question is now----
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the noes have it.
The amendment is not agreed to.
Mr. MEUSER. Madam Chair, I ask for a recorded vote.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. A recorded vote has been requested
and pursuant to the House rule it will be postponed.
Does anyone seek recognition to offer an amendment?
Mr. WILLIAMS. Madam Chair, I have an amendment at the dais.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The clerk will report the amendment.
The CLERK. Amendment to H. Res. 1298 offered by Mr.
Williams----
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Without objection, further reading of
the amendment will be dispensed with.
The gentleman from Texas is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I offer this amendment on behalf of the American people.
Let's be clear. Things are getting worse, not better.
Runaway inflation is laying seize to this nation and shipping
containers are piled up on docks, and ships remain idle
offshore. Massive worker shortages are worsening this country's
already fragile fiscal situation, and the Labor Department
reported an enormous 8.3 percent leap in consumer prices over
the past year. I am a business owner and I can tell you that
that is true and it is right with us as we speak.
Core inflation prices jumped .6 percent since July and even
the Department of Defense acknowledges this moment as a
critical juncture, concerned that rising inflation will drive
small businesses out of the defense industrial base, leaving
our nation vulnerable to attack. For months, we have been
living in a world where Americans were forced to make difficult
and sometimes impossible choices as every part of their daily
lives becomes increasingly expensive.
Despite this, their government, specifically Secretary
Yellen, who we have heard a lot about today, had the audacity
to describe this period as transitory. A new word that just
kind of popped up. I have news for her and news for you. I am a
lifetime small business owner and it is not. It is here and it
is getting worse.
The Department of Treasury is charged with implementing
economic and fiscal policy in this country. As such, it was
tasked with collaborating with the SBA on the Paycheck
Protection Program, a program intended to assist small
businesses during a period of intense economic distress caused
by poor state and local government policies enacted during the
coronavirus pandemic. Now, while the economic pain of
government forced closures had immediate negative impacts on
small business, we must not be so blind as to ignore or
minimize as Secretary Yellen did and has. This slow bleed to
slow businesses is caused by rising inflation, labor shortages,
and disruptions to the supply chain, not to mention talked
about tax increases.
Therefore I urge you, Madam Chair and my colleagues, to
support this amendment. My amendment requires the Department of
Treasury to report to Congress the actions taken and
communications made with the Small Business Administration to
assist small businesses in response to these economic
headwinds. While the pandemic may have been the catalyst to
this country's current economic misfortune, we continue to see
the effects that bad government policy has on small businesses.
We must be aware of what our government is doing for small
businesses, especially in these challenging times because small
businesses are basically 99 percent of what we have in our
country.
Again, I urge your support of my colleagues and I yield my
time back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized?
Mr. DONALDS. Madam Chair?
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. For what purpose does the gentleman
seek recognition?
Mr. DONALDS. Madam Chair, I move to strike the last word.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman from Florida is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. DONALDS. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Members, I think being in support of the Williams amendment
is critical. One of the key things we obviously know is that
the SBA does have communications with business owners
throughout the United States. I am quite sure that business
owners, especially during the last couple of years have been
commenting to SBA about some of the headwinds they are facing.
One of the key ones has been labor shortages throughout the
United States. If you look at productivity, the productivity
measure is actually down for 2 consecutive quarters. If
productivity is down, what are the real implications of labor
markets on small businesses owners throughout the United
States? What has been the communication between small
businesses owners and the SBA about whether it is specific
issues in their company or in their industry or with government
regulations and/or government policies that are putting more
strain on labor markets for small business owners? I think it
is timely information that this Committee needs to help advise
SBA, and in some respects bring light to some of the policy
challenges, economic challenges that are existing, and whether
the current administration, in my opinion it is the current
administration, but whether it is the current administration,
it is adding to the difficulty of small business owners
specifically in the case of labor shortages. We all know that
there were severe labor shortages last year. We are also very
clear about why there were labor shortages last year. And just
because unemployment appears to be low at 3, 4 points, whatever
it is right now, its low U-6 unemployment rate, the labor
shortage issues still exist. Companies are still struggling in
hiring employees to work in their small business and wage rates
have gone up precipitously. They have gone up substantially for
a small business owner. All that creates pressure. I am quite
sure there have been communications with the SBA on this. This
Committee needs to be privy to those conversations and that is
why we should be in support of the Williams amendment. I yield
back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on the amendment?
Ms. TENNEY. Madam Chair? Madam Chair?
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Tenney.
Ms. TENNEY. Yes. I move to strike the last word.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. TENNEY. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I, too, support the Williams amendment and I am also a
fellow small business owner, although maybe we would be
considered micro since we only have 70 employees.
I wanted to just talk about the core responsibility of
Congress to provide oversight over the president and the
federal bureaucracy. It is our duty on behalf of the American
people to ensure they faithfully execute our laws and the
responsibilities to the public. However, throughout the past 18
months, this administration has consistently acted to block and
avoid our questions. We simply cannot get answers and documents
requested.
Almost 2 years ago, the Small Business Administration was
given unprecedented responsibility to help our small businesses
respond to and survive the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In return, the SBA and the Treasury, under Janet Yellen, have
demonstrated a shocking lack of responsiveness to the concerns
and questions from congressional offices and small businesses.
In addition, to this day, many of these small businesses
continue to suffer in the wake of the pandemic with never-
ending arbitrary rules, the nationwide supply chain breakdown,
record high energy prices, and decades high inflation has not
gone away even though it might appear to be transitory and
maybe here to stay. We do not know from Secretary Yellen.
However, the SBA has yet to respond with any policies to
effectively tackle these important issues head on. While we are
here today to discuss Secretary Yellen's refusal for well over
a year to follow a congressional mandate and appear before this
Committee to discuss the Treasury Department's work on the
Paycheck Protection Program, many of us have had similar
difficulties with other members of the administration.
Over the past year, the SBA has consistently stonewalled me
and my office as we have requested and tried to get simple
answers as to why they provided forgiveness for 38 individual
Paycheck Protection Program loans totaling approximately $67
million in taxpayer money to affiliates of Planned Parenthood
Federation of America. When the Paycheck Protection Plan or
Program was created by Congress in the CARES Act and then
reauthorized in December of 2020 in the Omnibus bill, Congress
applied affiliation rules prohibiting the SBA from issuing and
forgiving PPP loans to entities with more than 500 employees
across their affiliates, and it only excluded hotels and
restaurants. I assert and argue that Planned Parenthood is
neither a hotel nor a restaurant.
Planned Parenthood, with over 16,000, not 500 or less,
employees nationwide is the nation's largest abortion provider
and falls well above the 500 employee threshold for PPP
eligibility. During Secretary Guzman's confirmation hearing in
the Senate, she promised to investigate why the SBA wrongly
approved PPP loans for Planned Parenthood affiliates. However,
since that hearing, the SBA went on to confirm an additional
six PPP loans, including $10 million for Planned Parenthood of
Greater New York in my home state. Therefore, in front of this
Committee last November, I asked Secretary Guzman if she
planned on illegally forgiving these PPP loans and if she
planned on asking Planned Parenthood to return the money. She
refused to answer. Again, stonewalling us. Then 6 months later,
Secretary Guzman's office finally responded to my questions for
the record saying that the SBA had forgiven 35 Planned
Parenthood SBA loans illegally. During the April hearing, I
proceeded to ask her why the SBA thought they were allowed to
award and forgive these loans to Planned Parenthood. She again
refused to provide any answer to my office or to me personally
during that Committee hearing. Then in May of this year,
Patrick Kelley, the Associate Director of the SBA Office of
Capital, came in front of this Committee. I asked him the same
question as Secretary Guzman. He refused to provide any answer
on why Planned Parenthood was eligible for these loans.
Their behavior is completely unacceptable. Our federal
bureaucracy must be responsible for its actions. We cannot
tolerate arbitrary decision making and this flagrant violation
of the law. I think it is time we passed this common sense
Resolution of Inquiry and finally get some straight answers
from the administration and the Department of Treasury and have
Secretary Yellen perform her constitutional duty in appearing
before this Committee. This is our job. This is our job to
provide oversight which is why I support the Williams
amendment, and I urge all of my colleagues to do the same. We
are here to help the American people and help our small
business community as many of us are small business owners, not
to get into a partisan game. This is an issue that is not
partisan. She is supposed to appear before the Committee and we
need to have answers on these issues in applying the law that
we have passed in this House.
With that, I yield back my time. Thank you.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentlelady yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on the amendment?
Mr. MFUME. Madam Chair?
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman from Maryland.
Mr. MFUME. Madam Chair, I move to strike the last word.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. MFUME. I am speaking against this particular amendment
and the one previous, Madam Chair, simply because as well
intentioned as they may be, it strikes me that the date range
being covered by both of these is from January 21, 2021, until
the present, which was the day that a new administration took
over. Since these are pandemic related, I would have hoped that
we would be looking at trying to get information that covers
the width and the breadth of the pandemic which goes back a
year before that to March of 2020. No matter how well
intentioned, it just strikes me as being more partisan than it
could or should be. If we are really interested in trying to
figure out the impact on small businesses during the pandemic
in particular and also the fraud that may have been involved,
we would want to cover a broader period of time. I will not be
voting for either. I will vote for the Van Duyne amendment. I
think it is a good amendment.
I do want to also say, Madam Chair, that I appreciate your
patience with Ms. Yellen. It is a patience we have all tried to
display, but it is rather frustrating that a Member who has a
constitutional and policy directive to come before this
Committee refuses to do so. I do not understand that and I know
how it is frustrating you. I know that it is not your fault but
at some point in time, Ms. Yellen is either going to have to
get her driver or an Uber or something to get up to Capitol
Hill and come before this Committee because I have done a lot
trying to contain myself over these last 18 months about her
refusal to do so.
I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on the amendment?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Move to strike the last word.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman from Missouri is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I thank Mr.
Williams for offering this common sense amendment.
As Mr. Williams so clearly stated, small businesses are
being crushed under the weight of immense economic pressure.
The Paycheck Protection Program may have been the government's
first immediate response to provide economic relief for this
country's struggling small businesses, but their troubles are
far from over. Consequences of poor government policies have
created an untenable economic situation for the hardest working
and most vulnerable businesses in our country. Just the latest
polling data from the Job Creators Network, 57 percent think we
are in a recession; 65 percent now have crime as one of the
most important issues that they are dealing with.
Thank you to Mr. Stauber who held a roundtable last week on
this very issue. There is one issue after another that is
troubling and overwhelming our small businesses. The testimony
that was at this small business roundtable was chilling to say
the least from how some small businesses are having to change
their business models and the things they have to do just to be
able to open their doors and to accommodate their customers. It
is unbelievable.
The consequences of these poor government policies have
created a difficult situation for these small businesses. We
must have a full picture of what our government is doing to
assist these critical businesses which is what Mr. Williams's
amendment is trying to do.
I also want to comment on Mr. Mfume's comments. I thank him
for those. We are frustrated, too. This is why we are here this
morning with Secretary Yellen. I serve on another Committee, on
Financial Services, and Secretary Yellen seems to have the time
to show up on that Committee. She has been there twice in the
last year. And yet she refuses to do her statutory duty to show
up here. It is mind blowing to see how she thumbs her nose at
this Committee. I know that the Chairwoman has done her best to
try and get Ms. Yellen here and I appreciate her efforts. This
is not a slap at her, but this has got to stop. This has got to
be a time when we come together and get the information we need
to do our job. I think Mr. Williams's amendment is a step in
that direction and so I fully support his amendment. I urge my
colleagues to do the same.
With that, I want to yield to Mr. Williams for a few more
comments.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Well, I will be brief but let me just remind
everybody that the Biden administration owns inflation. It has
nothing to do with dates. This administration owns inflation.
We are seeing nothing happen. Small business is paying for the
brunt of it. Quite frankly, if you cannot vote for this
amendment, how can you say you support small business and main
street America? It is hard for me to believe that. I am a small
business owner employing hundreds of people. I see what is
happening firsthand since the Biden administration put a full
frontal assault on small business. So I just say we need to
pass this amendment. I yield my time back.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
I would now like to recognize myself.
I understand the challenges small business are facing with
the ongoing economic issues. In fact, I, along with my
Democratic colleagues and President Biden, worked together to
pass the Inflation Reduction Act last month which will build an
economy that works for small businesses. By the way, none of
the Members of the Republican party voted for it. It makes a
much needed investment to lower energy and healthcare costs,
and in turn creating opportunities for entrepreneurs to launch
and grow their small businesses. Moreover, the Inflation
Reduction Act is fully paid for and will drive deficit
reduction over the next decade. You are talking about reducing
inflation? This is a bill that does that. The Biden-Harris
administration projects more than $1.5 trillion in deficit
reduction this year after reducing the deficit by more than
$350 billion last year. This, in turn, will ease inflationary
pressure.
However, this amendment does nothing to address issues
facing small businesses. It is a ``gotcha'' amendment at best.
This is not a good faith effort to boost the Committee's
oversight capabilities on PPP. This is a minority resolution.
If they want to approve an amendment that will destroy their
resolutions privilege, I have no issues with that.
If there is no further discussion, the question is on the
amendment by the gentleman from Texas.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the noes have it.
The amendment is not agreed to.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Madam Chair, I request a recorded vote.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman has requested a
recorded vote. Pursuant to Committee Rule 13 and House Rule XI,
further proceedings on the amendment are postponed.
Does anyone else seek recognition to offer an amendment?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Madam Chair, I have an amendment at the
dais that needs to be distributed.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The Committee shall stand in recess
to enable Committee staff to copy and distribute amendments.
Committee staff, please distribute the amendment. I request the
Members stay around as the markup will resume shortly.
[Recess]
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The Committee will come back to
order.
The clerk will report the amendment.
The CLERK. Amendment to H. Res. 1298----
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Without objection, further reading of
the amendment will be dispensed with.
The Ranking Member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Madam Chair.
This amendment is similar to the rest of them in that we
are looking to get information from Treasury with regards to
their concerns about the veterans and the impact that the Small
Business Administration has on the various programs, as well as
the PPP program. This is an extremely important group of folks.
There are separate programs already in the SBA for these folks.
Is the Treasury Department getting advice from anybody? Is SBA
getting advice from anybody with regards to veterans?
We had a small business roundtable with veterans, just
specifically for veterans last fall, as well as a showcase to
showcase the importance of veterans and how they are such an
important part of our small business community and
entrepreneurs. They are an important group that we need to
really consider. As I mentioned, the SBA already has separate
programs for them.
You know, Treasury is locked together at the hip. I know
there have been some comments made that they are only with PPP,
but they are not. They are locked at the hip with SBA from the
standpoint that anything that goes on in the economy, they have
a responsibility to provide oversight, and I am sure in an
advisory capacity, the president as well. We need to know what
they are talking about and what kind of concerns they have.
When we have regulations that are out of control, this is a
huge impact and can impact veterans. I got stopped on the
street this morning of all things by an individual who was
concerned about some regulations that are impacting their
industry. It was not veteran concerns but it is just another
example of the out of control rules and regulations agenda of
this administration that I think we need to have some clarity
on. We need to have some oversight over, and we need to expose
what is going on.
I cannot let go of the comment by the Chairman with regards
to the Inflation Expansion Act. This bill that no Republicans
voted for, did nothing to stop inflation. CBO says it does
nothing to stop inflation, that it probably increases
inflation. To say that it reduces debt when you have $350
billion of the $740 billion paid for is like saying you are
going to raise interest rates 10 percent but, oh, by the way,
we are going to reduce it 1 down to 9 and you are actually
saving 1 percent on interest or whatever, that is crazy. That
is backwards thinking. This bill expanded the national debt by
over $400 billion and the Wharton School of Business says it
could cost up to a trillion dollars, which would be another
$250+ billion worth of debt.
The thought process of the majority on inflation and rules
and regulations is mindboggling. This is why we are here this
morning, to voice our concerns over the various issues that the
Treasury Department has oversight over and input into. We need
to understand what the thought process is with the
administration and the various things that they are having
oversight over. We need to see that communication. What are
they saying? Are they truly concerned about it or is it paying
lip service to it? Right now if you view their actions rather
than their words, they do not care about small businesses. This
Committee cares about small businesses. That is our job, and
our job is to provide oversight to make sure they do care about
small businesses.
Madam Chair, with that I will close. I ask for support of
the amendment and I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on the amendment?
Mr. FLOOD. I do, Madam Chair.
I would move to strike the last word.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. FLOOD. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I would like to thank the Ranking Member for bringing this
amendment forward.
Veterans and the access of veterans that they have to
capital is important to me. I would like to have the
opportunity to visit in this setting with Secretary Yellen to
ask questions about what the Department of Treasury is doing to
make sure that these programs that we fund as a federal
government are putting capital in the hands of veterans.
In my district, I am very proud to be the host district for
Offutt Air Force Base, one of our nation's leading strategic
command centers for not only the nuclear triad but the 55th
Wing of the U.S. Air Force. We have, because of that, a lot of
airmen and women that work in Bellevue, Nebraska, in Sarpy
County, Nebraska. When they are done with their service, they
might want the opportunity of the American dream by starting a
business. Too often than not, some of these programs are
difficult to access. Veterans often do not know where to go.
These are men and women who have served their country at home
and abroad. They have been on missions that most of us would
never want to even talk about. When they complete their
service, they look at the opportunities that they have and they
want to locate where their kids are going to school and the
education that the kids receive in Bellevue, Nebraska is
stellar. That is why we see so many airmen deciding to stay in
Sarpy County, Nebraska, and live in eastern Nebraska.
I want to specifically talk about an opportunity for the
Small Business Administration and veterans. I would like to
share this opportunity with Secretary Yellen, and I would like
to get her opinion on what the SBA can do specifically to make
sure that this capital gets in the hands of veterans.
Mayor Rusty Hike in Bellevue, Nebraska, has led the way on
redeveloping what they call Old Town Bellevue. This is where
the first settlers following Lewis and Clark made their way
across the Missouri River, Iowa to Nebraska, and settled what
became Fort Crook as a U.S. Army Base. This is where Standing
Bear had his trial, where the Federal District Court declared
that ``I am a man.'' It was historically significant. Mayor
Hike is in the process of revitalizing Old Town by bringing
multiuse real estate opportunities together and he wants to see
small business grow and thrive. That means he needs veterans.
There are over 10,000 active servicemembers that are on the
Offutt Air Force Base. Think about how many veterans we have
just in this one county in eastern Nebraska, men and women that
have served their country and should have the opportunity to
take advantage of a small business administration program but
yet often these veterans are unaware of the program. They often
do not have the skills necessary to put a business plan
together. They would benefit from the wraparound services that
are available to veterans. With the Ranking Member's amendment
today, it gives us an opportunity to talk about a priority, I
think, for this Committee. Talk about a priority that we should
be talking to Secretary Yellen about to find out what, in fact,
is the plan for veteran-owned businesses and to increase
opportunities for our veterans. We know what happens when we do
not provide opportunities to veterans and we do not recognize
their service. Oftentimes, as we know, given some of the things
that they have seen, veterans really struggle later in life. I
worked with a lot of veterans that deal with PTSD that have
seen things and done things in service to our country that
makes it difficult sometimes just to manage daily life. These
are the people that also are entrepreneurs and business people.
With the access to capital and the Small Business
Administration or the wraparound services, we need to know as a
Committee where are we going with veteran-owned businesses?
What are the priorities? How do we help places like Old Town
Bellevue revitalize itself in such a historic spot and build on
Mayor Rusty Hike's vision?
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on the amendment?
Mr. WILLIAMS. Move to strike the last word.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman from Texas is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Well, I do not need 5 minutes for this but I
listen to all this conversation and it is really hard for me to
understand why we just cannot help our veterans for crying out
loud. How hard can this be? How is this partisan?
I represent Fort Hood, the largest military base in
America. Probably this morning we got 40,000 young men and
women down there that are being trained to fight for freedom
and liberty but yet the other side just talks about free stuff
all the time. Everything is free. Tuition now is free. You do
not have to pay your apartment. Forbearance. Illegals get free
stuff. It is just unbelievable. We need to cut out the free
stuff and we need to help our veterans. We need to help our
veterans start a business, create a business. They are trained.
They are ready. This amendment does that. But again, how can
you be against our veterans? How can that be? And then you call
yourself a patriot? It is hard for me to believe.
I yield my time back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Let me----
Madam?
Yes.
Mr. MFUME. Madam Chair? I move to strike the last word.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman is recognized for 5
minutes. Will you yield for 2 seconds?
Mr. MFUME. Yes, whatever you would like.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. It is offensive to say that Democrats
do not care about veterans. My uncle fought in the Korean War.
Puerto Rico, Puerto Ricans in the United States have one of the
highest participation in the Armed Services. To say that
Democrats do not care for veterans--no, that is not the issue
here. The issue is this is not germane to the resolution. It is
just that simple.
I yield back. Thank you for yielding.
Mr. MFUME. Absolutely, Madam Chair.
I just find it almost amusing that we are told that we are
against veterans before the vote has even taken place on the
amendment that we just got. Now, unless somebody is
clairvoyant, I do not know how you make that assumption. If you
are basing it on past history, you cannot just assume that
everybody on this Committee does not care about or work with
veterans.
I would call the gentleman's attention back to the National
Defense Authorization Act with an amendment from myself and was
co-lead by Representative Van Duyne to give the SBA more time
in transferring certification processes regarding disabled
service veterans and their minority-owned or small businesses
that they owned. I think the last thing that I wanted this to
degenerate into has been what it has been degenerated into, I
guess. Again, my reservation here is that this calls for a
period of time for an examination that starts January 21, 2021,
the day that the current president got sworn in and not
covering the full pandemic, or even time before that because
this has been an issue that has been affecting veterans for a
long time.
In my district in Baltimore, I work very closely with the
Maryland Center for Vets. We work with veterans around the
state on a number of issues, small business notwithstanding,
but also education and other things. It is a bit misleading to
suggest that before a vote is taken people are automatically
predisposed against veterans when that has not been the case. I
plan on now voting against what I probably had some idea that I
might vote for which is this amendment. I just do not like the
way it is being characterized and the way that Members of this
side of the aisle are being painted.
I do not know if I have got any time left, Madam Chair, but
I yield it back to you.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on the amendment?
Mr. PHILLIPS. Madam Chair, I move to strike the last word.
Mr. Phillips is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. PHILLIPS. I want to associate myself with your remarks
and also my colleague from Maryland. I am disgusted by that
tone. As someone who employs veterans and has a Gold Star son,
I take grave offense to anybody who would say we Democrats do
not support veterans. The shame is not on us. The shame is on
anybody who might say that. I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on the amendment?
Mr. DONALDS. Madam Chair, the gentleman from Florida.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman from Florida is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. DONALDS. I move to strike the last word, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the time.
Briefly, Members, listen, the amendment in front of us is a
good amendment. I think that I would actually encourage all of
the Members to take a look at the words in front of us and to
have the other conversations associated with commentary when
the Committee is adjourned. At the core of what we are trying
to do here is make sure that veterans are getting all the
assistance that they need and getting the necessary information
so that this Committee can do their work on behalf of men and
women who have served our country regardless of their politics.
I think what we should get focused back on is what is in front
of us right now. We can have the other conversations later,
because the amendment brought by Ranking Member Luetkemeyer is
a quality amendment that this Committee should take up.
With that, I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentlemen yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on the amendment?
The gentlelady from Pennsylvania, Ms. Houlahan, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
The gentlelady is muted. You need to unmute.
I guess we are having difficulties.
Ms. Houlahan, can you speak louder, please?
We are going to take a brief recess until we address these
technical difficulties.
[Recess]
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The Committee will come back to
order.
The gentlelady from Pennsylvania is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. HOULAHAN. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I have now been in Congress for the better part of 3-1/2
years and I have worked my darndest to remain civil and decent
because I want to always assume the best of everyone across the
aisle and within my own party. I take deep offense to the
statement of the gentleman who would ever imply that I or my
colleagues are not patriots. In fact, I am myself a veteran, my
father a veteran, my grandfather a veteran, my brother a
veteran, many of my cousins are veterans. I am also a small
business person and have been an entrepreneur for a better part
of my life before joining Congress. For the better part of 3-1/
2 years I have listened to this rhetoric coming from many of my
colleagues and I just cannot abide by it any longer. While I
appreciate that this is not the conversation that I would like
to be having, this is the conversation that I am forced to be
having. I would like very much so to ask for the apology from
the gentleman who has somehow talked to me and my colleagues
about not being patriots and about not understanding the plight
of the veteran. You have no idea, sir, how I would have voted
on this particular amendment. It was literally just dropped a
few minutes ago.
With that, I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentlelady yields back.
Do other Members wish to be recognized on this amendment?
If there is no further discussion, the question is on the
amendment by the gentleman from Missouri.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the noes have it. The
amendment is not agreed to.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Madam Chair, I request a recorded vote.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman has requested a
recorded vote. Pursuant to Committee Rule 13 and House Rule XI,
further proceedings on the amendment are postponed.
Does anyone else seek recognition to offer an amendment?
H.R. 8844
Seeing none, we will now consider H.R. 8844, the STEP
Improvement Act of 2022 introduced by Mr. Evans and cosponsored
by Ms. Young Kim, Ranking Member of the Innovation,
Entrepreneurship, and Workforce Development Subcommittee, Ms.
Newman and Mr. Flood.
This legislation would reauthorize STEP for 4 fiscal years
and modernize the program to improve communication,
accountability, and transparency.
I would now like to recognize the gentlelady from
California, Ms. Kim, for an opening statement.
I would now like to recognize the gentlelady, Ms. Newman,
for an opening statement.
Ms. NEWMAN. Thank you, Madam Chair. Good morning to
everyone.
Before I start I would like to identify that I am entering
some letters of support for this piece of legislation with my
thanks.
Today I am truly proud to stand with my colleagues to
introduce this bipartisan bill, the STEP Improvement Act of
2022. The provisions included in this new bill will give small
businesses the support that they absolutely need both to become
exporters and expand the capital of current exporter
businesses.
Businesses less than a year old are vulnerable. All of the
great small business people in this room understand that the
first year is really tough, and so this is a great opportunity
for them to participate. This assistance will be critical to
their success. The bill also standardizes the application
process and increases spending flexibility for grant
recipients. We want to make it as easy as possible for small
businesses to receive the assistance they need to succeed and
thrive.
As we move our economy out of the worst of the pandemic, we
must lend as much support as possible to small businesses. I
really support this bill. Small businesses are the absolute
backbone of our country and our economy and we must invest in
their success. I urge all of my colleagues to support this
legislation. Thank you and I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentlelady yields back.
Now I would like to recognize the gentleman from Nebraska,
Mr. Flood, who is a cosponsor of this bill, for an opening
statement.
Mr. FLOOD. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I am proud to co-lead H.R. 8844 with my colleagues,
Congressman Evans, Congresswoman Newman, and Congresswoman Kim.
I also want to thank the Chairwoman and the Ranking Member
Luetkemeyer for having this markup today.
H.R. 8844 reauthorizes the State Trade and Export Program
for 4 fiscal years. Also known as STEP, this provides financial
awards to states to assist small businesses with export
development.
In order to better understand the role of STEP, let's take
a look at how it has affected Nebraska over the last few years.
Since its inception, STEP has connected Nebraska businesses
with markets in Mexico, Canada, United Kingdom, Brazil, Chile,
India, Columbia, Finland, Argentina, Japan, and countless other
countries across the globe. To ensure American and Nebraskan
companies remain competitive in this modern global age, we need
to have an international reach for our products and services.
One business that has benefitted from STEP is Paraclipse
Systems, LLC, based in Columbus, Nebraska. This business
manufactures nonintrusive fly control products that you install
in your home as in flies, the insect. Paraclipse sells fixtures
that are attached to a wall. Inside the fixture is a light and
glue paper. The flies are attracted to the light and get stuck
on the glue paper. Thus, helping remove flies from your home.
With a $10,000 investment, this company was able to expand its
sales and create 14 jobs. That is the power of this program,
creating jobs and expanding the reach of American businesses.
Nebraskans are entrepreneurial and STEP can connect our
talented businesswomen and men with the resources that can help
grow their business into big and successful enterprises that
will employ more people. I am pleased to help co-lead this
legislation and urge my colleagues to support the bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The gentleman yields back.
Are there any other Members who wish to be recognized for a
statement on H.R. 8844?
The Ranking Member is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I want to thank the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Congressman Evans, as well as Representatives Newman, Kim, and
Flood for working on this legislation. From computer and
technology parts in California, to agricultural commodities in
Nebraska, Congresswoman Kim and Congressman Flood know the
importance of advocating for our small exporters on the global
stage. This Congress, the Committee has heard from the
Associative Administrator of the SBA Office of International
Trade and small business stakeholders on the State Trade
Expansion Program. This important program partners with states
and territories to increase the number of small businesses that
export, increase the value of those exports, and increase new
trade opportunities. States utilize STEP awards to support
small businesses by facilitating foreign trade missions and
tradeshow exhibits, or to provide consulting, marketing, and
website services. My home state of Missouri has participated in
the STEP program since its inception and over $2.5 million has
been distributed to hundreds of Missouri businesses to support
their export ventures.
This legislation will reauthorize STEP for 4 fiscal years
from fiscal year 2023 to fiscal year 2026 so small businesses
can continue to utilize the program's export promotion
services. Legislation will also improve the implementation of
the program by creating a standardized application process. To
increase accountability, the legislation requires the Associate
Administrator to conduct an annual survey of each state grantee
to solicit feedback and determine the best practices.
Further, H.R. 8844 requires SBA to publish an annual report
on the program and analysis of the performance metrics of the
program, including whether performance goals have been met. In
a growing global economy, we must support our small businesses
in their export efforts.
I urge my colleagues to support H.R. 8844 and I yield back
the balance of my time.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
I will recognize myself briefly.
I would like to commend Representatives Evans, Kim, Newman,
and Flood on their bipartisan work on this bill. Reauthorizing
this program will enable more small businesses to compete in
the global marketplace. STEP was created to help small
businesses navigate the complexities of exporting their goods
and services abroad and has become an invaluable tool for
thousands of small businesses.
In fiscal year 2021, the SBA assisted more than 3,400 small
businesses and supported more than $832 million in export sales
from STEP. The Committee held two hearings on STEP during this
Congress and learned they have been a vital resource for small
businesses throughout the pandemic. The additional flexibility
granted to small businesses allowed them the utilize funding in
creative ways to expand their footholds in international
marketplaces. The Committee heard from small firms that when
physical travel was shutdown, they were able to utilize STEP
funds for digital marketing, e-commerce, and website
translation services to help make their businesses shine on the
global stage. In addition, states used STEP funding to host
virtual trainings on export compliance and worked with foreign
consultants to support and represent U.S. companies overseas.
H.R. 8844 will reauthorize the program for 4 fiscal years,
ensuring it remains a pivotal tool for small businesses looking
to export. It will also improve STEP by creating a standardized
application process for states, increasing grant spending
flexibility, improving communication between the SBA and
participating states, and collecting more robust performance
metrics.
Lastly, H.R. 8844 will increase access to STEP by allowing
entrepreneurs with less than a year in business to take
advantage of the opportunities the program presents. This would
allow more small businesses to get to market faster and sell
their goods and services abroad. I applaud the work of
Representatives Evans, Young Kim, Newman, and Flood, and I urge
a vote yes.
If there is no further discussion, the Committee will move
on to consideration of H.R. 8844.
The clerk will report the bill.
The CLERK. H.R. 8844----
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Without objection, H.R. 8844 is
considered as read and open for amendment at any point.
Does anyone seek recognition to offer an amendment?
Seeing none, the question is now on H.R. 8844.
All in favor, say aye.
All opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it and H.R. 8844
is agreed to.
The question now occurs on reporting H.R. 8844 favorably to
the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it and H.R. 8844
is reported to the House.
Without objection, Committee staff is authorized to correct
punctuation and make other necessary technical corrections and
conforming changes.
Without objection, Members have 2 business days to file
additional supplemental, dissenting, and minority views.
At this time, the Committee stands in recess subject to the
call of the Chair.
[Recess]
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The Committee will come to order.
The Committee will now resume consideration of the
amendments on which roll call votes were requested and
postponed. There are four postponed recorded votes.
The question now occurs on Van Duyne 1v2. The clerk will
please call the roll.
The CLERK. Ms. Velazquez?
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. No.
The CLERK. Ms. Velazquez votes no.
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. No.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes no.
Mr. Crow?
Mr. CROW. Yes.
The CLERK. Mr. Crow votes yes.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Davids votes yes.
The CLERK. Sorry, could you repeat that, please?
Ms. DAVIDS. Sorry. Davids votes yes.
The CLERK. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. Mfume?
[No response.]
Mr. Phillips?
Mr. PHILLIPS. I am sorry; is this the Van Duyne amendment?
The CLERK. Correct.
Mr. PHILLIPS. Phillips votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Phillips votes aye.
Ms. Newman?
Ms. Newman?
[No response.]
Ms. Bourdeaux?
Ms. BOURDEAUX. Bourdeaux votes aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Bourdeaux votes aye.
Mr. Carter?
Mr. Carter?
[No response.]
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. No.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes no.
Mr. Evans?
Mr. EVANS. No.
The CLERK. Mr. Evans votes no.
Ms. Houlahan?
Ms. Houlahan?
Ms. HOULAHAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Houlahan votes aye.
Mr. Kim?
Mr. ANDY KIM. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Kim votes aye.
Ms. Craig?
Ms. CRAIG. Ms. Craig from Minnesota votes aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Craig from Minnesota votes aye.
Mr. Peters?
Mr. PETERS. Peters votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Peters votes aye.
Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Williams?
Mr. WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Williams votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
Mr. STAUBER. Stauber votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Meuser votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Tenney?
Ms. TENNEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Tenney votes aye.
Mr. Garbarino?
Mr. Garbarino?
[No response.]
Ms. Young Kim?
Ms. YOUNG KIM. Kim votes aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Young Kim votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Mr. Donalds?
Mr. Donalds?
[No response.]
Mr. Fitzgerald? Ms. Salazar?
Mr. Fitzgerald?
Mr. FITZGERALD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Fitzgerald votes aye.
Mr. Flood?
Mr. FLOOD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Flood votes aye.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Are there any other Members that wish
to vote?
The clerk will report the tally.
The CLERK. On this vote there were 17 ayes and 4 noes.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The amendment is agreed to.
The question now occurs on Meuser 1v2. This amendment
previously failed by voice vote.
The clerk will please call the roll.
The CLERK. Ms. Velazquez?
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. No.
The CLERK. Ms. Velazquez votes no.
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Yes.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Crow?
Mr. CROW. No.
The CLERK. Mr. Crow votes no.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Davids votes no.
The CLERK. Ms. Davids votes no.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. Mfume?
[No response.]
Mr. Phillips?
Mr. PHILLIPS. Phillips votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Phillips votes aye.
Ms. Newman?
Ms. Newman?
[No response.]
Ms. Bourdeaux?
Ms. BOURDEAUX. Bourdeaux votes no.
The CLERK. Ms. Bourdeaux votes no.
Mr. Carter?
Mr. Carter?
[No response.]
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. No.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes no.
Mr. Evans?
Mr. EVANS. No.
The CLERK. Mr. Evans votes no.
Ms. Houlahan?
Ms. HOULAHAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Houlahan votes aye.
Mr. Kim?
Mr. ANDY KIM. No.
The CLERK. Mr. Kim votes no.
Ms. Craig?
Ms. CRAIG. Ms. Craig of Minnesota votes aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Craig of Minnesota votes aye.
Mr. Peters?
Mr. Peters?
Mr. PETERS. Peters votes no.
The CLERK. Mr. Peters votes no.
Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Yes. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Williams?
Mr. WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Williams votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
Mr. STAUBER. Stauber votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Tenney?
Ms. TENNEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Tenney votes aye.
Mr. Garbarino?
Mr. Garbarino?
[No response.]
Ms. Young Kim?
Ms. Young Kim?
[No response.]
Ms. Van Duyne?
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Mr. Donalds?
Mr. Donalds?
[No response.]
Ms. Salazar?
Ms. Salazar?
[No response.]
Mr. Fitzgerald?
Mr. FITZGERALD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Fitzgerald votes aye.
Mr. Flood?
Mr. FLOOD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Flood votes aye.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Are there any other Members that wish
to vote?
The clerk will report the tally.
The CLERK. On this vote there were 12 ayes and 8 noes.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The amendment is agreed to.
The question now occurs on Williams 1v2. This amendment
previously failed by voice vote.
The clerk will please call the roll.
The CLERK. Ms. Velazquez?
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. No.
The CLERK. Ms. Velazquez votes no.
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. No.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes no.
Mr. Crow?
Mr. CROW. No.
The CLERK. Mr. Crow votes no.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Davids votes no.
The CLERK. Ms. Davids votes no.
Mr. Mfume?
[No response.]
Mr. Phillips?
Mr. PHILLIPS. No.
The CLERK. Mr. Phillips votes no.
Ms. Newman?
[No response.]
Ms. Bourdeaux?
Ms. BOURDEAUX. Bourdeaux votes no.
The CLERK. Ms. Bourdeaux votes no.
Mr. Carter?
[No response.]
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. No.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes no.
Mr. Evans?
Mr. EVANS. Evans votes no.
The CLERK. Mr. Evans votes no.
Ms. Houlahan?
Ms. HOULAHAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Houlahan votes aye.
Mr. Kim?
Mr. ANDY KIM. No.
The CLERK. Mr. Kim votes no.
Ms. Craig?
Ms. Craig?
[No response.]
Mr. Peters?
[No response.]
Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Williams?
Mr. WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Williams votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
Mr. STAUBER. Stauber votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Meuser votes aye. Sorry.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Tenney?
Ms. TENNEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Tenney votes aye.
Mr. Garbarino?
Ms. Young Kim?
Mr. GARBARINO. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Garbarino votes aye.
Ms. YOUNG KIM. Young Kim votes aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Young Kim votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Mr. Donalds?
[No response.]
Ms. Salazar?
[No response.]
Mr. Fitzgerald?
Mr. FITZGERALD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Fitzgerald votes aye.
Mr. Flood?
Mr. FLOOD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Flood votes aye.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Are there any other Members that wish
to vote?
Mr. MFUME. Madam Chair?
Ms. CRAIG. Madam?
Mr. MFUME. I am Mfume of Maryland. I vote no.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes no.
Mr. PETERS. Madam Chair, Peters of California votes no.
The CLERK. Mr. Peters votes no.
Ms. CRAIG. Madam Chair, Angie Craig from Minnesota votes
no.
The CLERK. Ms. Craig votes no.
Mr. GARBARINO. How is Mr. Garbarino recorded?
The CLERK. Mr. Garbarino is recorded as voting aye.
Mr. GARBARINO. Thank you.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The clerk will report the tally.
Are there any other Members that wish to vote?
Mr. CARTER. Madam Chair, Troy Carter.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Carter, how do you vote?
Mr. CARTER. Carter votes no.
The CLERK. Mr. Carter votes no.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The clerk will report the tally.
The CLERK. On this vote there were 11 ayes and 13 noes.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The amendment is not agreed to.
The question is now on reporting H. Res. 1298 as amended
without recommendation to the House.
All those in favor, say aye.
All those opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the Chair, the ayes have it and H. Res.
1298 as amended is reported to the House without
recommendation.
Without objection, the Committee staff----
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Madam Chair, we request a recorded vote on
that.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Pardon? I am sorry?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. We request a recorded vote.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. A recorded vote is requested.
The clerk will please call the roll.
The CLERK. Ms. Velazquez?
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ No.
The CLERK. Ms. Velazquez votes no.
Mr. Golden?
Mr. GOLDEN. Yes.
The CLERK. Mr. Golden votes aye.
Mr. Crow?
Mr. CROW. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Crow votes aye.
Ms. Davids?
Ms. DAVIDS. Aye. Davids votes aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Davids votes aye.
Mr. Mfume?
Mr. MFUME. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Mfume votes aye.
Mr. Phillips?
Mr. PHILLIPS. Phillips votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Phillips votes aye.
Ms. Newman?
[No response.]
Ms. Bourdeaux?
Ms. Bourdeaux?
Ms. BOURDEAUX. Bourdeaux votes aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Bourdeaux votes aye.
Mr. Carter?
Mr. CARTER. Mr. Carter votes aye.
The CLERK. Carter votes aye.
Ms. Chu?
Ms. CHU. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Chu votes aye.
Mr. Evans?
Mr. EVANS. Evans votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Evans votes aye.
Ms. Houlahan?
Ms. HOULAHAN. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Houlahan votes aye.
Mr. Kim?
Mr. ANDY KIM. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Kim votes aye.
Ms. Craig?
Ms. CRAIG. Ms. Craig votes aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Craig votes aye.
Mr. Peters?
Mr. PETERS. Peters votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Peters votes aye.
Mr. Luetkemeyer?
Mr. LUETKEMEYER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Luetkemeyer votes aye.
Mr. Williams?
Mr. WILLIAMS. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Williams votes aye.
Mr. Stauber?
Mr. STAUBER. Stauber votes aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Stauber votes aye.
Mr. Meuser?
Mr. MEUSER. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Meuser votes aye.
Ms. Tenney?
Ms. TENNEY. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Tenney votes aye.
Mr. Garbarino?
Mr. GARBARINO. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Garbarino votes aye.
Ms. Young Kim?
Ms. YOUNG KIM. Kim votes aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Young Kim votes aye.
Ms. Van Duyne?
Ms. VAN DUYNE. Aye.
The CLERK. Ms. Van Duyne votes aye.
Mr. Donalds?
Mr. DONALDS. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Donalds votes aye.
Ms. Salazar?
[No response.]
Mr. Fitzgerald?
Mr. FITZGERALD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Fitzgerald votes aye.
Mr. Flood?
Mr. FLOOD. Aye.
The CLERK. Mr. Flood votes aye.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Madam Clerk, how am I recorded?
The CLERK. You are recorded with a no vote.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. I meant to vote yes.
The CLERK. Ms. Velazquez votes aye.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. Are there any other Members that wish
to vote?
The clerk will report the tally.
The CLERK. On this vote there were 25 ayes and 0 noes.
Chairwoman VELAZQUEZ. The motion to report the resolution
as amended to the House without recommendation is agreed to.
Without objection, Committee staff is authorized to correct
punctuation and make other necessary technical corrections and
conforming changes.
Without objection, Members have 2 business days to file
additional supplemental, dissenting, and minority views.
My thanks to all the Members for their participation today.
If there is no further business to come before the Committee,
without objection this meeting is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:11 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
