- SBA DISTRICT OFFICE COLLABORATION WITH RESOURCE PARTNERS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SBA DISTRICT OFFICE COLLABORATION WITH RESOURCE PARTNERS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON UNDERSERVED,
AGRICULTURAL, AND RURAL BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS
UNITED STATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JULY 20, 2022

__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Small Business Committee Document Number 117-063
Available via the GPO Website: www.govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

48-013                    WASHINGTON : 2022

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS

NYDIA VELAZQUEZ, New York, Chairwoman
JARED GOLDEN, Maine
JASON CROW, Colorado
SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas
KWEISI MFUME, Maryland
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
MARIE NEWMAN, Illinois
CAROLYN BOURDEAUX, Georgia
TROY CARTER, Louisiana
JUDY CHU, California
DWIGHT EVANS, Pennsylvania
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
ANDY KIM, New Jersey
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
SCOTT PETERS, California
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri, Ranking Member
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
PETE STAUBER, Minnesota
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York
YOUNG KIM, California
BETH VAN DUYNE, Texas
BYRON DONALDS, Florida
MARIA SALAZAR, Florida
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska

Melissa Jung, Majority Staff Director
Ellen Harrington, Majority Deputy Staff Director
David Planning, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Hon. Jared Golden................................................     1
Hon. Claudia Tenney..............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Mark Delisle, Director, Maine Small Business Development
Center, Portland, ME...........................................     6
Ms. Nancy Strojny, SCORE Maine Assistant District Director,
Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE), Portland, ME......     7
Mr. J.D. Collins, Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director,
Michigan Small Business Development Center, Grand Rapids, MI...     9
Mr. John William (Bill) Leaverton, Regional Director, America's
SBDC at Tarleton State University, Stephenville, TX............    11

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:
Mr. Mark Delisle, Director, Maine Small Business Development
Center, Portland, ME.......................................    26
Ms. Nancy Strojny, SCORE Maine Assistant District Director,
Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE), Portland, ME..    29
Mr. J.D. Collins, Chief Executive Officer and Executive
Director, Michigan Small Business Development Center, Grand
Rapids, MI.................................................    32
Mr. John William (Bill) Leaverton, Regional Director,
America's SBDC at Tarleton State University, Stephenville,
TX.........................................................    34
Questions for the Record:
None.
Answers for the Record:
None.
Additional Material for the Record:
None.

SBA DISTRICT OFFICE COLLABORATION WITH RESOURCE PARTNERS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 20, 2022

House of Representatives,
Committee on Small Business,
Subcommittee on Underserved, Agricultural,
and Rural Business Development,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m., in
Room 2360, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jared Golden
[chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Golden, Williams, Stauber, Tenney,
and Flood.
Chairman GOLDEN. Good morning. I call this hearing to
order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
I would like to begin by noting a few requirements.
Standing House and Committee rules continue to apply during
hybrid proceedings, so all Members are reminded that they are
expected to adhere to these rules, including the rules of
decorum.
House regulations require Members to be visible through a
video connection throughout the proceeding, so please keep your
cameras on. Also, please remember to remain muted until you are
recognized to minimize background noise.
In the event that a Member encounters technical issues that
prevent them from being recognized for their questioning, I
will move to the next available Member of the same party and
will recognize that Member at the next appropriate time slot
provided they have returned.
I will now move to an opening statement.
In the rural areas that make up most of my district, the
benefits of small businesses go much further than jobs and a
tax base. They also provide community. I have seen it with my
parents' small business, where you can often find folks from
all over town and the surrounding towns coming together to
catch up, shoot the breeze, and check in on one another. Small
businesses across rural America are essential to building and
maintaining these communities and preserving the rural American
way of life.
But, as my own folks will tell you, running a small
business is not an easy task. That is why the SBA offers free
or low-cost counseling and training services that help address
unique challenges that entrepreneurs face.
The SBA relies on four primary resource partners to deliver
these offerings. Those are the Small Business Development
Centers, Women's Business Development Centers, SCORE, and
Veterans Business Outreach Centers to help support small firms
across the country, particularly in rural areas, through every
step of the business cycle.
SBA's programs and services, including resource partners,
work in close partnership with SBA's 10 regional offices, and
68 district offices across the country. U.S. SBA district
offices primarily concentrate on outreach and marketing efforts
and maintain working relationships with their local resource
partners, lenders, and economic development organizations.
These district offices perform regular reviews to ensure
that resource partners meet the needs of their small business
clients.
Strong relationships between a district office and their
local resource partners are vital to the success of the small
businesses that they serve. Clear communication and
coordination facilitate the flow of useful information from the
SBA to small businesses. It also allows the SBA to receive
feedback on challenges they face and how agency offerings can
alleviate them.
I have seen the benefit of strong collaboration between the
agency and resource partners firsthand in Maine. With locations
in Augusta, Bangor, and Portland, the Maine District Office
delivers SBA programs and services across all of Maine's 16
counties.
The Maine District Office also meets with the Maine SBDCs,
WBCs, and SCORE chapters quarterly to ensure everyone is rowing
in the same direction.
For the past 2-plus years, district office staff have been
there to help guide Maine owners as they work to navigate the
economic disruption, particularly early on during COVID-19.
Their efforts have included partnering with me on tele-town
halls to spread awareness about economic relief programs, like
the Paycheck Protection Program that were available to small
businesses. Together, we contacted thousands of business owners
to make sure they knew that there were resources there for
them.
And while every relationship is unique, district offices
and resource partners consistently have problems with staffing.
Hiring caps due to budgeting constraints have left many offices
short-staffed, increasing the burden on current employees, and
leading to higher levels of burnout.
In fiscal year 2022, SBA received approximately $278
million, about $8 million more than the fiscal year 2021
enacted level in the salaries and expenses account. This
increase was, in part, intended to better support SBA
employees. This budget increase is a good first step, but I
would like to discuss other actions we can take to ensure that
district offices and resource partners have the staff they need
to serve main street.
Today, I would like to take a closer look at this and other
challenges that district offices face and steps we can take to
strengthen the work shared between them and their resource
partners.
I will now yield to the Ranking Member, Ms. Tenney, for her
opening statement.
Ms. TENNEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really appreciate
your comments, and I am looking forward to hearing from our
witness today.
As we hold this Committee hearing, I am a small business
owner as well. Small businesses are facing historic economic
headwinds, including soaring costs, chronic labor shortages,
supply chain disruptions. Last week, the Consumer Price Index
hit another historic level of 9.1 percent, the highest 12-month
gain since 1981.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics also reported the Producer
Price Index, a measure of wholesale inflation, jumped 11.3
percent from the previous year. Inflation is raging across all
industries which means higher prices for smaller businesses and
the customers.
In addition to soaring prices, small businesses continue to
experience significant labor issues and ongoing supply
disruptions. The most recent Job Openings and Labor Turnover
Summary reported 11.3 million job vacancies across the nation,
and 4.3 million employees just simply quit their jobs. The
National Federation of Independent Businesses Monthly Job
Report shows half of small business owners reported job
openings they could not fill. Further NFIB stated that
approximately 94 percent of small businesses have been affected
in some way by supply chain disruptions.
As our economy approaches potentially a recession, it is
important for our Committee to examine how the SBA can better
support small businesses on the ground. The SBA's Office of
Field Operations (OFO) is responsible for that. It oversees
regional and district offices across the country. OFO is
responsible for connecting and supporting entrepeneurs with SBA
tools and services.
Small business owners turn to district offices to gain
access to capital, expand consumer base, navigate government
regulations, and to work with the SBA resource partners. The
SBA relies on its district offices to provide tools for
enhancing and growing small businesses while overseeing the
delivery of the SBA programs, including the Entrepreneurial
Development programs.
Upstate New York is home to three district offices that
serve 34 counties. These district offices were vital during the
pandemic as they assisted small firms in applying and assessing
the Paycheck Protection Program, the Economic Injury Disaster
Loans, and the Restaurant Revitalization Fund.
In 2021, New York's SBDCs helped over 42,000 small
businesses secure COVID-related loans and grants. They were a
lifesaver. Further, they assisted almost 2,000 new firms
opening their doors during 2021. These resources and programs
have a real impact in rural communities like mine. Over 16,200
new jobs were created because of this effort.
However, I am concerned with the SBA actions to allocate
resources for duplicative programs such as the Community
Navigator Pilot program and the Growth Accelerators Fund.
Further, it is troubling that the SBA is using resource
partners and programs to advance unfortunately a political
agenda. The SBA has touted becoming the first federal agency to
be a designated voter agency. In a press release, the SBA
states, ``It plans to use district offices to provide access to
voter registration services and vote-by-mail ballot
applications, otherwise known as vote harvesting.''
Now, more than ever, small businesses need the SBA to carry
out its statutory missions and core responsibilities. Small
firms are struggling from the administration's poor economic
policies and they need the SBA to put them first. For this
reason, I am a sponsor of the Improve the SBA Act, which will
safeguard taxpayer dollars by reducing duplicative programs,
ensure that resource partners are effectively serving small
businesses, and support entrepeneurs in navigating economic
headwinds, especially what we are seeing today.
I am also glad to have worked across the aisle to find some
bipartisan solutions to improve the SBA resource partners and
programs. In May, Representative Houlahan and I introduced H.R.
7670, the Women-Owned Small Business Program Transparency Act,
which will strengthen the women-owned small business
contracting program by enhancing transparency and
accountability, ensuring it works for taxpayers and our
nation's small businesses.
Further, I worked with Representative Davids to introduce
H.R. 6441, the Women's Business Centers Improvement Act of
2022, which reauthorizes the WBC program through fiscal year
2025 and increases the cap on individual center grants for the
first time.
I am confident that we can continue to work together to
strengthen these programs and better support small businesses.
I look forward to hearing from our witness today as to how we
can better empower our entrepeneurs and work to ensure that SBA
resources are operating efficiently and communicating with the
small businesses in a prompt and efficient manner.
Thanks so much.
Chairman GOLDEN. The gentlewoman yields back.
I would like to take a moment to explain how this hearing
will proceed. Each witness will have 5 minutes to provide a
statement, and each Committee Member will have 5 minutes for
questions.
Please ensure that your microphone is on when you begin
speaking and that you return to mute when finished.
Before introducing our witnesses, I just want to take a
moment to welcome a new Member to the Subcommittee here. We
have got Congressman Flood from Nebraska. Good to have you on
board.
Do you want to say hello, introduce yourself for a quick
minute?
Mr. FLOOD. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the opportunity to serve this Congress. I represent
the City of Lincoln and a rural area in Northeast Nebraska and
look forward to discussing the SBA and its services and how
important it is for small businesses to thrive in America. So,
thank you.
Chairman GOLDEN. Welcome. Mr. Flood and I were just talking
about how Maine and Nebraska are the only two states in the
country that split their Electoral College votes according to
the results of their congressional district votes. So something
we have got in common. It is a unique system and one that I am
a fan of.
Moving to witness introduction.
Mr. Delisle is the state director of the Main SBDC and
oversees implementation of the program and delivery of its
services. He serves on the National Accreditation Committee for
American Small Business Development Centers and brings to his
position extensive experience as a small business owner, most
recently as an independent retailer of fine art supplies and
picture framing. Mr. Delisle has a Master's in Business
Administration and a Bachelor of Science in Materials
Engineering from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Welcome
back, Mr. Delisle. Not your first time before the Committee by
any means. It is good to have you.
Our second witness is Ms. Nancy Strojny. She is the
assistant district director for SCORE Maine. Ms. Strojny has
served as the Chair of the Portland SCORE chapter from 2011 to
2020 when she was promoted to assistant district director for
SCORE. She is a national guest speaker, panelist, and blogger
on a wide range of business issues and was selected as a White
House Champion of Change in 2012. In 2019, the Portland Chapter
of SCORE was voted the SBA's National SCORE Chapter of the
Year. Welcome to Ms. Strojny.
Our third witness is Mr. J.D. Collins. He is the state
director of the Michigan SBDC. He leverages 20-plus years of
executive leadership experience in small businesses and large
corporations to oversee the SBDCs human, financial, and
administrative resources, along with stakeholder relationships.
Mr. Collins is passionate about serving Michigan's small
business community. Welcome, Mr. Collins.
And I will now yield to the Ranking Member, Ms. Tenney, to
introduce our final witness.
Ms. TENNEY. Thank you. I yield that distinguished
introduction to the small business owner, Mr. Williams,
Representative Williams.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ms.
Tenney for that. And it is an honor to do this today. I want to
thank the Chairman and the Ranking Member for allowing me to
introduce our final witness, who happens to be from my
congressional district in Texas.
Mr. Bill Leaverton is the regional director for Tarleton
State University, home of the Texans. Fighting Texans, right?
But University Small Business Development Center in
Stephenville. A native Texan, Mr. Leaverton is proud to
represent Tarleton State University and the SBDC in assisting
rural entrepeneurs. We have a lot of rural in our district.
Prior to assuming the position as director in 2019, Mr.
Leaverton spent most of his career owning and operating small
businesses that make up the bedrock of America and often that
history, we do not have that in helping people. So you bring a
unique background to us. In 2021, Mr. Leaverton's SBDC assisted
in providing small businesses over $100 million in capital
assistance, which was a record for their mostly rural network,
and it has been a pleasure to watch rural area grow in our
district and see the benefits that Tarleton's SBDC is having on
our economy. Mr. Leaverton, thank you for all of your work to
support main street. It is good to see that you brought some
friends with you that we have, and I know your experience as a
small business owner and SBDC regional director will be
extremely beneficial to our hearing today. So Mr. Leaverton,
thank you for taking time to testify before us, and I yield my
time back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman GOLDEN. The gentleman yields back.
Thank you all for being here. And we will begin with
recognizing Mr. Delisle for 5 minutes. Go ahead, sir.

STATEMENTS OF MARK DELISLE, DIRECTOR, MAINE SMALL BUSINESS
DEVELOPMENT CENTER; NANCY STROJNY, SCORE MAINE ASSISTANT
DISTRICT DIRECTOR, SERVICE CORPS OF RETIRED EXECUTIVES (SCORE);
J.D. COLLINS, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
MICHIGAN SMALL BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT CENTER; JOHN WILLIAM
``BILL'' LEAVERTON, REGIONAL DIRECTOR, AMERICA'S SBDC AT
TARLETON STATE UNIVERSITY

STATEMENT OF MARK DELISLE

Mr. DELISLE. Good morning, Chairman Golden, Ranking Member
Tenney, Members of the Committee. Thank you for inviting me to
testify today.
My name is Mark Delisle and I am the state director for the
Maine Small Business Development Center program and joined the
program in 2008. As you know, the SBDC is a nationwide network
that helps build and strengthen small businesses through no-
cost, confidential business advising, training and educational
resources. A program of the Small Business Administration, we
have served in Maine businesses for over 40 years, being one of
the initial eight pilot programs in the country.
The impact of our program in Maine is substantial. In 2021
alone, we helped 2,953 entrepreneurs to start 136 new
businesses, create and save 917 jobs, and helped entrepreneurs
access $48.8 million in capital. All of those results are
verified and attributed to our assistance by the client in
writing.
We could not have this level of success without the support
of our partners at the SBA's Maine District Office. District
Director Diane Sturgeon and her team work tirelessly to support
resource partners and the small businesses of Maine. Examples
of our collaboration with the district offices include:
Regular meetings. There are quarterly resource partner
meetings that involve SBDC, Women's Business Center, the SCORE
program as well, where we can enhance communication
collaboration, understand each other's initiatives and
programs, and avoid duplication.
For the past several years, the SBA district offices also
convene a broader meeting that includes many other economic
development partners that meet on a quarterly basis. It is a
great opportunity for not only SBA programs but other economic
development partners and resources to get together quarterly,
again to kind of coordinate and make sure that we are serving
the best interests of small businesses across the state of
Maine.
We additional also cohost many educational events with the
Maine District Office. A most recent example of that would be
in May of this year, National Trade Month and Export Week, we
co-hosted a four-part series on exporting with topics ranging
from writing an export business plan to obtaining financing for
an export venture. We also have regular sessions that we hold,
discussing the resources that are available to small businesses
and entrepeneurs across Maine and also basics of starting a
business and have done that on an ongoing basis.
There are also our promotional opportunities that are
available that we work with the district office on where we
will regularly visit local businesses, especially pre-pandemic,
to highlight services that have been received by the small
business from the SBA and the resource partners. The two times
a year that that is most common is Small Business Saturday in
the fall leading into the retail season, and also Small
Business Week in May where we highlight many of our small
business award winners, often our clients of the various
resource partners as well.
The other element of collaboration and coordination between
the SBA district office and the resource partners at SBDC
specifically would be oversight or compliance oversight. There
is an annual Project Officer review. In fact, I had mine
yesterday. It involved a 90-minute meeting with our project
officer where we go over all the performance of the program and
all aspects of collaboration and moving together, working
forward, working together.
They also have responsibility to sign off on our annual
proposal and that goes in usually in August and September of
this year. So they review what we are proposing for our core
grant award.
In addition to my work in Maine, as was noted, I am on the
National Accreditation Committee for the SBDC program. I joined
that Committee in 2018. This involves a weeklong review of SBDC
programs across the country. Since 2010, I have been on teams
that have reviewed 18 SBDCs across the countries. Every one of
those reviews involves a meeting with the district director and
the project officer at the SBA in whatever state or region we
are in where we review the collaboration, the partnership, the
relationship between the district officer and the SBDC program.
So I have seen all sorts of great examples of collaboration of
work between a district office and the SBDC program. The
elements that are there when we have the strongest relationship
from my view having gone to so many other states and programs
are open communication, understanding each other's roles and
responsibilities, and a mutual goal to serve entrepeneurs of
small businesses in the state or the region.
In Maine, our work together is mutually beneficial and
helps increase awareness of the critical services we provide to
Maine small businesses. The advocacy of our district office
enables more entrepeneurs to access the SBDC services that they
need to start, grow, and sustain their business. The district
office relies on and trusts the resource partners to be their
feet on the ground doing the fieldwork to deliver detailed one-
on-one guidance to small business.
Thank you, and I look forward to any questions you might
have.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you.
And we will now give 5 minutes to Ms. Strojny. Go ahead,
ma'am. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF NANCY STROJNY

Ms. STROJNY. Subcommittee Chairman Golden, Ranking Member
Tenney, and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to offer testimony on SCORE's collaboration with
the U.S. Small Business Administration district offices in the
state of Maine. I am Nancy Strojny and I am currently the
assistant district director for SCORE in Maine.
SCORE is the nation's largest network in the nation of
volunteer, expert business mentors, with more than 10,000
volunteers across the country offering free and confidential
business advice and education.
Since our founding in 1964, SCORE volunteers have helped
more than 11 million entrepreneurs to start, grow, or
troubleshoot their small business. We continue to mentor
because mentoring works. SBA data shows that the business
owners who received 3-plus hours of mentoring report higher
revenues and increased business growth. In the past 5 years in
the state of Maine alone, SCORE has helped our clients to start
1,791 new businesses, in turn creating 5,487 new jobs.
My fellow SCORE volunteers represent a diverse range of
backgrounds and industry expertise. I spent 30 years working in
sales and marketing with Proctor and Gamble and merchandising
with CVS before going into business for myself.
I have been a SCORE volunteer for more than a decade,
serving in leadership roles as chapter chair, assistant
district director, and the SCORE board of directors. As a
mentor, I am proud to create meaningful and long-term
relationships with my clients, helping them to launch new
businesses and operate existing businesses more successfully.
My SCORE client, Kate McAleer, founder and co-owner of
Bixby Chocolates in Rockland, Maine, has explained the value of
our mentoring relationship as, and I quote, ``Our participation
with SCORE has been invaluable to Bixby's company. Our mentor
has the extensive experience and incomparable ability to
provide advice. Her judgement is always sound, invaluable, and
uncanny. Her ability to help navigate our entrepreneurial
journey for key decision making and support has been and
continues to be important and critical to us in our
successes.''
Clients like Kate demonstrate SCORE's vital contribution to
Maine's large and vibrant small business community. According
to SBA data Maine's 150,000 small businesses represent 99.2
percent of all state businesses. And small businesses accounted
for 56.8 percent of Maine's employment in 2018, compared to
39.7 percent nationally. Maine is truly a small business state.
In order to best serve our clients, SCORE regularly
collaborates with the SBA and its resource partners--the SBDC,
the Women's Business Center, the Veterans Business Outreach
Center. This is a result of the outstanding SBA leadership in
Maine led by District Director Diane Sturgeon and our
willingness to serve Maine clients without organizational or
geographical boundaries. We share information and refer clients
to each other freely, putting the needs of the client first.
One example is Tiny Homes of Maine, a designer and builder
of custom mobile spaces with a manufacturing facility located
in Northern Maine. Founder Corinne Watson worked with an SBDC
business advisor on her financials to help secure capital and
worked with SCORE on strategy and operations.
Another example of collaboration between resource partners
in Maine is Focus ME, which is now in its 7th year. This
women's group program was created in collaboration with the
Women's Business Center and focuses on personal development,
including goal setting and peer-to-peer learning.
Our SCORE main client success award luncheon held annually
in June celebrates business innovation, vision, and achievement
and presents nonmonetary awards to worthy clients. Our resource
partners and the SBA attend and participate in this luncheon.
Serving clients without borders is a hallmark of SCORE and
SBA teams in Maine. Other SBA collaborations include the SBA
Thrive Emerging Leader Program. Score Maine has mentored
clients through this program since 2018, also serving as expert
panelists to provide insight and feedback on each business's 3-
year growth plan.
Lender information panels, which are hosted by the SBA
quarterly and are attended by all resource partners.
The SBA Small Business Awards held each year during
National Small Business Week. SCORE Maine clients regularly win
SBA Maine awards, including Tyler Frank, founder of Garbage to
Garden who won the 2022 Small Business Person of the Year Award
in Maine. Tyler has been a SCORE client for over 7 years.
SCORE participants in quarterly meetings hosted by our SBA
district director. My colleague, Marty Doto, chapter chair for
SCORE Central NY, also shared the following information about
SCORE's collaboration with SBA district offices in New York.
SBA staff participates in our monthly volunteer mentor
meetings, provides insight into SBA programs and resources,
which enables our mentors to offer clients enhanced services.
Members of the SBA Upstate New York District Office team have
also co-mentored with SCORE volunteers. During the pandemic,
SCORE Central New York worked closely with the SBA to provide
timely and updated guidance and training on SBA COVID relief
programs as they evolved. The SBA District Office held numerous
``train the trainer'' webinars to help us better counsel our
clients in understanding and applying for emergency funding.
Similar to my district in Maine, SCORE and the SBA
collaborated on client recruitment, marketing of the emerging
leaders, and THRIVE programs. At SCORE, we believe that our
clients' success is our success and collaborating with the SBA
and our fellow resource partners is one way we help our clients
succeed.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I
welcome any questions.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you.
We will now give 5 minutes to Mr. Collins.

STATEMENT OF J.D. COLLINS

Mr. COLLINS. Good morning. And thank you to the Committee
for the opportunity to testify today. This is a real honor.
Once again, I am J.D. Collins, and I am the executive
director of the Michigan SBDC. The Michigan team consists of
about 100 core consultants and specialty teams that address
technology commercialization, cybersecurity, growth strategies,
market research, and mobility. We are the Motor City after all.
I am here today to discuss how Michigan established a
robust relationship with our state and regional SBA offices and
demonstrate how that relationship resulted in better outcomes
for Michigan's small businesses. So I asked the question, what
is the advantage of a tightly aligned small business partner
network? Well, the advantage became evident during the early
days of the pandemic. To take you back in those early March
days in 2020, there was a tsunami of information cascading into
the small business world, often leaving them with more
questions than answers.
Well, that is when the Michigan SBDC invited the SBA
resource partners into daily huddles where we distilled
information and distributed it to small businesses in terms
that were easy to understand. We then coupled this information
with co-hosted webinars that helped businesses navigate the
early days of the pandemic. Think EIDL and PPP days.
To say this was popular is an understatement.
To put the demand into perspective, Michigan SBDC hosts
webinars and we are thrilled if we get 10 attendees. For one
PPP webinar, we had over 3,000 attendees.
Mr. Golden, you mentioned in your preamble demand for
services was high and I hope to address that as well as that is
a continued issue for SBDCs in Michigan and I have heard from
my fellow colleagues around the nation that demand for services
is high. We can attribute this to people who reached out during
the pandemic, liked what they got, and are coming back for
repeat services as time goes on.
So the business-friendly information ended up on our
website. I have had to update the website in Michigan just to
keep up with demand and keep the website from crashing. The
collective efforts of the resource partners and our
distribution of client-friendly information earned us the
nickname, ``The Small Business Source of Truth.''
Now, this story was made possible by the focused efforts to
establish meaningful resource partnerships. It is about people.
It is about relationships and it goes beyond names on paper.
Yes, we have aligned strategies, goals, and clear
communication, but it is a fact that I know our district
director, Leketa Henderson, I know that she has my back. If can
call her, and she will answer. And I have sat shoulder to
shoulder in the trenches with the other resource partners as
well. It is those deeper relationships that allowed a focused
partner response when it was needed.
Now, you have heard from my colleagues about regular
cadence at meetings and partnership opportunities. We do the
same here in Michigan. I can tell you one unique aspect of what
we are doing, and in fact, I am there right now as we host and
collaborate with the SBA district office on what we call the
Great Lakes Lenders Conference. It is an SBA lender's
conference where we bring partnerships together and allow for
those human-to-human relationships and bonds to grow, and quite
frankly, it builds esprit de corps amongst the team when it
comes to planning it. That, coupled with our regular touch
bases and strategic alignment allows us to partnership.
So Michigan's resource relationships with our resource
partners gave us a nick-name, and I am happy to answer any
questions the Committee may have. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you.
And now Mr. Leaverton, thank you for being here today, and
we will give you 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN WILLIAM ``BILL'' LEAVERTON

Mr. LEAVERTON. Good morning, Chairman Golden,
Representative Tenney, Representative Williams and Mr. Flood.
Thank you for inviting me to testimony today. I look forward to
discussing small business, and particularly in the rural
setting with you.
My name is Bill Leaverton. I am the regional director for
the SBDC at Tarleton State University located in rural
Stephenville, Texas. We represent some of the most rural
communities of the state, if not, in fact, the nation.
The SBDC's overall focus is simply to help the public
become successful small business owners. I specifically focus
on assisting small business owners in the rural setting obtain
loans.
So, we are here today to talk about the SBA's role and its
collaboration with resource partners. So, I wanted to share
with you some of that collaboration.
As Representative Williams can certainly attest, the SBDC
assisted countless businesses during the pandemic during the
shutdown. We were given daily updates from the SBA, lots of
webinars that were vital to helping the public understand what
was going on and indeed, how to improve and yet survive.
A significant program is the 504-loan guaranty program
which helps small businesses obtain loans in order to open
those dreams.
But the needs of the rural entrepreneur are vastly
different than that of our urban counterparts. They are not
even close to the same. The first unique distinction I would
like to point out is that the rural environment requires face-
to-face interaction. This type of interaction builds the most
cornerstone foundation of small business in the rural setting
and that is trust and in the SBDC. Another unique distinction
is that in many rural areas, they simply do not have access to
internet. It is vital.
So, this makes online participation in webinars and Zoom
conferences impractical at best. For example, I worked for 7
months with a community in rural Texas of 500 people open a
daycare center. It injected $260,000 into the economy, created
eight jobs, and more importantly, put rural parents back into
the workforce. I communicated with those people almost
exclusively face to face or via telephone because they could
not do Zoom conferences as they had no access to internet.
Unfortunately, this is a problem that is rampant in small Texas
rural areas.
Second, the rural community needs longer term commitments
programs. The CARES Act created human capital that allowed the
SBDC to meet an overwhelming demand. Now that that program as
it relates to the SBDC is expiring along with the human
capital, we are left with a situation in which demand outpaces
supply greatly. For instance, our office currently has a 3 week
wait period to meet with clients.
Third, rural communities need streamlined programs. Rural
clients to the SBDC oftentimes find themselves attempting to
navigate the many different programs available, and most of
these programs quite frankly closely align with the mission of
the SBDC. For example, the Navigator program was a very well-
designed and planned program. However, in my opinion, it could
duplicate the efforts of the SBDC, overlap geography, and
divert resources.
Finally, the rural community needs direct support.
Recently, I was able to obtain a $300,000 rural business
development grant from the USDA. This allowed and enabled the
Stephenville Economic Development Foundation to create a
revolving loan that will create access to capital and jobs for
our rural communities.
The SBA is a successful organization but finding ways to
strengthen those programs that are working is essential for the
rural business. In my opinion, there are three examples that
policy could assist.
One, create more long-term horizon programs for the SBDC
that result in direct interaction with the rural community. The
SBDC is effective whenever we are allowed to be present.
Second, streamline the various duplicate programs that
could overlap the mission of the SBDC itself.
Third, establish ways to provide direct access to capital
for small and microbusinesses in rural areas. We desperately
need that.
In closing, thank you for inviting me to testify today.
Your willingness to invest your time on this Committee is duly
noted and we very much appreciate it. On behalf of the
Northwest Texas SBDC Network, Tarleton University, and the
University of A&M system, I thank you for your service.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you very much.
We are now going to move to the questions from Members
portion of the hearing, and I will go ahead and recognize
myself first. I will probably end up asking each one of you a
question and I imagine there will be several rounds and we will
do these in 5-minute increments.
Someone has got to start the clock by the way. Thank you.
So, I am going to actually start with you, Mr. Leaverton.
Just kind of following up on what you were just talking about.
I have heard a lot of what you just said from folks back home
in Maine. You mentioned the 504 loan guaranty. You also talked
about using this USDA grant to set up like a revolving loan
program. So, and of course, I think you said you really focus
on helping people get access to capital.
So what are some of the challenges when you look at the
various capital that is out there, particularly SBA versus
private banking, et cetera? Just as an example, why the need to
set up a revolving loan program rather than rely on others?
What do you say to businesses when they come to you and say we
need some help finding capital?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
What I say to them is simply access to capital is the most
difficult part of opening a small business. And in many cases,
particularly in the rural setting, access to capital is
difficult because of the collateralization issue. Without that
collateralization, that small business is not going to open.
The banking institutions have their regulations and they have
their need to make a profit as well. And so, their risk factors
must be taken into consideration.
With instituting a revolving loan fund from the USDA's
rural business development grant allows a private group, albeit
overseen by the USDA, but it allows them to inject capital into
the rural setting in a much more personal way. We are able to
have a committee that is made up of the community members. We
are able to have a committee that is made up of small business
owners, and therefore, they can make a determination on what is
best to inject that money rather than at an institutional
level.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you. And tell us a little bit about
how the 504 loan guaranty helps you with that problem you were
just talking about as well.
Mr. LEAVERTON. Sure. The SBA's guaranty programs, of which
there are many, obviously, the 504 is the most popular one that
I encounter due to the collateralization issue again. The
banking institutions, like the 504 program, because it does
leverage hard assets as it were, land, buildings, and such that
enable the bank to mitigate their risk factor. And due to that
issue, it is the most popular program we have in the rural
area. The 7(a) loan is not as popular because it is a working
capital loan and again, the collateralization issue is a
problem. So, it is not as viable.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you. I guess lastly, one of your
third recommendations was on access to capital, and you talked
about the need for some kind of maybe new program, what you
could do like microloans and things of that nature. How do you
envision that being implemented?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Well, quite frankly, you know, there is no
word ``business'' in the USDA. There is in the SBA. So, I do
not understand quite honestly why we cannot operate in the same
manner. I mean, if the USDA is coming to our aid, why cannot
the SBA come to our aid? I realize that their mission may be a
bit different but my question to you is, why is that? We can
change that and make policy to enable them to allow the small
business in the rural setting to thrive. Whereas, instead, I
must turn to the USDA for that same very assistance and I find
that troubling.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you.
I have got a minute left. I am going to stick with you and
then we will hand it off to Ms. Tenney.
I talk with Mr. Delisle a lot and I think he agrees with
you about the importance of face to face. What type of
challenges do you have with getting yourself and your SBDC
employees out to meet with your potential clients face to face?
Is it staffing? Is it a lack of resources? I mean, what can we
do to help with that?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Well, Mr. Chairman, the easy answer is more
money. But the truth is that I have to make a choice. Do I
drive to this small community that I mentioned about the
daycare which is close to an hour from my office to meet with
them and then drive back, thereby spending at least half a day,
or do I stay in my office and meet with four people? That is
the choice. And the question is, indeed, do I allocate my
resources to that rural setting or do I not? And we are left
with this uneasy feeling of are we going to help the rural
businesses or are we not? And I think that we have to come
together and say that we are going to and apply the necessary
resources.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you. And that was perfectly right on
time for my 5 minutes.
So with that, I will turn it over to Ms. Tenney.
Ms. TENNEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
witnesses, all the witnesses for what you do, especially those
who work for SBA.
As a small business owner, you have been vitally important
to our region. In my area, we have Bernie Paprocki, who does a
phenomenal job for many years helping our small business
community, and we are really grateful for your service, which
is why this first issue I want to address is so upsetting to me
as you just described your lack of resources.
In January of 2022, the Small Business Administration
issued a press release highlighting the agency's request, the
agency's request to be a designated voter agency as a response
to President Biden's March 2021 Executive Order. We still have
not received the details as to what this would look like and
what type of advocacy the agency will engage in. My biggest
concern, obviously, as the founder of the Election Integrity
Caucus and someone who has been through this, why are we
tasking a nonpartisan organization to get involved in partisan
work outside the mission of small business. The last thing I
think that anyone in the SBA would want to be is in the middle
of political battles, especially dealing with the nuances and
the really important issues around voter security, making sure
that there is one person, one vote. Making sure that we have
private voting, all that goes into it. Why are we tasking the
SBA and these other agencies? HUD is also included in this.
I wanted to ask you, in viewing this, and you just decided
the wonderful work you are doing in our rural communities, do
you not think that this is really going to be a burden on SBA
with unrelated tasks dealing with getting to the rural needs?
You just cited the 504 loan guaranty program, 7(a), some of
these. Could you just comment, I know you work for SBA, but is
this not this kind of outside the mission in your opinion that
we are getting involved in political partisan vote harvesting
as opposed to really helping our small business community?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Thank you, Ms. Tenney, Representative
Tenney.
Ms. TENNEY. The question is to Mr. Leaverton by the way.
Mr. LEAVERTON. I do not know that I can speak to a lot of
that because it does not affect me directly. I can tell you
that I have never helped a small business open or a political
party affiliation was ever an issue. They simply want to open a
business, serve customers, and make a living. They are not
trying to open the next Google. They are not trying to conquer
the world so to speak. They simply want to provide for
themselves in a fashion with their two hands or their brain or
their back or what have you. They just simply want to put food
on the table for their families. And not one time in my time
has it ever been an issue. So I do not understand how that
would ever need to be an issue. And I would certainly hope that
it does not become one because there is not really, opening a
small business in a rural setting is about as bipartisan as it
gets.
Ms. TENNEY. The nonpartisan nature of the SBA is so
critically important to its mission. It seems to me that why
would you want to engage in this when you are just really just
trying to get people up and running. It just concerns me that
the top at the SBA would actually make this pitch.
Mr. LEAVERTON. I would hope that it does not become that.
Ms. TENNEY. I thank you for that. I appreciate that.
I just want to touch on a couple of things. So, you know,
obviously, we have inflation. It is at a 41-year high. You are
a small business owner, a former small business owner. What can
we do as a Committee? How can we help the small business
community weather this storm right now--inflation, rising
costs, gas prices? And what can we do from the SBA viewpoint,
how can we create legislation in a bipartisan way or some way
to help these businesses with the struggling costs? What have
you been doing and what have you been advocating for?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Great question, actually. Very good
question.
Education is the key. Most of the people that come to us
need education in small business. They understand how to bake a
cake. They understand how to sew a dress. They understand to do
the task that they are required to do or want to do. Bale hay,
whatever that may be. They understand that. That is inherent in
their nature. However, operating a business is not the same in
most cases. And as a result, many of them just simply are not
tooled, do not have the tools in order to perform that. And the
challenge is----
Ms. TENNEY. May I reclaim my time?
So in education, how do we get them to weather the storm
through these rising costs? What can we do with SBA and with
our Committee on Small Business, how can we help them get
through this with strategies, you know, the loan programs that
might be extended to be able to deal with our----
Mr. LEAVERTON. Certainly.
Ms. TENNEY.--supply chain, rising costs, inflation? In
especially rural areas. I know in my rural area, we do not even
have public transportation in most parts.
Mr. LEAVERTON. Part.
Ms. TENNEY. So we have to drive to get to work.
Mr. LEAVERTON. The short answer is all of the above. But
certainly, capital is the biggest issue. At least access to it.
That is probably the number one issue.
Ms. TENNEY. I think my time is out. Thank you very much. I
appreciate it. I yield back.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you.
Well, we will recognize Mr. Williams.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As most of you know, I am also a small business owner. I
have been for 51 years. And the challenges we see are a lot.
And we appreciate what you are doing. And I have also seen
Tarleton State University grow and transform over the years
through expanding their career and technical education programs
to partnering directly with small business owners in the
community to focus their academic offerings on the current
needs of employers. And there are a lot of those needs right
now with the employment situation like it is. And furthermore,
Tarleton's partnership with America's SBDC has been a great
asset to our rural Texas communities.
So Mr. Leaverton, your SBDC has leaned into its intended
role and taken on the difficult task of helping rural
entrepeneurs navigate the waters when opening their own small
businesses.
My first question would be to you. How can we direct SBDCs
across the country to better carry out their intended mission
and mimic, copy your success in reaching those in rural
communities?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Thank you, Congressman Williams.
I think that the main success story is to say either we are
going to pay attention to rural business or we are not. And it
is that simple. And if we are, then we have to go meet with
them face to face. As I said earlier in my testimony, trust is
important in the small business community. You cannot build
trust from a phone call. A friend of mine often says that an
email creates contact. A phone call creates a conversation and
a face-to-face meeting creates a relationship. Well, these
people operate on relationships and you cannot do that from a
Zoom call. You cannot do that from an email. It must be in
person, speaking to them in the coffee shop or wherever they
want to meet. And I will say to you that is a big piece.
Mr. WILLIAMS. I agree with you. It is called being retail.
Mr. LEAVERTON. Yes, sir.
Mr. WILLIAMS. I mean, you have got to sell something;
right?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Right.
Mr. WILLIAMS. And you forgot one thing. You talk about this
and that, and you did not mention Zoom, but it is a disaster. I
will add that to what you just said.
Mr. LEAVERTON. Sure.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Eye to eye contact is the way to get it done.
So, since I took office, I have pushed for less government
regulations and encouraged the streamline of federal programs
to ensure government is being a good steward of taxpayer
dollars.
That is why I have been concerned with the newly created
American Rescue Plan's Community Navigator Pilot program. It
looks like this program is looking to perform extremely similar
functions for the small businesses as SBDCs and it is
insufficient and will cause confusion if we have two programs
that frankly are doing the same thing, that are providing the
same type of assistance.
So the next question, in your opinion, does the duplication
of these programs hinder the work your SBDC can provide to
rural communities, and what issues does this cause?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Great question, sir. Thank you so much for
that. That is a really good question, actually.
The answer is it hinders us greatly. We have many great
programs out there. Unfortunately, many of them, their mission
aligns with the same as the SBDC. Therefore, we have
duplication of effort across many different platforms. So, if
you are a small business owner in the rural area and you are
trying to contact someone to help you, who do you contact? You
contact three or four agencies. You have the Women's
Development Center, the SBDC. You have SCORE and you have
numerous other ones that are short-term based. And (a), the
short-term based programs, when they just about get ramped up
it is about time for the money to run out and so therefore,
they extinguish. Secondly, some of the duplication of effort
that happens is contradictory. Just by human nature it can be
because we are person-to-person contacts, so my opinion and
yours may vary. So that is very challenging, and it does hinder
us greatly. And I would say to you, in my opinion, I quite
frankly do not understand why we cannot streamline that and
make a pointed approach. Gather the resources; therefore, I
would have the ability to go out into those rural areas because
those resources have been reallocated. You can call it the SBDC
or call it something else but allocate the resources into a
single fine point and then let us do our job.
Mr. WILLIAMS. That is called common sense.
Mr. LEAVERTON. Yes, sir.
Mr. WILLIAMS. That is the answer to your question.
Mr. LEAVERTON. Yes, sir.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Quickly. main street sees a lot of problems.
Right now we have got inflation skyrocketing, supply chain
disruptions. I have been in business 55 years. I have never
seen anything like this before. We cannot find workers. It is
hindering business operations. It goes on and on and on. The
Federal Reserve is raising interest rates now. It reminds me of
1981 all over again. So with all these costs, business owners
are having to make some difficult decisions that they have not
made in the past. So, what are the top concerns you are hearing
from American small businesses right now? And are you elevating
these concerns to the top officials at the SBA? You have got 15
seconds, if you can answer that.
Mr. LEAVERTON. The answer to your question about the
concerns they have is how do I raise my prices to afford the
costs I have to meet the demand of the public, yet the demand
cannot afford my product? How do I do that? That is the
question?
Mr. WILLIAMS. Yes.
Mr. LEAVERTON. And there is no answer.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Have you told the SBA? Have you talked to
them about these concerns?
Mr. LEAVERTON. I attempt to. Sure.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Yeah. Attempt. Okay. I get it.
All right, Mr. Chairman, I yield my time back. Thank you.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you.
Next up, Mr. Flood from Nebraska.
Mr. FLOOD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, as a Nebraskan, we have the lowest unemployment
rate of any state in the nation since they started keeping the
statistics in 1974. Our state unemployment rate is the absolute
lowest. To help me provide context to that, Mr. Leaverton, can
you tell me, when you talk about rural, what size communities
are you talking about? Like 2,000 people, 3,000 people, 10,000
people in a community?
Mr. LEAVERTON. The largest community I have in my whole
region is 36,000 people.
Mr. FLOOD. Okay.
Mr. LEAVERTON. Which is why the Rural Business Development
grant works because it requires 50,000 or less population in
order for you to be accessible to that funding.
Mr. FLOOD. In your service area, do you have towns of less
than 5,000?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Absolutely. I have towns less than 100.
Mr. FLOOD. Okay.
Mr. LEAVERTON. Most of my towns probably I would think
average in the range of 2,000.
Mr. FLOOD. Okay. So according to an NFIB report, half of
small business owners reported job openings they could not
fill. Is that a hurdle in your service area?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Absolutely. I would think it probably,
behind access to capital, be the second biggest challenge that
small business owners face. There simply are not people to, in
those communities there is no one to work which is why the USDA
created that program was to help revitalize small communities
and thwart the urbanization.
Mr. FLOOD. So I appreciate what you are doing. I think it
is important work. Let's talk about the types of capital that
we need. Obviously, there is the SBA traditional capital that
you are talking about here that could be anything from a widget
manufacturer to a dog grooming business. What tools do you have
in the toolbox when it comes to at-risk capital? And by that I
mean money for speculative tech startup type businesses that
are part of the economic development ecosystem of American that
is actually building wealth? What do you have? Is there a
program in Texas that provides that or a nonprofit corporation?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Not formally. No, sir. I have been fortunate
enough to encounter some private equity groups that are willing
to invest in a riskier startup faction such as tech or
something in the medical field. But in terms of formal, no,
sir, there is not. There is no network available that I am
aware of.
Mr. FLOOD. So would you say it is a fair characterization
of the people in your service area, and this often happens in
rural areas, where they think that tech startups and that
economic development entrepreneurial ecosystem belongs only to
towns like Boston, Austin, San Jose, and does not touch the
places that you are currently serving? Is that a feeling?
Mr. LEAVERTON. That is absolutely true. And I want to give
you a real quick example. I moved a company from Mountain View,
California, to Austin, Texas. I was an owner of the company and
I moved them from there to Texas. And the thought was we had to
be in the City of Austin because it is a tech-centric area. And
therefore, we needed to be around tech people. And since then,
I have obviously moved to Stephenville, Texas, and I can tell
you that categorically that was incorrect. That business could
have moved from Silicon Valley to Stephenville, Texas, and
thrived just as well as it would have in Austin. It was a
mischaracterization on my part it was, and I think it is a
large miss for companies.
Mr. FLOOD. And there is no data to support that only tech
entrepeneurs live in places like Austin.
Mr. LEAVERTON. No.
Mr. FLOOD. They, in fact, live where you live. And would
you also agree with me that, you know, when you live in a rural
area, you find creative solutions to problems that people in
larger cities with access to more amenities take for granted?
They fashion their own parts in Stephenville, Texas.
Mr. LEAVERTON. Absolutely. One of the largest resources
that Stephenville has is human capital because Tarleton State
University is so successful. Well, those people want to stay
there. Well, there simply are not jobs when they graduate so
they must migrate on to the urban areas which would give me as
a business owner moving that company from Silicon Valley to
Austin, Texas, it would have given me a tremendous amount of
people to choose from. Can you imagine if I had to move there?
I needed 32 people to work in that company. I would have had a
choice of probably 500 or 600 to choose from versus in Austin I
have a much more difficult time attracting the same talent
pool. And people who want to live in those rural areas are
willing to stay and sacrifice, and like you say, fashion things
and do what is necessary. So, we need to pay more attention to
it. Absolutely.
Mr. FLOOD. Thank you for your answers. I yield back.
Mr. LEAVERTON. Thank you.
Chairman GOLDEN. We are going to go to a second round for
those that want to stick around.
Mr. Leaverton, thank you for your service to this
Committee. You are off the hot seat for just a minute at least.
I guess I will shift to Mr. Delisle, sticking with the SBDC
aspects here. We have heard a lot about duplication. I shared a
lot of those concerns as you know. And I am certainly a big fan
of the work that SBDCs do. I have raised concerns on this
Committee about the existence for decades in statute within SBA
of something called the Office of Rural Affairs which literally
had no staff and no funding. Something we have been trying to
fix, and yet we are moving on creating more programs. And of
course, I am the sponsor for the second time of a bill to
reauthorize the SBDCs and try and improve upon the work that
you can do, how you can use your money, and of course, get you
more resources.
Mr. Delisle, can you talk a little bit about the importance
of reauthorization for the SBDC programs nationally and what
you like most about the proposed bill that has passed the House
for the second Congress in a row and of course has yet to see
any action in the Senate?
Mr. DELISLE. Yes. Thank you, Chairman Golden for the
question. And thank you for your support of reauthorization.
As you know, the reauthorization is critical to kind of
endorsing the Small Business Development Centers program as an
authorized program of Congress. It is very important. And it is
also an opportunity to do some corrections or some enhancements
of the rules and the criteria for operating the program. I know
of your support of increasing our capability to market our
services and to raise awareness. One thing that we definitely
have seen through the pandemic is that by raising awareness of
Small Business Development Centers and the other resource
partners, it has really allowed us to really serve far more
clients especially with the additional CARES funding. So having
additional room to spend marketing dollars is important.
Raising the authorized level so that the Appropriations
Committees can take action to hopefully increase resources so
that we can continue to provide those services ot the small
businesses across Maine and across the country. So I am
hopeful, as I know you are, that the Senate will also take up
reauthorization and we can get that passed so that we can
really advance the program further across the country.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you. You know, it was my amendment
to CARES that helped to increase SBDC funding as part of that
CARES Act funding that Mr. Leaverton noted was really
important. Of course, that increase now going away. We know
that there are workforce shortages out there among your
clients. What about among SBDCs in Maine, Mr. Delisle? Are you
having a hard time maintaining staffing and finding the right
people?
Mr. DELISLE. We are not having a hard time maintaining
staffing. We are fortunate that we have a great organization of
staff of SBDC advisers in Main that are long term and many have
retired, and we have been successful in hiring some really,
really good people even through the workforce shortages that we
have. So we do have good people.
Now, what we find is that people who become business
advisors for SBDC, they do it because they love the work. They
love working with clients. They love the small businesses and
they are really just committed to that mission. So,
fortunately, even though it is such a tight labor market and
certainly, all of my advisors could market their skills
elsewhere probably for significantly higher pay, they really
are committed to the organization.
With that said, any time we have an opening, it is always a
challenge. And as you know, especially in rural Maine, I have a
host partner up in Caribou, Maine. If we need to hire an
advisor in Caribou, Maine, it certainly is a challenge to find
a good, talented pool of candidates for that position but
fortunately right now we have a really good advisor in Caribou
and I hope he does not go anywhere.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you.
I particularly like the aspect of the reauthorization bill
that would allow you to use a small, responsible amount of your
budget for marketing as both I think you and Mr. Leaverton have
spoken to. What good are your services if the businesses,
particularly in rural areas, do not even know that you exist?
It is a real shame and something that we could fix with just a
small tweak in the statute with the passage of that bill.
I am going to probably come back in a little bit to ask
some questions about SCORE, but I am going to give the
opportunity to ask more questions.
And I see that Mr. Stauber has joined us from Minnesota.
Welcome, sir. And why do you not go ahead?
Mr. STAUBER. Thank you very much, Chair and Ranking Member
for holding this meeting.
I first want to give a shout out to the SBA district office
in Minnesota. District Director Brian McDonald and his team
have been working tirelessly over the last few years, and I
could not let this moment go by without acknowledging their
hard work and it is greatly appreciated.
And like the struggle, we, as Members of Congress have had
to get the federal agency in D.C. to respond to our questions,
the SBA district offices have been instrumental in helping our
small businesses survive during the government-mandated
shutdowns in 2020 and 2021 and have been extremely responsive
to our local small businesses.
Mr. Leaverton, with new inflation numbers at record highs,
what would you say is the confidence level of the small
business owners you interact with in the economy and current
state of play?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Thank you, Representative Stauber.
By competence, you mean competence in their business
environment?
Mr. STAUBER. Yes.
Mr. LEAVERTON. I would say that they know their business
very well. The challenge is that they do not know the market or
they do not know the environment very well and they cannot
adapt to it whenever the inflationary conditions such as we are
experiencing take place. They cannot adapt. They cannot change
to that because they have not the tools to do so. So as a
result, they are trying to utilize things that happened 2 years
ago to help them operate their bakery or their business today
and the conditions have migrated. So as a result, new tools are
needed and they do not simply have them.
Mr. STAUBER. Our federal government has put forth, and
these are the Biden administration's number, $201 billion--that
is with a B--$201 billion dollars of additional regulations on
small businesses across this nation, punishing them even
further. In your mind, are these regulations, do they stymie
the small business growth and/or do they stymie people wanting
to live that American dream by owning their small business?
Mr. LEAVERTON. That is a great question. And actually, I
think you hit the nail on the head when you said owning their
dream. The people that see me simply have a dream. I have
always wanted to open a small business. My kids are grown. Now
is my time. I am going to open the restaurant I always wanted
to. Or I have just graduated college and I want to forge my own
path and I want to create my own business, to be my own person,
my own boss.
Quite frankly, it is that simple for them. They just want
to provide a service or a product and be paid an appropriate
price, put food on the table, and live their lives.
Mr. STAUBER. Without the government on their back or in
their pockets; right?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Well, the challenge becomes whenever we
mount regulation and require them to do more and more and more
and more with the same dollar, if you will, either they are
being taxed more or they are being appropriated more, or
whatever the case may be, they wind up being inundated, and
quite frankly discouraged. And I see some leave business
because they simply just feel it is not worth the fight. And
they consider it to be a fight.
Mr. STAUBER. And it should not be. That is unfortunate.
Mr. LEAVERTON. Well, again, they are just trying to
support--if I own a bakery, you come in, you have got a
birthday, you want to buy a cake from me. I bake you a cake,
you buy it at an appropriate price, and we are all happy. Well,
I do not see why we need to complicate that.
Mr. STAUBER. Right. I agree with you.
And this is for any witness. How has your role changed or
what assistance have you started working on more given the
historic economic headwinds facing small businesses? And this
is for anybody. Anybody?
Mr. COLLINS. Can you repeat the question?
Mr. STAUBER. Yes. How has your role changed or what
assistance have you started working on more given the historic
economic headwinds facing small businesses? So what have your
priorities been these last couple of years with reference to
the headwinds we are facing with inflation and job creation?
Mr. LEAVERTON. The headwinds are difficult. Coming out of
COVID, people are struggling to begin with. Then, if you tack
on some of the issues that we are facing in today's rural
environment, and I operate in a very rural area of Texas
mostly. And I can tell you that those people are at their wit's
end and many of them do not survive because of that. They
simply fold their tent and go home because the headwinds are
too much. And so, they just do not have the tools to withstand
it.
Mr. STAUBER. We understand that the economic engines of
Main Street American are our small businesses and we must do
everything we can to help them succeed.
Mr. Chair, I am out of time. I yield back.
Chairman GOLDEN. We are going to recognize Mr. Williams
next.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
What have you seen out of the SBA, the national scope, the
Feds if you want to call them that? It has been my opinion that
they do not really understand small business. They actually
support higher taxes. And raising taxes on Main Street America
is the wrong thing to do.
We talked about burdens. My colleague talked about the
dollars, but the manhours to do that is 130 million manhours
for crying out loud. And the SBA does not want to talk about
that. They do not want to talk about cutting taxes and what
they do. Have you seen that kind of attitude from the Feds when
it really gets down to it on helping small business and relieve
burdens as opposed to raising burdens and keeping some of these
businesses from staying in business?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Well, Congressman, in my opinion, I see us
adding programs, adding burdens, adding bureaucracy, if you
will, to the small business environment. Simply put, we should
just get out of their way. If I take a cake, you want to buy a
cake for your birthday, I do not really see why we need to
interfere so much.
Mr. WILLIAMS. Well, competition works, does it not?
Mr. LEAVERTON. Yes, sir.
Mr. WILLIAMS. And if you get the government out of our life
and let businesses compete for service, for customers, then
customers will tell you if you are doing a good job or not.
Mr. LEAVERTON. Right. I do think that there is a place for
the SBA. I do think that there is a place for the programs
because I do think that they can support, provide access to
capital. And education is a big key, particularly in the rural
area. But at what cost?
Mr. WILLIAMS. Yeah, there is a place for the SBA. There is
no question. But I think that the SBA should totally be for
Main Street America regardless of who is in the White House.
And cutting taxes, cutting regulations, cutting burdens,
creating opportunity is the role of the SBA. And we have got 75
percent of the workforce, 75 percent of the payroll is
generated by the people you are talking about. And right now we
need them more than ever.
So, I appreciate you being here again. It is good to be
able to call you a Texan. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield
my time back.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you very much.
Mr. Flood is gone.
Question for Ms. Strojny. So in 2019, your SCORE chapter
was named Chapter of the Year. So what is your secret, and what
do you think that Congress could do, this Committee
specifically, to get resources to more SCORE chapters so they
can be as successful as yours?
Ms. STROJNY. Well, thank you for the question.
The secret to our success in the Southern Maine chapter was
really about building the appropriate team of people, of
volunteers, to serve the community. SCORE initially in Southern
Maine had a small cohort of volunteers, and we managed to bring
that during a 6-year time, bring in volunteers who could
deliver the expertise and help with clients and really make a
difference in the community. So we expanded our footprint all
across Maine. And trained up our volunteers and they provided
extensive services in communities that we had not previously
served because we did not have sufficient manpower.
Now, relative to how you can support SCORE, it is all
around the reauthorization and increasing our funding because
when we have increased funding, we are able to do additional
education. We are able to offer additional services. We have
additional tools and resources that we can support the rural
communities with.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you. I appreciate that.
Can you tell us a little bit about the performance reviews
carried out by SBA district offices, reviews of the resource
partnerships? So what is included in these reviews? Is the
review structure beneficial to you? Is it a burden? Just tell
us a little bit about that relationship.
Ms. STROJNY. Yes. So the SBA reviews our services on an
annual basis. Generally, we sit down for an hour based on the
fact that we have extremely collaborative relationships with
the SBA folks to begin with in Maine. This is not a burden but
rather an opportunity to talk about how we each can better
serve each other and serve the larger state of Maine. Questions
are around educational opportunities. How can we partner? How
can we partner more? How can the SBA support SCORE? Are there
additional opportunities that can be addressed? We review the
numbers, and by the numbers I mean how we create impact in the
state of Maine so that the SBA during this review is fully up
to speed on the role that SCORE plays in Maine. How many new
businesses we help create, how many jobs we help create, the
size of our organization, where we are growing, what is our
expertise. One of the hallmarks of SCORE is that we have quite
a bit of specific expertise that we call subject matter experts
and it is always important because the SBA is often the first
place that a person will call and say, hey, where can I get
help? And so for the SBA during these reviews to be totally up
to speed on what our organization looks like and what kind of
expertise we offer actually helps the SBA to make sure that
they are reviewing to the right organization and getting the
help that that client needs.
So, the reviews are not onerous in any way and based on how
we support each other it is just an opportunity to review
potential growth areas in the times ahead.
Chairman GOLDEN. Great. I am not surprised that the
relationship is pretty good between the partners and the SBA in
Maine.
But Mr. Collins, it has been described that when you took
over the SBDC that maybe there is room for improvement is the
way I have heard it described for the relationship with the
district offices in Michigan. How did you go about
accomplishing that and how would you advise others to improve
upon that relationship and just improve the collaboration and
communication? You can speak either to what SBDCs could do to
improve that or the district offices themselves.
Mr. COLLINS. Thank you for the question. I hope it came
across in my testimony that it is all about people and it is
about relationships. And yes, we have the metrics that were
discussed earlier by Ms. Strojny, but the ability to
collaborate on strategy, collaborate on programs, and it comes
with establishing those relationships first. And so, we started
with what we are just calling a monthly huddle. We then
migrated that to partner meetings, and then took that up one
step by cohosting some events together. And believe it or not,
it is the planning committees and it is the ability to address
strategy and be part of the participation in the event that
really builds esprit de corps amongst the team and those
relationships that allow us to have that relationship. So I
would say that it started with the personal relationships and
it has blossomed from there. So like I say, we are on really
solid footing right now.
Chairman GOLDEN. Thank you for that. I appreciate it very
much.
It looks like we are out of questions. And I appreciate
the, first of all, testimony that you have provided to the
Committee, as well as the answers that you have provided to the
questions that have been put forward to you today.
In closing, certainly, a big thanks to each one of you not
only for joining us but for the work that you do in the
communities that you serve helping small business owners,
entrepeneurs, do what they want to do and be as successful as
possible. I certainly believe that your work is vital to their
success and to growth in our communities, and specifically, in
rural communities like those represented by many of us that
joined the hearing today. I think that here in this Committee,
your partner programs are some of those that are most ripe for
bipartisan support. I certainly agree with those that express
concern about duplication, ways we might be able to find
savings to put more resources into your hands so you can reach
even more potential entrepeneurs and small business owners out
there. So, thanks to you all and to your staff for the work
that you do day in and day out and for being passionate about
it. And of course, it is our responsibility to have good
oversight over the agencies that are responsible for working
with you and the district offices and the SBA, so we are always
open to hearing your feedback about how we can press them,
question them, and make sure that they are using their
resources appropriately to support you and make sure that they
are doing their job in trying to connect their potential
clients with your great services as well.
And with that, I am going to go ahead and close things out.
And if there is no further business to come before the
Committee, we will be adjourned.
Although, I should say that Members have 5 legislative days
to submit statements and supporting materials for the record.
And we appreciate your time. Thank you all for coming.
[Whereupon, at 11:23 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
