- CYBERSECURITY FOR POWER SYSTEMS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CYBERSECURITY FOR POWER SYSTEMS

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY &
SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

October 21, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-43

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-762PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2017
_________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas, Chair
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         ZOE LOFGREN, California
Wisconsin                        DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ERIC SWALWELL, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             AMI BERA, California
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            KATHERINE M. CLARK, Massachusetts
RANDY K. WEBER, Texas                DON S. BEYER, JR., Virginia
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan          PAUL TONKO, New York
STEVE KNIGHT, California             MARK TAKANO, California
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
GARY PALMER, Alabama
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
DARIN LaHOOD, Illinois
------

Subcommittee on Energy

HON. RANDY K. WEBER, Texas, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              ERIC SWALWELL, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              KATHERINE M. CLARK, Massachusetts
STEPHAN KNIGHT, California           ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia           EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Research and Technology

HON. BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia, Chair
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
MICHAEL T. MCCAUL, Texas             ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             KATHERINE M. CLARK, Massachusetts
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan          PAUL TONKO, New York
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas            SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington             ERIC SWALWELL, California
GARY PALMER, Alabama                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas

C O N T E N T S

October 21, 2015

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Randy K. Weber, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................     8
Written Statement............................................     9

Statement by Representative Suzanne Bonamici, Minority Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Environment, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    10
Written Statement............................................    12

Witnesses:

Mr. Brent Stacey, Associate Lab Director for National & Homeland
Science and Technology, Idaho National Lab
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15

Mr. Bennett Gaines, Senior Vice President, Corporate Services and
Chief Information Officer, FirstEnergy Service Company
Oral Statement...............................................    21
Written Statement............................................    23

Ms. Annabelle Lee, Senior Technical Executive in the Power
Delivery and Utilization Sector, Electric Power Research
Institute
Oral Statement...............................................    32
Written Statement............................................    34

Mr. Greg Wilshusen, Director of Information Security Issues,
Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    41
Written Statement............................................    43
Discussion.......................................................    60

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Brent Stacey, Associate Lab Director for National & Homeland
Science and Technology, Idaho National Lab.....................    82

Mr. Bennett Gaines, Senior Vice President, Corporate Services and
Chief Information Officer, FirstEnergy Service Company.........    86

Mr. Greg Wilshusen, Director of Information Security Issues,
Government Accountability Office...............................    88

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Statement submitted by Representative Barbara Comstock,
Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    94

Statement submitted by Representative Lamar S. Smith, Chairman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    96

Statement submitted by Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    98

CYBERSECURITY FOR POWER SYSTEMS

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 21, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy &
Subcommittee on Research and Technology,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Randy
Weber [Chairman of the Subcommittee on Energy] presiding.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Weber. Good morning, and welcome to today's joint
Energy and Research and Technology Subcommittee hearing
examining cyber threats to American energy systems.
Today, we will hear from an expert panel on the growing
threat of cyber attacks to the nation's electric grid. Our
witnesses today will also provide insight into how industry and
the federal government are working together, or maybe in some
instances not working together, to anticipate cyber threats,
and improve the reliability and resiliency of our electric grid
against those cyber attacks.
The reliability of America's power grid is one of our
greatest economic strengths. I like to say, the things that
make America great are the things that America makes, and how
do we do that? With an affordable, reliable, dependable
electricity supply.
In my home State of Texas, reliable and affordable power
serves a population that is increasing by more than 1,000
people a day, and it provides power to the energy-intensive
industries that drive consumption. Texas is by far the nation's
largest consumer of electricity. Keeping the Texas power grid
reliable and secure is key to continuing this economic growth.
But as we established in a hearing on broad threats to the
power supply earlier this year, utilities face significant
threats to that same reliable delivery of power. Our electric
grid is particularly vulnerable to growing cybersecurity
threats as the grid is modernized, as distributed energy,
electric vehicles, and modernized digital operating systems
create more access points for cyber attacks. And while the
nation's industrial control systems for the grid are analog
systems designed to last for decades, digital IT systems must
constantly adapt to combat evolving cyber threats.
Small-scale cyber and physical attacks to our electric grid
are estimated to occur once every four days, and in over 300
cases of significant cyber and physical attacks since 2011,
suspects have never been identified. Now, let me repeat that.
In over 300 cases of significant cyber and physical attacks
since 2011, no suspects have been identified.
We often think of cybersecurity and other threats to the
power grid at a macro scale, but these types of attacks can
occur even at a local level. In 2011, the Pedernales Electric
Co-op, a non-profit co-op that serves approximately 200,000
customers north of San Antonio, was struck by a cyberattack.
While the attack thankfully did not disrupt power to consumers,
it is a stark reminder that threats to the grid are real, and
they are not going to go away anytime soon.
Our nation's power supply cannot be protected overnight,
particularly as utilities struggle to adapt technology to
manage a growing number of cybersecurity threats. Cyber threats
to the power grid will continue to evolve, particularly as more
interconnected smart technologies are incorporated into the
electric grid. We call those smart meters back in Texas. And as
protective technology improves, so does the capability and
creativity of those who are conducting those cyber attacks,
unfortunately.
While we cannot predict every method of attack, the federal
government can and should play a role in assisting industry
with developing new technology and security safeguards.
Accordingly, research and development efforts at the Department
of Energy are focused on providing industry with comprehensive
tools to conduct internal analysis to identify and address
cybersecurity weaknesses so that the industry can take the lead
in addressing these same vulnerabilities.
That is why testing facilities and cooperative research,
like the Cyber Security Test Bed at Idaho National Lab, are
valuable tools to combat cyber threats. At INL, industry can
test control systems technology in real world conditions,
reducing response time and risk for future attacks.
I'd like to say in advance I want to thank the witnesses
for testifying before the Committee today. I look forward to a
discussion about cyber threats to our critical infrastructure,
and how the federal government can provide industry with the
tools and technology necessary to fight the next generation of
cyber attacks.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Weber follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee on Energy
Chairman Randy K. Weber

Good morning and welcome to today's joint Energy and Research and
Technology Subcommittee hearing examining cyber threats to American
energy systems. Today, we will hear from an expert panel on the growing
threat of cyber-attacks to the nation's electric grid.
Our witnesses today will also provide insight into how industry and
the federal government are working together to anticipate cyber
threats, and improve the reliability and resiliency of our electric
grid against cyber-attacks.
The reliability of America's power grid is one of our greatest
economic strengths. In my home state of Texas, reliable and affordable
power serves a population that is increasing by more than 1,000 people
per day, and provides power to the energy intensive industries that
drive consumption. Texas is by far the nation's largest consumer of
electricity. Keeping the Texas power grid reliable and secure is key to
continuing this economic growth.
But as we established in a hearing on broad threats to the power
supply earlier this year, utilities face significant threats to the
reliability of power delivery. Our electric grid is particularly
vulnerable to growing cybersecurity threats as the grid is modernized,
as distributed energy, electric vehicles, and modernized digital
operating systems create more access points for cyber-attacks.
And while the nation's industrial control systems for the grid are
analogue systems designed to last for decades, digital IT systems must
constantly adapt to combat evolving cyber threats.
Small scale cyber and physical attacks to our electric grid are
estimated to occur once every four days. And in over 300 cases of
significant cyber and physical attacks since 2011, suspects have never
been identified.
We often think of cybersecurity and other threats to the power grid
at a macro scale, but these types of attacks can occur even at the
local level. In 2011, the Pedernales Electric Co-op, a non-profit co-op
that serves approximately 200,000 customers north of San Antonio, was
struck by a cyberattack. While the attack thankfully did not disrupt
power to consumers, it is a stark reminder that threats to the grid are
real, and are not going away.
Our nation's power supply cannot be protected overnight,
particularly as utilities struggle to adapt technology to manage a
growing number of cybersecurity threats. Cyber threats to the power
grid will continue to evolve, particularly as more interconnected smart
technologies are incorporated into the electric grid.
And as protective technology improves, so does the capability and
creativity of those conducting attacks.
While we cannot predict every method of attack, the federal
government can and should play a role in assisting industry with
developing new technology and security safeguards.
Accordingly, research and development efforts at the Department of
Energy are focused on providing industry with comprehensive tools to
conduct internal analysis to identify and address cybersecurity
weaknesses so that industry can take the lead in addressing these
vulnerabilities.
That's why testing facilities and cooperative research, like the
Cyber Security Test Bed at Idaho National Lab, are valuable tools to
combat cyber threats. At INL, industry can test control systems
technology in real world conditions, reducing response time and risk
for future attacks.
I want to thank our witnesses for testifying before the Committee
today. I look forward to a discussion about cyber threats to our
critical infrastructure, and how the federal government can provide
industry with the tools and technology necessary to fight the next
generation of cyber-attacks.

Chairman Weber. I now recognize Ms. Bonamici.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, Chairman Weber, for
holding this hearing, and thank you to our witnesses for
participating.
As many of you know, October is National Cyber Security
Awareness Month, so it's a fitting time for this hearing today.
We're all familiar with the increasing frequency of cyber
attacks that compromise personal and business information. At
the World Economic Summit earlier this year, cyber threats made
the top 10 list of the most likely global risks. Lloyd's of
London estimates that cyber attacks can cost businesses as much
as $400 billion a year.
What we're focusing on today is a different kind of
cybersecurity. It's about securing the electric grid so that a
cyber attack doesn't affect grid operations, which could halt
our daily lives and threaten our economic security. These
attacks often gain entry through an information technology
system, but, instead of taking corporate data, they directly
target system operations that can cause havoc and chaos.
In February of this year, an elite group of hackers broke
through an electric utility's firewall and gained access to
their substation controls in just 22 minutes. Luckily the
attack was a drill initiated at the request of the utility to
test their system. But this example demonstrates what's
possible.
The energy sector continues to report more cyber attacks to
the Department of Homeland Security, more than any other
critical infrastructure sector. In just one month the PJM
Interconnection, which coordinates electricity transactions in
13 states and in D.C., experienced 4,090 documented cyber
attempts to attack their system. That's more than five and a
half attacks on their electrical market system per hour.
So far, no publically reported cyber events have resulted
in an electricity outage in the United States but the
sophistication of attacks on industrial controls systems is
increasing.
Utilities across our country are advancing energy
efficiency through smart grids and programs like feed-in tariff
systems. As we discuss ways to keep the grid safe, we also must
be mindful of doing so without inhibiting innovation.
Google, Wells Fargo, and Aetna are exploring ways to
leverage employee behavior as a tool, instead of a
vulnerability, to build a more secure system. From
understanding how people swipe their phones, to the patterns
they use when typing on a keyboard or walking, a better
understanding of behavioral biometrics is opening the door to
developing more cyber-secure components and processes. The more
we understand about human and social behavior, the stronger our
toolbox. Rather than resting the success of our cybersecurity
efforts on programs that require changes in human behavior, we
might have better success if we change our technology and
processes to fit the behavior of people. And the more we
understand the behavior of threat actors, the better we can
design protections.
So in addition to building a better technology-based
firewall, we need to invest in developing a better human
firewall. Our weakest link and our most resilient asset to meet
the dynamic changing needs of the cyber arms race is us.
I thank each of our witnesses for being here today, and I
look forward to hearing what each of you has to say, and thank
you for sharing your expertise.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the remainder of my
time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bonamici follows:]
Prepared Statement of Subcommittee on Environment
Minority Ranking Member Suzanne Bonamici

Thank you, Chairman Weber and Chairwoman Comstock, for holding this
hearing, and thank you to our witnesses for participating. As many of
you know, October is National Cyber Security Awareness Month, so it's a
fitting time for this hearing.
We are all familiar with the increasing frequency of cyber attacks
that compromise personal and business information.
At the World Economic Summit earlier this year, cyber threats made
the top 10 list of most likely global risks. Lloyd's of London
estimates that cyber attacks can cost businesses as much as $400
billion a year.
What we are focusing on today, however, is a different kind of
cyber security. It's about securing the electric grid so a cyber attack
doesn't affect grid operations, which could halt our daily lives and
threaten our economic security. These attacks often gain entry through
an information technology system, but, instead of taking corporate data
they directly target system operations that can cause havoc and chaos.
In February of this year, an elite group of hackers broke through
an electric utility's firewall and gained access to their substation
controls in 22 minutes. Luckily the attack was a drill initiated at the
request of the utility to test their system. But this example
demonstrates what's possible.
The energy sector continues to report more cyber attacks to the
Department of Homeland Security than any other critical infrastructure
sector. In just one month the PJM Interconnection, which coordinates
electricity transactions in 13 states and DC, experienced 4,090
documented cyber attempts to attack their system. That's more than five
and a half attacks on their electrical market system per hour.
So far no publically reported cyber events have resulted in an
electricity outage in the U.S. But the sophistication of attacks on
industrial controls systems is increasing.
Utilities across our country are advancing energy efficiency
through smart grids and programs like feed-in tariff systems. As we
discuss ways to keep the grid safe, we must be mindful of doing so
without inhibiting innovation.
Google, Wells Fargo, and Aetna are exploring ways to leverage
employee behavior as a tool, instead of a vulnerability, to build a
more secure system. From understanding how people swipe their phones,
to the patterns they use when typing on a keyboard or walking, a better
understanding of behavioral biometrics is opening the door to
developing more cyber-secure components and processes.
The more we understand about human and social behavior, the
stronger our toolbox. Rather than resting the success of our
cybersecurity efforts on programs that require changes in human
behavior, we might have better success if we change our technology and
processes to fit the behavior of people. And the more we understand the
behavior of threat actors, the better we can design protections.
So in addition to building a better technology-based firewall, we
need to invest in developing a better human firewall. Our weakest link
and our most resilient asset to meet the dynamic changing needs of the
cyber arms race is us.
I thank each of our witnesses for being here today, and I look
forward to hearing what each of you has to say.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back my remaining time.

Chairman Weber. I thank the gentlelady from Oregon.
Our first witness today is Mr. Brent Stacey, Associate Lab
Director for National & Homeland Science and Technology at that
Idaho National Laboratory. Mr. Stacey earned his bachelor's
degree from Idaho State University.
Our next witness is Mr. Bennett Gaines, Senior Vice
President of Corporate Services and Chief Information Officer
for FirstEnergy Service Company. Mr. Gaines earned his
bachelor's degree in social sciences from Baldwin Wallace
College and his master's degree from the University of Phoenix.
Next, we have Ms. Annabelle Lee, Senior Technical Executive
in the Power Delivery and Utilization Sector for the Electric
Power Research Institute. Ms. Lee received her B.A. from
Stanford University and her master's degree from Michigan State
University.
And our final witness today is Mr. Greg Wilshusen--is it--
--
Mr. Wilshusen. Wilshusen.
Chairman Weber. Wilshusen.
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes.
Chairman Weber. Okay. So the rest of the Committee is duly
notified. Wilshusen, Director of Information Security Issues
for the Government Accountability Office. Mr. Wilshusen
received his bachelor's degree in business administration from
the University of Missouri and his master's degree in
information management from George Washington University School
of Engineering and Applied Sciences.
Welcome to all of you, and Mr. Stacey, you are recognized.

TESTIMONY OF MR. BRENT STACEY,

ASSOCIATE LAB DIRECTOR FOR NATIONAL &

HOMELAND SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,

IDAHO NATIONAL LAB

Mr. Stacey. Thank you, Chairmen Weber, Chairwoman Comstock,
Ranking Member Grayson, Ranking Member Lipinski, and
distinguished Members of the Committees. I want to thank you
for holding this hearing and inviting testimony from Idaho
National Laboratory, also known as INL.
INL is acutely aware of the important national challenges
facing critical infrastructure, especially the infrastructure
vital to securing our energy supply. For over a decade, INL has
developed and built capabilities focused on the control systems
employed by our nation's critical infrastructure. I'd like to
highlight a few examples out of many which represent how INL
teaming with others has contributed to the security of our
infrastructure.
First, the 2006/2007 Department of Homeland Security's
Aurora project test, destroying an electrical generator
connected to INL's power grid, was significant in proving a
cyber-physical vulnerability in the electric power system.
Second, for DOE Office of Electricity Distribution and
Energy Reliability, as the lead laboratory along with Sandia
National Laboratory for the National Supervisory Control and
Data Acquisition Test Bed, INL completed more than 100
assessments on vendor and asset owner control systems to
identify and resolve cyber vulnerabilities. For DHS, INL
provides control systems and critical infrastructure experts in
support of DHS programs including Industrial Control System
Cyber Emergency Response Team, or ICS-CERT.
INL remains committed to the complex national security
challenges that face our nation. As we lean forward pushing the
limits of science and engineering for control systems security,
we see a number of trends that offer insight into the direction
for future research and development. These insights include,
one, the presumption that a control system is air-gapped is not
an effective cybersecurity strategy. This has been demonstrated
by over 600 assessments. Intrusion detection technology is not
well developed for control system networks. The average length
of time for detection of a malware intrusion is 4 months and
typically identified by a third party. As the complexity and
interconnectedness of control systems increase, the probability
increases for unintended system failures of high consequence
independent of malicious intent. The dynamic threat is evolving
faster than the cycle of measure and countermeasure, and far
faster than the evolution of policy. And fifth, the demand for
trained cyber defenders with control systems knowledge vastly
exceeds the supply.
In a world in which we are rapidly migrating to the
Internet of Everything, these insights, and others, highlight a
seemingly unmanageable, exponentially increasing burden of
vulnerabilities, attack surfaces and interdependencies.
INL views this burdensome and dynamic cyber-physical
landscape, at its most basic level, as a three-tier pyramid of
defense. The base level is hygiene: the foundation of our
nation's efforts composed of the day-to-day measure and
countermeasure battle. Elements of this level include important
routine tasks such as standards compliance and patching. The
hygiene level is and has been primarily the role of industry.
The second level of the pyramid is advanced persistent threat
composed of the more sophisticated criminal and nation-states'
persistent campaigns. This requires a strategic partnership
with industry and government. At this level, ICS-CERT provides
critical surge response capacity and alerts. At the top of this
pyramid are the high-impact low-frequency events: catastrophic
and potentially cascading events that will likely require
substantial time to assess, respond to, and recover from. This
level is primarily the responsibility of government.
At INL, we are focusing our future research on the top two
levels, striving for a 2- to four-year research-to-deployment
cycle. Our objective with this research is to achieve
transformational innovations that improve the security of our
power infrastructure by reducing complexity, implementing
cyber-informed design, and integrating selected digital
enhancements.
In conclusion, I'd like to thank the Committee members for
this opportunity to share our insights into the capabilities,
experiences, and vision for cybersecurity and the protection of
our nation's power grid. Your interest in understanding
cybersecurity threats with an emphasis on the reliability of
our national power grid is commendable and gives me confidence
that there is strong support from our legislators for research
leading to innovative solutions.
One of my intentions today is to instill reciprocal
confidence that INL, in concert with DOE and DOE laboratories,
will continue to apply our intellectual talent and research to
address these challenges.
In honoring the time allotted for my statement, I request
that my full written statement be entered into the record.
Thank you.
Chairman Weber. Without objection, so ordered.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stacey follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Weber. Mr. Gaines, you're up.

TESTIMONY OF MR. BENNETT GAINES,

SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,

CORPORATE SERVICES AND

CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER,

FIRSTENERGY SERVICE COMPANY

Mr. Gaines. Good morning, Chairman Weber and Members of the
Committee. I am Bennett Gaines, Senior Vice President,
Corporate Services, Chief Information Officer for FirstEnergy.
Our 10 operating companies serve 6 million electrical customers
in six states, and we control an interconnected network of
power plants, transmission lines and distribution facilities. I
am responsible for providing information technology services,
ensuring the security of the company's physical and cyber
assets.
Over the past few years, FirstEnergy has worked with the
Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Energy, and
Congress, sharing steps we are taking to address cyber threats
as well as developing partnerships with the federal government
in these efforts.
In 2013, FirstEnergy was one of only a handful of utilities
that entered into a cooperative research and development
agreement, or CRADA, with Homeland Security, a relationship
that has proven valuable to both us and the federal government.
In 2014, we began working directly with the Department of
Energy as one of the first utilities to deploy the
Cybersecurity Risk Information Sharing Program, or CRISP, tool.
We strongly believe that sharing this information of critical
information is essential and should be actively supported
moving forward. The fact is, although the cybersecurity efforts
of electric utilities have been effective in addressing threats
to date, we need to continually strengthen and build on these
efforts to ensure they are up to the task of meeting the future
cyber-related challenges.
Operational and technical advances have created roader
surfaces that are more vulnerable to attacks. Companies
continue to integrate remote access, mobile devices that
increase exposure. High-value targets such as Supervisory
Controlled Data, Acquisition, or SCADA systems, further entice
attackers to take advantage of an organization.
Cyber attacks are on the rise, and the behavior of
cyberterrorists has become increasingly destructive. Many
companies are doing an excellent job with prevention through
layer defense, real-time alerting, operational monitoring,
security awareness training, and other proven tactics. However,
in light of today's threats and vulnerabilities, we need to
focus more of our attention on getting ahead of the threats
rather than simply reacting to the threats.
Toward that end, we need to take aggressive steps to
mitigate vulnerabilities and minimize the damage and business
losses that could result from potential compromises.
At FirstEnergy, we're evaluating cyber threats to our
communications network by integrating more traditional data
regarding physical access systems and the status of equipment
and health and on our power systems. This process, called
Threat Intelligence Management, or TIM, provides a more
comprehensive system-wide consistent picture that our Security
Operations Center can use to improve our response to cyber
attacks. While any information can be shared, it also must be
aggregated, correlated, analyzed and distilled to be relevant
and actionable. By supporting these essential functions, TIM
helps us maintain a critical infrastructure that is both highly
secure and resilient. The program analyzes a constant flow of
information from every corner of the system to anticipate and
detect threats. This data can be shared among government and
industry partners to enhance awareness of threats and provide
more warning information to better mitigate attacks.
Simply put, TIM offers a better platform for information
sharing. The program not only helps us better identify and
analyze threats and attacks, it also supports more effective
information sharing and great collaboration among all
stakeholders. This results in more threat indicators, improved
security, greater resilience of critical infrastructure, and
ultimately more effective collaboration between industry and
government.
Finally, the TIM program provides enhanced visibility of
the enterprise overall security posture. This is accomplished
by coordinating the monitoring of cybersecurity, physical
security, information technology, and operational technologies.
Advanced analysis of these functions provide early warning of
security incidents and rapid mitigation of vulnerabilities.
In closing, we must continually improve our cybersecurity
systems and processes to stay ahead of the bad actors. To give
you a greater sense of the size and scope of the problem, I
simply point out that during my brief time here today,
FirstEnergy probably has defended itself from at least four
cyber attacks.
As you consider where to focus our efforts moving forward,
I urge you to look towards greater research and funding in this
area with a focus on aggregating, correlating, analyzing and
distilling information in order to be relevant and actionable.
I strongly believe that one of the best ways to achieve this
goal is through an effective threat intelligence management
program.
Thank you very much for the time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gaines follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Weber. Thank you, Mr. Gaines.
Ms. Lee, you're now recognized.

STATEMENT OF MS. ANNABELLE LEE,

SENIOR TECHNICAL EXECUTIVE IN THE

POWER DELIVERY AND UTILIZATION SECTOR,

ELECTRIC POWER RESEARCH INSTITUTE

Ms. Lee. Good morning, Chairmen and Members of the
Subcommittees.
The Electric Power Research Institute is an independent,
nonprofit organization and conducts research and development
relating to the generation, delivery, and use of electricity
for the benefit of the public.
The nation's power system consists of both legacy and next-
generation technologies. New grid technologies will operate in
conjunction with legacy equipment that may be several decades
old and provide new security controls.
Traditional information technology--IT--devices typically
have a lifespan of 3 to five years, and historically, IT has
included computer systems, applications, communications
technology and software typical for a business or enterprise.
In contrast, operational technology, or OT, devices, have a
lifespan of up to 40 years or longer and have historically
focused on physical equipment technology that is commonly used
to operate the energy sector.
There's some basic differences between the security
requirements for IT and OT systems. For example, the focus for
IT systems is confidentiality of information such as customer
energy usage and privacy information. The focus for OT systems
is availability and integrity to ensure that the reliability of
the grid is maintained even in the event of a cybersecurity
incident.
With the increase in the use of digital devices and more
advanced communications and IT, the overall attack surface has
increased. These new devices include commercially available
components as an alternative to proprietary solutions that are
specific to the electric sector. Many of the commercially
available solutions have known vulnerabilities that could be
exploited when the solutions are installed in OT devices.
The electric sector is addressing these attacks with
various mitigation strategies. Cybersecurity must be included
in all phases of the system development lifecycle and address
deliberate attacks launched by disgruntled employees and
nation-states as well as non-malicious cybersecurity events,
for example, user errors or incorrect documentation.
Risk assessment is a key planning tool for implementation
of an effective cybersecurity program. EPRI, in conjunction
with utilities, researchers, and vendors, developed a risk
assessment methodology that is based on a typical IT
methodology with impact and likelihood criteria that are
specific to the electric sector. This work was performed as
part of the National Electric Sector Cybersecurity Organization
Resource, or NESCOR for short, project, DOE funded public-
private partnership. Several utilities are implementing
mitigation strategies at the enterprise level. One example is
an Integrated Security Operations Center, or ISOC for short. An
ISOC is designed to collect, integrate and analyze alarms and
logs from traditionally siloed organizations, providing much
greater situational awareness to the utility's security team.
Two documents specifically address the electric sector and
provide mitigation strategies. Both documents are used
worldwide. The first is the National Institute of Standards and
Technology Interagency Report Guidelines for Smart Grid Cyber
Security. The development was led by NIST with a team of
roughly 150 volunteers. A second document is the Electricity
Subsector Cybersecurity Capability Maturity Model, which allows
electric utilities and grid operators to assess their
cybersecurity capabilities and prioritize their actions and
investments to improve cybersecurity. Many utilities and EPRI
map their R&D programs to the domain specified in this maturity
model.
With the modernization of the electric grid, new
technologies and devices have been deployed to meet our current
and future electric sector needs. With this new functionality
comes new threats including cybersecurity threats. To take
advantage of the new technology, these threats must be
addressed.
This concludes my statement.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lee follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Weber. Thank you, Ms. Lee.
Mr. Wilshusen, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. GREG WILSHUSEN,

DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION SECURITY ISSUES,

GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Wilshusen. Chairman Weber, Representative Bonamici, and
other Members of the Subcommittees, thank you for the
opportunity to testify at today's hearing on efforts by federal
agencies and industry to mitigate cybersecurity threats to the
U.S. power systems.
As you know, the electric power industry is increasingly
incorporating information and communications technologies into
its existing infrastructure. The use of these technologies can
provide many benefits such as greater efficiency and lower cost
to consumers. However, if not implemented securely, modernized
electricity grid systems will be vulnerable to attack and that
could result in loss of electrical services essential to
maintaining our national economy and security.
Today, I'll discuss actions taken and required to bolster
cybersecurity of the nation's power systems. Before I begin, if
I may, I'd like to recognize several members of my team who
were instrumental in developing my statement and performing the
work underpinning it. With me today is Mike Gilmore, an
Assistant Director, and Brad Becker, who led this effort. In
addition, Lee McCracken, John Ludwigson, and Scott Pettis also
made significant contributions.
In 2011, we reported on a number of challenges that
industry and government stakeholders faced in securing smart
grid systems and networks against cyber threats. These
challenges included taking a comprehensive approach to
cybersecurity, ensuring that smart grid systems had built-in
security measures, monitoring implementation of cybersecurity
standards and guidelines, effectively sharing cybersecurity
information, and establishing cybersecurity metrics.
Since then, FERC has acted to implement our recommendations
to assess these and other challenges in its ongoing
cybersecurity efforts. However, it did not implement our
recommendation to coordinate with state regulators and other
groups to periodically evaluate the extent to which utilities
and manufacturers are following voluntary cybersecurity
guidelines.
Other entities have acted to improve cybersecurity in the
sector. For example, NERC has issued updates to its critical
infrastructure protection standards for cybersecurity and has
hosted an annual conference on grid security. In 2014, NIST
updated its smart grid cybersecurity guidelines to address the
threat of combined physical-cyber attacks. NIST also issued a
framework for improving critical infrastructure protection and
cybersecurity. The framework is intended to provide a flexible
and risk-based approach for entities including those within the
electricity subsector to protect their vital assets from cyber
threats.
The Departments of Homeland Security and Energy have
efforts underway to promote the adoption of the framework by
critical infrastructure owners and operators. These departments
have also developed cybersecurity risk management approaches
and tools that are available for use by the electricity
subsector.
Nevertheless, given the increasing use of information and
communications technologies to operate the electricity grid and
other areas, continued attention to these and other areas is
required to help mitigate the risk these threats pose to the
electricity grid.
In particular, assuring that security features are built
into smart grid systems and that a comprehensive approach to
cybersecurity is taken whereby utilities employ a defense in
depth strategy based on sound risk management principles will
be essential. Effectively sharing cyber threat vulnerability
and incident information among federal, state and local
governments as well as the private sector stakeholders in a
timely manner is imperative to provide utilities with the
information they need to protect their assets against cyber
threats.
Additionally, an effective mechanism for monitoring the
implementation and effectiveness of the cybersecurity policies,
practices and controls over U.S. power systems is paramount to
ensure the resiliency and security of the electricity grid.
To summarize, more needs to be done to meet the challenges
facing the industry in enhancing security. Federal regulators
and other stakeholders need to work closely with the private
sector to address cybersecurity challenges as the generation,
transmission and distribution of electricity come to rely more
on emerging and interconnected technologies.
Chairman Weber and Members of the Subcommittee, this
concludes my statement. I'd be happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilshusen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Weber. Thank you, Mr. Wilshusen, and I now
recognize myself for five minutes of questions. Wow, where do
we start?
Mr. Gaines, the Department of Energy's Office of
Electricity works with electric utilities on information
sharing and encouraging utilities to learn from the challenges
faced by their regional counterparts. The Department of
Homeland Security also operates programs to facilitate the
information sharing you referred to in your comments. What
information do you feel is most important to share with each
other and for the industry to share with regulators, and the
third part to my question really is, in your comments I think
you said information had to be actionable.
Mr. Gaines. Correct.
Chairman Weber. Define what you mean by ``actionable.'' Let
me reiterate. What information do you feel is most important
for industry to share with each other and then to share with
the regulators? It may be one and the same. And then define
``actionable information'' for us.
Mr. Gaines. I'll start out with your first questions in
that we have spent the last two years working directly with
both agencies and within the confines of the programs that they
have, which are the CRISP tool and the enhanced cybersecurity
tool, and they are very effective. The difficulty of both of
those tools, they're historical; they look back. They don't
look at real-time incidents, and in some cases, there can be a
lag between three to six months from when an incident occurred.
It's not correlated on a timely manner as to what is going on
with the rest of the industry so that we can take action on
those events, and in some cases, you could have a dormant piece
of malware sitting in your environment that you didn't take
action on but that was alerted months earlier.
As it relates to actionable, it's having real-time
information, and a technical term--I don't want to lose you--is
the actual threat actors' IP address and the specific
information that's time-framed within that window. An
illustration of that would be----
Chairman Weber. You're not losing me. I was wondering about
that earlier when you said up to 4 months since 2011, 300
attacks, and no suspects.
Mr. Gaines. That's correct.
Chairman Weber. Go ahead.
Mr. Gaines. And that is the difficulty is that by the time
the actor penetrates your environment, they're not the actor
that you see. There's an alias that sits behind that wall and
the difficulty is following that breadcrumb back to the
original source, and one of the difficulties that we have in
the industry is, is the information we get from the federal
government is not timely, and so for us to take action on
something that really we have no control over is very
difficult. My suggestion would be to reverse that, is for us to
provide across the industry real-time incidents, and it's
doable, and to be able to track not only the source but the
actual follow-on activity that occurs from that event.
One of the things that we don't do is we don't do a good
diagnostics of what happens once the event occurs, and we move
on to the next one.
Chairman Weber. Let me jump over to Mr. Wilshusen. You
talked about having conferences, I think, you met around the
country, probably industry and I presume government as well.
How often are those conferences held and how many attendees,
and should we increase that frequency and are they sharing that
information?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, what I referred to were conferences
that were being held by NERC, which is the North American
Electric Reliability Corporation, and they hold those annually,
but to the extent that Mr. Gaines talked about in providing
useful, actionable information in a timely manner, annual is
not enough. They do talk about different threats----
Chairman Weber. It would almost have to be daily or weekly.
Mr. Wilshusen. Much more frequently. This has been----
Chairman Weber. Absolutely.
Mr. Wilshusen. Right. This has been----
Chairman Weber. I'm talking about the sharing of the
information.
Mr. Wilshusen. Right, the sharing of the information,
particularly between federal government and the private sector
and even among private sector entities has been a longstanding
problem and a challenge throughout all critical infrastructure
sectors including the, electricity subsector. What we have
found in the past is that there have been certain obstacles to
doing that including from the government sector to private
sector, making sure that those individuals at the private
sector had the appropriate security clearances--that's been a
challenge--as well as having a secure mechanism to share that
information timely.
Chairman Weber. Is there one office that oversees what
you're describing? Is there one office within your agency, for
example, that oversees that? Who oversees that?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, overall, DHS has a responsibility
across federal government for taking the lead in the----
Chairman Weber. So does DHS--you may not know this--forgive
me for interrupting, but does DHS have one office that
allocates their time and manpower and resources to just this
cybersecurity for energy companies alone? Do you know?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, it does have a group that's
responsible overall but the Department of Energy, known as the
sector-specific agency, also has responsibility for interacting
with the energy sector to include the electricity sector for
sharing information and assisting that sector in securing its
systems.
Chairman Weber. I am running out of time, but I have one
last question. So what could be done better to help streamline
this process?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, one of the requirements under the
Executive Order 13-636 is for agencies and particularly I think
it's DOD and perhaps DHS to come up with a mechanism that will
allow for faster sharing of information to the private sector.
Chairman Weber. All right. Thank you.
I'm over time, and I yield to the gentlelady from Oregon.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to the witnesses for bringing your expertise on an
important issue.
I also serve on the Education and Workforce Committee, and
I'm going to focus at first on some of the workforce issues
making sure that we have the workforce that we need to continue
to address this serious issue, and I know Mr. Stacey, you said
that the demand for trained cyber defenders with control
systems knowledge vastly exceeds the supply.
Now, my alma mater, the University Of Oregon, has just
created an Oregon Center for Cybersecurity and Privacy. They
received a federal--some federal funding, and a Center of
Excellence designation, and they plan to begin enrolling
students by next summer. But how can we incentivize more
universities to support educating this workforce, and once we
have a strong pipeline of students and get them into the
workforce, how can we attract them to public service and
government jobs when typically the private sector would pay
more and be perceived as more innovative?
So I'll start with Ms. Lee and also ask Mr. Wilshusen and
anybody who wants to weigh in.
Ms. Lee. As I noted in my statement, I previously was in
the federal government for 14 years. I think one of the real
advantages of working in the federal government is the kind of
work you can do and the impact that you have. I mentioned the
guidelines for smart grid cybersecurity products that we
developed. There were 150 volunteers from around the world that
participated in developing that document. These were senior-
level people literally around the world. I kept getting asked,
do you pay these people, and my response was no, these are
volunteers. I think one thing in the federal government and
working with the federal government for several decades, you
can have an impact and influence that you don't have anywhere
else, and to me, that's a real benefit for working in the
public sector. Private sector does compete. It is difficult
now. There're very few--as mentioned earlier, there are not
significant numbers of people who are in cybersecurity, and
those who focus on control systems, and as I mentioned, there
are some basic differences between cybersecurity for control
systems and our IT systems. That community is even smaller. We
need to beef up that workforce. There are controls that you
don't put on OT systems that are typical on IT systems, and we
need to--we definitely need to grow this area.
Ms. Bonamici. And do you agree with Mr. Stacey that there's
a serious need, that we don't have the workforce?
Ms. Lee. We don't have the workforce.
Ms. Bonamici. I want to follow up because I know the U of O
Center is going to be working with the faculty from several
different departments including computer and information
science, philosophy, business, law. What role--you talked about
the role of human behavior but how can we really capitalize on
understanding human behavior to deal with the threats, and also
hopefully to be out in front and prevent them.
I'll open it up to the panel. Ms. Lee, do you want to
start?
Ms. Lee. As you mentioned, I think human behavior is very
important. Historically--and I've been doing cybersecurity now
for almost three decades--the solution was, have longer
passwords, and so what does everybody do? They write them down
because you can't remember 12- or 15-character passwords that
you have to change every 3 or 4 months.
Ms. Bonamici. We've all done that.
Ms. Lee. Yeah. You write them down. That's the only way you
can remember them. Is to look at cybersecurity and the solution
has to be yes, we need to figure it out. As I say, it's a messy
environment.
If you look at the reality of cybersecurity, the devices
that are out there, the controls you may need to implement. you
can't do. You either can't afford them or they affect the
performance. You need to figure out the solutions. And I think
that's the direction that cybersecurity needs to go.
Historically----
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. I need to get a couple more
questions in.
Mr. Gaines, you talked about the TIM, the Threat
Intelligence Management. That seems like a sound approach. What
are the barriers to improving and expanding that approach?
Mr. Gaines. The barriers are twofold. One, there are
limitation that industry has today in communicating with the
government vulnerabilities, and that is a real challenge in
that we are limited to some extent because we hold the
liability if there's a breach or vulnerability to the network.
I think that needs to looked at and in some cases eliminated so
that we can share openly very specific information about
vulnerabilities.
The second is, is the actual technologies themselves.
Today, we are one of only two utilities that have a completely
integrated security operation center, and Ms. Lee spoke about
that center. It's a center that we integrate the physical,
being badge access, building access. We integrate the IT, being
the cyber component, and we integrate the operational, the
SCADA systems together. All three of those systems are actually
monitored, reviewed, and we take actions against events, and
I'll use a simple analogy so you can understand----
Ms. Bonamici. I'm afraid my time's going to expire. Can I
just have a few more seconds, Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Weber. Without objection.
Ms. Bonamici. I want to get in a quick question for Mr.
Wilshusen. You mentioned in your testimony that FERC was
adopting standards from NIST's efforts but according to FERC
officials, the statute did not provide any authority to allow
FERC to require the smart grid technologies to follow the
standards and now it's voluntary. How's that working?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, it is voluntary. One of the problems
that we noted is that FERC has not--because the standards are
voluntary and have not been adopted, it has not gone out to
examine the effectiveness or the extent to which those
voluntary standards have been implemented.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, and I'm very over time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yield back.
Chairman Weber. No problem.
And now the Chairman is pleased to recognize for his first
appearance in a hearing in this Committee, the gentleman from
Illinois, Darin LaHood. Welcome.
Mr. LaHood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much. I
appreciate it. Great to be part of this Subcommittee.
I want to thank the witnesses for your testimony this
morning.
I guess, Mr. Stacey, I wanted to just maybe see if you
could highlight a couple examples of cyber attacks that maybe
recently happened where systems have been compromised and maybe
the cost to a particular company and how it affected citizens
or customers.
Mr. Stacey. Yes. Two of the most recent are BlackEnergy and
Havex attacks. These have been to the human-machine interface
associated with the industrial control systems. Near as we can
tell, those are primarily associated with collecting
information, trying to map out systems and see what they look
like, although the payloads on those are dynamic. There's been
a very active response from DHS on this along with other
entities, in fact, traveling around the country in briefings
with the FBI and notifying people about that.
As far as the costs associated with individual utilities in
mitigating that, I don't have insight into that, but I know the
federal government and the laboratory took a very aggressive
stance on notifying and making people aware of those particular
malware.
Mr. LaHood. And I guess as a follow-up maybe to Mr. Gaines,
when we talk about cybersecurity and talk about really what
these entities are engaged in is criminal activity, when we
talk about deterring that, I mean, are there currently any
active prosecutions by the federal government, either the U.S.
Attorney's Office or anybody that we can kind of use as
examples to deter this behavior?
Mr. Gaines. I don't--I'm not aware of any criminal activity
so I say that. I do know that there have been incidents that
have been nation-state and/or in some cases domestic that
probably warrant the investigation of that. A good example of
that would've been the Metcalf incident that occurred in
southern California in 2013. That substation lost 17
transformers. There were 127 rounds of ammunition that was shot
into the substation and power had to be rerouted.
To the Chairman's point, though, that actor has not--and/or
actors have not been found, and the evidence obviously is very
clear that it was multiple actors very potentially.
But to the extent that there has been prosecution, that has
not occurred, to my knowledge.
Mr. LaHood. And on that specific case with Metcalf, is
there an ongoing investigation to try to determine who the
perpetrator was?
Mr. Gaines. There absolutely is, and following that
incident, FERC issued a number of standards on physical
security that the industry is now implementing, and a lot of
that has to do with both the monitoring both of the physical
asset and the cyber asset, and so we've learned from an
industry but to the extent that we've seen that replicated or
duplicated in industry, it has not.
Mr. LaHood. In terms of becoming aware when a system is
compromised, walk me through a little bit of, if a company is
compromised, the reporting on that in terms of to the federal
government. Is that something that's made public, or who's the
repository of threats or compromises that happen, and then how
does that get made public or is there some secrecy involved
with that? I mean, I guess what I'm getting at, do companies,
you know, in a competitive marketplace not want people to be
aware that their systems were compromised for vulnerabilities?
How is that addressed?
Mr. Gaines. I'll give you a real-life example. At 11
o'clock yesterday afternoon, our systems were attempted to be
penetrated by a denial of service, so they're flooding your
network. That flooding of the network slows down your network,
and at that point we pick it up on our firewalls, we shut the
traffic down, and then we do forensics on that. Within an hour,
we report that to the ES ISAC. That ISAC is our sector group
that we use to facilitate that type of information. Now, I go
back to my original point that I made earlier. That happened to
me. I venture to say that that same actor was scanning other
networks and that that same DDoS attack was being attempted. At
4 o'clock, we get an acknowledgement back from the government
that they received the information. As of 11 o'clock, 24 hours
later, I still don't have a response back from the government.
There's a good example of the timeliness of information. If
we could share that information real time within the industry,
think about the potential of being able to collaborate very
quickly and take action because most likely that actor has shut
down their server and they've moved on, and so we have no time
again to take any reasonable mitigation steps. The good news
is, our security systems worked. To the extent that that threat
I reported gets communicated, it does get communicated. Most
likely it'll be a few months from now. It'll be watered down,
and the real sad part about it is, it doesn't have the level of
detail to take any action on it.
Mr. LaHood. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Weber. Thank you.
And before I go to the gentleman from New York, if I can
just take one second here, so what you just described, Mr.
Gaines, gets back to those conferences. If you could come in
with that kind of information in real time to everybody that
was in a like business and say expect this kind of attack, is
that a doable deal?
Mr. Gaines. I would--if I may----
Chairman Weber. Sure.
Mr. Gaines. I would argue slightly different. I have
security clearance, and to the gentleman's point, Homeland
Security does offer briefings to those that have security
clearance. They're non-industry-specific so they can be across
any sector. And ironically, the same approaches that an actor
uses in finance is very similar to an attempt that they would
use in our industry. That's still not soon enough. Those
briefings occur once every three months.
Chairman Weber. But is there no platform to broadcast this
information industry-wide? And let's be energy industry
specific. Is there no platform for that?
Mr. Gaines. There is. My point being is, it's not timely
enough. There is, and it's a very good tool. It's not timely
enough and it's not detailed enough.
Chairman Weber. All right. Thank you.
I appreciate the gentleman from New York's indulgence.
You're recognized.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome to our panelists.
The line between federal and state power has historically
been drawn at the intersection between the high-voltage
transmission system and the lower-voltage distribution system.
However, the relevance of this distinction is less clear when
it comes to cybersecurity, and Ms. Lee, you addressed some of
that with the new technologies, but to both you and Mr. Gaines,
Ms. Lee and Mr. Gaines, could the increase of smart grid and
distributed energy technologies being deployed on the
electrical distribution system increase those cybersecurity
risks to the high-voltage transmission system.
Ms. Lee. As I said in my statement, the increase in
technology and the inclusion of IT and communications, the new
technology, yes, that does increase the potential for
cybersecurity events. I will add another one, and that is the
interconnection of these systems. If we look at the new
technology, our distributed energy resources, renewable devices
where you transmit the electricity that may be generated in one
state to another state, all of that increases the attack
surface and the potential for cybersecurity events.
On the other side, utilities, reliability is number one.
Cybersecurity should support the reliability of the grid, and
there are a number of tools and techniques that the electric
sector has been using for decades to address reliability that
can also be used to address cybersecurity. This is not a
totally foreign area, and so it's taking advantage of what
they're currently doing, and then looking at the techniques and
technologies that the IT community uses to address these new
threats.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And Mr. Gaines, do you also concur that it increases risk
here?
Mr. Gaines. If I may, not to differ, I might add a
different perspective----
Mr. Tonko. Okay.
Mr. Gaines. --if I could, please? The distribution system
and transmission system are two separate systems. The
distribution system is a regional, local system and smart grid
and/or tied to that smart grid is a meter. That's an individual
IP address. It's an individual computer. Think of it like that.
There are securities around that through a certificate and
encryption, and in our design, that particular meter is not
tied into our core distribution system. We have what we call a
head-in system that sits outside of our company.
So I would suggest to you that from a smart meter and smart
grid perspective, the design and construct of that is secure.
Is there a risk in our cases in Pennsylvania? We have two
million customers, and I'm convinced given enough time with a
bad actor, they could figure out how to be destructive with
that. But to the extent that our design and configuration
within the industry and our design and configuration is very
similar to most smart grids and the technology is very similar.
So there's a risk but I don't see it as a huge threat.
Mr. Tonko. And no specific recommendations you would make
to address that increased risk, either of you?
Mr. Gaines. I would--the gentleman, Mr. Stacey, made some
very good points. I think good hygiene is important, good
engineering is important, and constant management. These
devices are now computers and so they have to be maintained.
They don't have the life of an existing meter, which is 20 to
30 years. These devices have a life of between five to seven
years, and so the challenge that the industry is making sure
they maintain their smart grid environment, not neglect it.
Mr. Tonko. Ms. Lee?
Ms. Lee. There are things that the industry, as Mr. Gaines
said, is doing, and I mentioned in my testimony all utilities
do risk assessments. They need to prioritize their system,
prioritize the risks and vulnerabilities, and then make
decisions about which ones they want to mitigate. They do not
have unlimited resources. Utilities deal with many areas of
risk. Cybersecurity is one area. And they need to prioritize
and determine what they want to do for their mitigation
strategies and then make decisions that way.
Mr. Tonko. There was some exchange--thank you. There was
some exchange over the role of forensics in cybersecurity. What
do we need--this is to all of you. What is needed to adequately
conduct a forensic analysis after a cyber event? What are the
best----
Mr. Gaines. Directed to me, sir?
Mr. Tonko. Any of the four.
Mr. Gaines. Two things. First of all, there needs to be--I
go back to what we can share and what we cannot share with the
government during an incident. That's a--there's a lag that
occurs there. If I have a major incident in my environment, I
have to report that to several agencies. That can be days or
weeks in some cases. Secondly, once we determine it truly was a
cyber incident, then I have to put together a full
investigative report, and then it goes through a very lengthy
process of determining the actual degree or significance of
that. I suggest to you that we cut all that or most of that
away, and that if I truly know that I've been breached inside
of my network, I think there's an obligation that we work much
closer with the federal government on a real-time basis of
defining the problem first and then let's go assess the
penalties or determine who was at fault later, and that lag at
times can be weeks and months before we actually get into the
real forensics and do the real what I think are important
things are mitigating it. And more importantly, that
information is not shared with the industry in some cases for a
year.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Weber. I thank the gentleman.
And now the gentleman from Arkansas, Mr. Westerman, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
panel, for your insight today.
Mr. Wilshusen, I'll direct this question to you, but others
may wish to add in on it. I've visited several power-generating
facilities, and I was pleased to find out that the control
systems inside the power plants are totally isolated from the
outside world in the facilities I've visited, so the chance of
a cyber attack on the actual generating facilities is pretty
much mitigated unless a bad actor got into the facility and
messed with the control system, which could cause a huge issue.
So when we're talking about a cyber attack, what physically are
the risks there since these power plants are basically just
getting a demand signal from the grid? What kind of destruction
do you anticipate could happen from a cyber attack?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, first of all, I would first ask about
your premise that the industrial control systems networks are
indeed isolated and separated from other external networks or
company communications networks. What we have found and what I
have seen reported through ICS-CERT and others is that often
companies believe their industrial control systems networks may
be air-gapped, if you will, but are surprised to find when in
fact they are not. With the increasing introduction of
information and communications technologies, we're finding,
increasingly, that these networks are indeed interconnected
with other networks. That's one thing. But given that, if they
are air-gapped, it does provide an additional level of security
certainly to where remote access may not be available and where
an attacker may have to have physical access to the device. But
to be sure that's something that if they are air-gapped, that
is an improvement and a control over it, but--and that's what
has been historically but increasingly we're finding on what's
being reported is that they are being interconnected with
internal and external networks, thereby as Ms. Lee mentioned,
increasing the attack surface and increasing the likelihood of
a potential incident over those industrial control systems
networks.
Mr. Westerman. So is that the main concern with cyber
attacks is getting into those power-generating facilities'
control systems or is it more to protect the distribution and
transmission systems?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, I think you have that probably at
multiple sections throughout the entire electricity grid,
depending upon where the control systems or the sensors are
located. If they are indeed interconnected to external
networks, there's an increased likelihood that they may be
vulnerable to attack if they're not sufficiently hardened. Of
course, there are actions that an entity can take to better
secure those connections and to better secure those devices. If
those are being done, that will help, but historically, that
always hasn't been done for a number of reasons.
Mr. Westerman. It just seems like it would be a good
operating protocol to have those industrial control systems
isolated from the outside world as far as having the best way
to keep a cyber attack from happening on one of those
facilities.
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes, that's correct, but often they're
interconnecting in order to provide greater efficiency and
usefulness, if you will, and so there's always that balance,
but yes, it would be better from a security perspective to keep
them isolated.
Mr. Westerman. So when we talk about the role that smart
grid technology plays in creating cyber vulnerabilities, does
the fact that the smart grid relies on two-way communication
make the grid more susceptible to cyber attacks, and if so, how
is that?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, potentially, and that would be as Mr.
Gaines mentioned more at the distribution level rather than the
power-generating and transmission level where there could be
attacks against individual smart meters. Indeed, I believe
there have been reported attacks against smart meters, but more
for the purpose of committing fraud and addressing some of the
programming that is in those smart meters, but the threat
potentially is, and again, absent other controls that may now
be in place, is that collectively as millions of smart meters
out there could that have an impact on the larger electricity
grid, and that's something that there potentially could.
Mr. Westerman. And when you talk about smart meters, are
you talking about the meters that give the feedback or just the
ones that the meter reader can drive through the neighborhood
and read the meters without getting out of the vehicle? Are
those----
Mr. Wilshusen. Yeah, those would be included in that, yes.
Mr. Westerman. I think I'm out of time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Weber. Okay. The gentleman yields back.
The gentlelady from Connecticut, Ms. Esty, is recognized.
Ms. Esty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and to our Ranking
Members for today's very important hearing.
In Connecticut, we're very focused on grid reliability just
actually from natural disasters we've been coping with, and
certainly the cybersecurity threat has gotten us all to pay
much closer attention.
I have two quick questions. First for Ms. Lee and Mr.
Gaines. Can you explain a little bit more how we should address
the challenges between the difference in lifespan of
operational technology and information technology? All of us
who know, who have any of those devices in our pockets, and if
you've got teenagers, you really know within a year they want a
new one, and yet we're looking at overall systems on the
utility side that are decades long. What do we know about from
prior history that can help us in Congress think about how to
meld together these two systems, one of which is highly
capital-intensive over decades and another which is changing
constantly?
Mr. Gaines. Ms. Lee, go ahead.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. Yes, as I mentioned earlier, the
difference in lifecycle--and it's amazing when you think our
device if it's a year old, it's ancient.
What needs to be done, and talking about the modernization
of the grid, and I think of that more than just a smart grid.
If you want to talk about all of the domains--generation,
transmission and distribution--the new devices are using
commercially available operating systems and applications
rather than the proprietary solutions that were used
historically, and so when you look at these devices, yes, they
may have a lifespan of 30 or 40 years but you have Windows, you
have your internet protocols. It's having the two communities,
and Mr. Gaines talked about that, having the communities, the
IT and OT communities together, figure out the best solutions,
and a lot of utilities are putting them in the same room and
addressing these difficulties because when you get away from
the proprietary solutions, you need to figure out how do you do
it with all of these commercially available products.
Mr. Gainrs. I would add to that two things you heard me in
the testimony. We have and are converging both the operational
side of our business and the IT side of our business, and we're
doing it a lot with technology first of all. Inside of a
substation, 15 years ago it was an analog substation and it was
not two-way communication. What sits in a substation now is a
communications network, and so we are building out with inside
substations a very protected, secure network inside of that
substation, and it comes with us--it comes with cyber risk but
it also comes with the ability to monitor that substation. And
so that is the piece that some of those in industry are doing.
We are thinking of that substation as a physical asset as well
as a logical asset. And so when I actually manage our
substations, I think of them as a computer. I think of them as
an asset in transmitting and/or transferring energy, and in one
place we look at both of those. We don't separate those two. We
don't separate the operational side of our business from the
cyber side or the technology side. And as more communication
devices go into substations, that's going to be required.
Ms. Esty. Thank you. That is very helpful.
And just a quick question for anyone who wants to chime in.
Part of what we do is direct research dollars from this
Committee, and if you had to divide up the federal research
dollars between on cybersecurity, in prevention, detention,
mitigation, and recovery, at this stage of the game, what do
you think for us--those of us who sit here in Congress as we're
allocating funds and we all know we should have more funds, but
with the not enough money that we have, as I think about it,
how should we think about dividing those up?
Mr. Gaines. Mine would be prevention. It has the greatest
opportunity to be able to share, and I think the greatest
opportunity to expand and grow.
Mr. Stacey. Yes. Thank you for the question.
I would offer that we're spending an awful lot today on the
measure-countermeasure. The threats and the daily bombardment
is consuming most of our resources. We need to make sure that
we're investing a significant amount of our research dollars in
how do we take some of these critical assets off the table with
either some kind of disruption zone--which is now a terminology
that's being used where you put some kind of a----
Chairman Weber. A firewall? A firewall?
Mr. Stacey. Well, it's not quite as sophisticated as a
firewall. It's an analog circuit that allows the electrons to
go in and only do one thing, and it requires the cyber hacker
to have physical access to the other side. And so research
associated with trying to help define the critical assets and
then we create an environment to take some of these critical
assets off the table.
So to answer your question shortly, I believe more needs to
be done to get us out of this paradigm of measure-
countermeasure and how we're going to solve this long term
because, frankly, the resources aren't scalable. Thank you.
Ms. Esty. Thank you. That's very helpful, yes.
We all remember Mad Men and Spy versus Spy. I think you're
right. We need to be removing assets from vulnerability. It
makes a lot of sense.
Thank you all very much.
Chairman Weber. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Palmer.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for coming in this morning. It's extremely important.
Mr. Gaines, the National Institute for Standards and
Technology has developed voluntary guidelines for smart grid
cybersecurity, and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
continues to approve cybersecurity standards. How helpful are
these types of standards to the industry?
Mr. Gaines. The standards are invaluable. They create a
baseline. However, I suggest to you that's just what they are
is a baseline, and that the threats that we see today are going
forward, they're not going back. And so we identify most of the
vulnerabilities associated with those standards and things that
happen to us, not what things are going to happen to us. And I
don't think that you can regulate or put standards in this to
control every vulnerability. What I think you have to have is a
collaborative effort across industry and government to address
some of the issues that we have.
Mr. Palmer. Part of my concern is that these are industry
standards, and James Clapper, the Director of National
Intelligence, said the greatest threat to our national security
is cyber attacks. I think he identified 140 attacks against
U.S. corporations by China, and it appears to me that we're in
the middle of a digital arms race in terms of cyber attacks,
and specifically my concern right now is with our energy
infrastructure and how devastating it would be if we had a
cyber attack against our infrastructure that shut it down. Do
you think industry standards alone are enough or does the
government need to take a more active role in this,
particularly in developing the technology to protect us against
cyber attacks?
Mr. Gaines. First of all, to answer your first question,
are the standards adequate, they are adequate, and I repeat
again, they create a baseline. If you would suggest, though,
that could more be done, I do, and I apologize. I don't
remember the member's name. More research needs to be put into
technology, number one, and it can be on any one of those three
fronts. Prevention is the area that I suggest. Information
sharing is a big piece of that, how we can be more
collaborative and develop tools between government and industry
to share and within industry, and so I would suggest where the
management can be a major player is, they have access to
information we don't and vice versa, and the idea is, how can
we get that to be a timely sharing of information and a more
detailed level of sharing of information. That's the area that
I suggest that we put more emphasis on, not necessarily
standards.
Mr. Palmer. Well, in regard to the timeliness, Mr. Stacey,
in your testimony, you mentioned that intrusion detection
technology is not well developed for control system networks
and that it can often take months before malware is detected.
What are the factors that account for such a significant amount
of time that elapses before detection?
Mr. Stacey. Well, first, let me characterize, as Ms. Lee
did, the difference between IT technology and OT. With IT
technology, we're fairly mature now in proactively managing
systems. We have configurations and patchings that we use to
manage these systems.
Operational technology, or industrial control systems, may
manage several hundreds or even thousands of points a minute,
and if you try to proactively manage that network, you can do a
denial-of-service attack on yourself. And so the tools today
are basically passive monitoring--watching for things in and
out--and the sophisticated hackers are aware of that and can go
slow and low. And so the detection oftentimes, as I said, comes
from a third party. And this is another research area that
could be invested in is the detection technology for industrial
control systems. Thank you.
Mr. Palmer. Is that, in your opinion, where we need to go
in terms of improving the detection time?
Mr. Stacey. Correct.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Chairman, I yield the balance of my time.
Chairman Weber. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from California is now recognized.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
panelists.
This issue, it just--it seems to evolve faster than we can
stay pace with it, whether it's hacks or breaches that occur on
the private sector side or hacks and breaches that we're seeing
at OPM or other federal agencies that have, you know, certainly
compromised millions of people's personal information, and so I
guess my first question is, if one of our power grids went down
tomorrow in a major metropolitan area because of a cyber
attack, would anyone here be surprised? Just a yes or no up and
down. Mr. Stacey, yes or no?
Mr. Stacey. It's certainly possible.
Mr. Swalwell. But would you be surprised if it happened? If
you learned tomorrow that, say, the San Francisco Bay area was
out of power because of a cyber attack, would that surprise
you?
Mr. Stacey. No.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Gaines?
Mr. Gaines. Yes, it would.
Mr. Swalwell. Ms. Lee?
Ms. Lee. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell. And Mr. Wilshusen?
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell. Okay. And so for those who said--well, let me
start with you, Mr. Stacey. Why would it not surprise you?
Mr. Stacey. I just believe--because our monitoring and
detection for those kinds of events is not sophisticated enough
for me to give an answer of yes.
Mr. Swalwell. Do you believe that we have made the
necessary investments across our country in protecting against
cyber attacks, and not just the investments but is our
workforce trained in a way that our cyber hygiene is good
enough to prevent this from happening?
Mr. Stacey. Yes, I think we have invested properly. I think
there's a lot of work being done both in the utility sector and
within the government sector. I think we're short of staff
certainly and we're working on that in a number of areas with
universities, et cetera. But we've heard from several leaders
within the federal government that we likely have people inside
the infrastructure, and these are very complex systems and the
complexity even independent of a malware attack, adds a level
of vulnerability.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you.
And for the three who said they would be surprised if they
learned tomorrow that a major metropolitan area had been hit,
can you just maybe elaborate briefly on why it would surprise
you? Mr. Gaines?
Mr. Gaines. I'll give you a fact-based answer.
Mr. Swalwell. Sure.
Mr. Gaines. And I certainly know that there are
vulnerabilities that exist in every network, but I would
suggest to you at FirstEnergy, I feel we have done the right
things to secure our company and that component of the grid.
The other thing that's unique to the grid is, we have the
interconnects, in our case, PJM, and so in this case, we would
work very hard with PJM given that if our company was breached,
to minimize that impact across the network. Is it possible?
Yes, but your black-and-white answer is, would I be surprised?
Yes, I would be. And it's because of those two specific
entities, and I would suggest to you the peers around me that
are on PJM and the grid probably have the same level of
confidence that their business, their company is secure also.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. Thank you.
Ms. Lee?
Ms. Lee. Yes, I will agree completely with Mr. Gaines on
that, and just add to that, if you look at--and it was
referenced earlier the Metcalf attack, that their end result
was no power failure. The reliability of the grid is paramount,
and as he mentioned, working with the interconnections and the
different utilities, the intent is to maintain the reliability
of the grid. So yes, it is a hypothetical possibility but if
you look at all that's in place to ensure the reliability, it
still is a very stable system.
Mr. Swalwell. And then can you tell me who you fear an
attack would come from if it came--if it was--if it occurred?
Do you think it would be a state actor or a non-state actor?
Which one would be more likely based on your experience and
what you've learned? Mr. Wilshusen?
Mr. Wilshusen. I think initially I would say it's probably
going to be a non-state actor but I think also I've been
reading where there could be state actors involved too. But
certainly terrorists and groups that may wish to do us harm
would do so. I think state actors are probably, depending on
the state, also are relying on the electricity and our national
economy to support them as well.
Mr. Swalwell. And Mr. Gaines, are you cleared? Do you have
a security clearance?
Mr. Gaines. I do have a security clearance.
Mr. Swalwell. Do you feel that enough people in your
company are cleared to work with the federal government on the
threats or could we do a better job of bringing more people in?
Mr. Gaines. I don't think it's the volume; it's the
quality. And I would suggest that today I have secret that it
would be beneficial to move a smaller group to top secret, and
the difference there is this, and it gets back to the
timeliness and the level of detail, and for the sensitivity of
my clearance, I just have to leave it at that, is that it would
be much more beneficial to see things on a timely basis and at
a much deeper level to be able to take action, but I feel at
this point it's adequate but could be improved.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. Thank you.
And Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Weber. Well, thank you, and I appreciate your
bringing that up.
Back to Mr. Stacey's lack of surprise at an attack, I was
talking with the Ranking Member here, and it's kind of like a
lot of terrorism. What is it we say, that we have to be 100
percent vigilant, diligent all the time; they have to be lucky
one time.
So I now recognize the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Moolenaar.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gaines, I wanted to follow up with you one some of your
comments. You had talked about the area of prevention and
thinking about what we could do to complement the efforts
you're doing in the industry, and you talked about, you know,
prevention investments maybe could be--there could be benefits
across industries. Can you describe that a little bit more?
Mr. Gaines. Across the industry?
Mr. Moolenaar. Across the industry.
Mr. Gaines. Across the industry itself?
Mr. Moolenaar. Yes.
Mr. Gaines. And I do have to come back to this issue, and I
know it's uncomfortable maybe to repeat it again, but we do
have in the industry a set of standards, and those standards
hold us to a level, and if we're not compliant, then there's
liability, and I think that has to be looked at first because
there is the--there's not the lack of interest in wanting to be
able to share from an industry but there's certainly a level of
hesitancy at times at what level we share. So I remind us of
that.
To that point, though, I don't think it can be done on a
voluntary basis. I think that there has to be an open,
collaborative environment between the government, and I speak
of probably two or three agencies that I think we could all do
a better job, and I start out with Homeland because they own
the infrastructure. I start out with DOE because they are our
sector control. Those are two. The third would be the FBI
because they become the investigative arm in the event that
something happens. I do believe that there is a way with the
industry to be able to collaborate real-time threat analysis
information, and it isn't a voluntary but rather a requirement
that should occur, but it does start with the issue of our
ability to be able to manage that directly industry to
government.
Mr. Moolenaar. So it sounds to me like some of the effort,
you're talking about people getting together in a room and
meeting and discussing this. You aren't talking about major
investments in infrastructure or some kind of----
Mr. Gaines. Both.
Mr. Moolenaar. --technology. You are talking about both?
Mr. Gaines. I am talking about both. I'm talking about the
industry being able to have the necessary technology within
their company to be able to provide that level of information,
and I'm talking about the government being able to have and
being a recipient and being able to use it, so it's technology
and it's also skills and resources.
Mr. Moolenaar. And do you think that when you think about
prevention, you know, you prevent one threat but that another
threat emerges that you weren't aware of? How long are the
benefits from that kind of an investment? You know, how long
does that last?
Mr. Gaines. I think that's one of the things Ms. Lee talked
about is that becomes a priority, where do we focus on first. I
don't think you can deal with every single threat. There's a
lot of work that's being done in the industry right now to
define what a critical asset is, and it's very good work. The
gentleman asked me, are the standards good. They're really
good. They create baseline. I can tell you within our company,
what are by definition the critical substations that have an
impact on our entire network. Now, if I start there just alone
with those critical assets and you multiply that times 120
investor-owned utilities, that's pretty valuable information.
And so--and again, I don't want to give you any idea how many
that is other than to say it is a manageable number.
Mr. Moolenaar. And just, it was mentioned earlier this idea
of improving early detection, and I don't know if that was you,
Mrs. Lee, or who it was that talked about the importance of
that. Is that where we should be focusing?
Ms. Lee. I will add, I think early detection is important.
One of the difficulties, and I believe it's been discussed
here, is when you have an event, it can be very difficult to
determine whether it's a cybersecurity event. I've done
exercises with utilities and their frustration was, I didn't
know it was a cybersecurity event. So it's a matter of, we
talked about on the protection side but also as we've all
discussed, using commercially available products. They have
built-in vulnerabilities. The utilities are--as they're
developing their mitigation strategies, you have to assume your
systems at some point are going to be compromised, and so you
take that as a given, maybe not significant but you use that
when you develop your mitigation strategies. So I think it's a
combination of looking at it from the protection side but then
what do you do if there is a cybersecurity event. You want the
electricity to continue to flow.
Mr. Moolenaar. Mr. Wilshusen?
Mr. Wilshusen. Yes, I would agree with that too because I
know there's been a lot of discussion about the standards out
there, and that's fine and they may be adequate, but what also
needs to happen is the implementation of those standards
consistently over time throughout the enterprise, and in our
work at federal agencies and other entities, that often does
not occur. Vulnerabilities exist because standards aren't being
implemented consistently over time across the enterprise. And
so it's through that that attacks often occur. So the aspect of
monitoring the effectiveness of the security controls is also
going to be a key part of the overall defense--in-depth
strategy.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, and thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Chairman Weber. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Dr. Abraham.
Mr. Abraham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Stacey, let me start with you at kind of the 30,000-
foot view. If we have a full-scale cyber attack, what does it
do to the nation's economy and to the nation's security
infrastructure?
Mr. Stacey. It would be significant. All the other
infrastructures run off the energy infrastructure.
Mr. Abraham. And that leads me to the next question. How
often is a cyber attack or an attempted attack tried on our
nation's power grid?
Mr. Stacey. What I can tell you is that from ICS-CERT,
they're seeing a 32 percent increase in fiscal year 2014 of
target attacks on the energy sector. I don't have the specific
number for the grid.
Mr. Abraham. But it has increased in the last----
Mr. Stacey. It is increasing.
Mr. Abraham. And I read something in USA Today that the
U.S. power grid faces physical or online attacks approximately
once every four days. Is that a fairly accurate statement?
Mr. Stacey. That's fair.
Mr. Abraham. Okay. That's all, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Weber. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk, is recognized.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate
all of the witnesses being here. I apologize that I wasn't here
for the earlier testimony but we also have Homeland Security
issues going on. I'm doing the ping pong between the
committees.
But prior to coming to Congress, I spent 30 years in the IT
industry. Twenty of that time, I had my own business, and a
good portion of our business was going into smaller utility
systems and helping them automate. So I have some background in
this, predominantly smaller municipal co-op systems to where we
would put fiber optics into the city to tie the different SCADA
systems together, pump stations, substations, et cetera, so
they can more effectively monitor--getting more to a smart
grid. During that time, many of those smaller operations saw
the value of bringing in revenue, especially in small
utilities, of selling the interconnectivity to businesses that
had multiple locations within their jurisdiction. That also led
to bringing in high-speed internet, which allowed them to
connect and sell internet services on the same backbone or the
same infrastructure that was also running their devices. Now,
of course, we put in a lot of technology to segregate those
networks, but at the same time, they also saw the functionality
of being able to monitor and manage and respond without having
to be in the office to an incident that happened within the
utility system through the use of the internet.
So as we were trying to implement these new technologies to
allow them to be more efficient in operating their utility, and
many of those provide electricity throughout their cities or
their area of responsibility, it did help a lot, but then there
was the concern that we had of someone from the outside being
able to get in. And so what we would do is, we would do a lot
of research, and one of the things that we did not have was an
approved products list that we could go to, that the government
had said all right, if you use this type of gateway, use this
firewall, use this type of filter, then we know it'll be
secure. So we did a lot of research. We went to a lot of
vendors and we would get what we believed was the most secure,
put that into place, and in most cases we were under contract
to maintain it and make sure the security updates were done,
the patches, et cetera, et cetera.
The next progression was to then put in the other elements
of the smart grid for meter reading and all this. So some of
the things we started looking at were points of access, points
of failure, points of vulnerability, which growed--which grew
exponentially once we started adding the more technology.
In a previous committee, I brought up the lack of an
approved products list that vendors such as myself or these
smaller electric utilities can go to that has standards,
equipment standards, standards of practice, operation, et
cetera. Now, I understand the Department of Energy is working
on that, and I applaud that effort. But I do believe, and I
know that there is a lot of vulnerability accessing the grid,
you may say, through smaller electric utility systems. Some of
those that we put equipment in, we went out and spent a lot
looking at security aspect of it to make sure that they could
operate securely. Because of budget cuts, many of them would
cut our contract and manage it themselves, and then some of
them would actually go and buy parts off of eBay because they
were cheaper, but I would try to emphasize to them, there's a
reason that part is on eBay is probably because it has been
discontinued for security reasons.
Can any of you that would like to comment on where we are,
where we're going and if you feel that there is a need to have
a standard set of standards for equipment, for upgrade, for
maintenance, and operation with the smaller utilities as well
as large.
Mr. Gaines. Well, I'll speak as a large utility. I can't
speak for a small utility. That would not be accurate for me to
do.
Mr. Loudermilk. You may be able to opine as far as how
vulnerability of the small utilities affect the larger utility.
Mr. Gaines. Well, I'll try to answer your question
directly, though, regarding standards associated with
equipment, software technologies. I think there certainly has
to be some level of verification, validation of equipment. To
the extent that you could create a universal standards for
every type of equipment that sits inside of a network, I think
it would be very difficult, and the question is, who would
monitor and manage that. That is the challenge, and it ranges
from software to hardware. I do think there are some validation
points, though, that you can put in. Do you have--are you
building software or are you building equipment--a method of
configuring it so that it could be personal to the company
versus a standard set of passwords that are set in a piece of
software, as an example. Those are things that you could do to
design into the technology. As it relates to the vulnerability
between a small utility, municipal or not, we work together
very well in the industry between our industry association,
EEI, groups like EPRI who do research for us, and so I would
tell you that there's very little distinction about what the
expectations are on a small utility versus a large utility.
Mr. Stacey. Thank you for the question. I'd offer this
perspective. Right now, vendors are offering equipment with as
much flexibility as they can, with as much functionality as
they can. And that's adding to the complexity. If as a sector
there was work done on how do I minimize the functionality to
really what I need-- that the valve only opens and closes as
fast as I need for an emergency response, and that sensors on
the pipe managing flow only have the fidelity for managing the
flow, as we reduce that complexity, initially that would cost
more because you're asking for something that's different, but
as an industry, as they worked on reducing the complexity and
trying to find components that did the minimum functionality
required to manage within an industrial control system, I think
there'd be some benefits to that.
Mr. Loudermilk. Is there currently a rating system or an
evaluation that is used as far as how secure a utility is in
their operation?
Mr. Gaines. In terms of vendor equipment?
Mr. Loudermilk. The whole footprint, the entire topology.
Is there a method that some independent organization or the
government can come in and evaluate and give some type of
security rating?
Mr. Gaines. Yes, there is. The CIPS, the Critical
Infrastructure Protection Standards, are a set of standards
that originated in 2005. We're on version 5 right now. And they
baseline the transmission system and the security around that
through those standards and then they are auditable. And to the
extent there is remediation associated with those audits,
they're managed accordingly. FERC administers those through
NERC.
Chairman Weber. Does the gentleman yield back?
Mr. Loudermilk. I'm out of time, Mr. Chairman, so I will
yield back the time I don't have remaining.
Chairman Weber. All right. The gentleman yields.
Mr. Johnson, you're recognized.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
my colleagues on the Committee for allowing me to sit in on
this today. It's an area of extreme interest and importance in
my regard.
I spent nearly 30 years as an information technology
professional, part of that time, a large part of that time, in
the Department of Defense being concerned about the security of
data systems that support our special opreations folks and
things like that. I feel very, very strongly that cybersecurity
is an issue across the spectrum. It's getting a lot of talk but
it's not getting a lot of focused attention to address the
issue. It's an issue--and I don't know if the four of you agree
or not. It's not something that's got a finish line. You know,
this is not something that we're going to solve and then we're
going to move on to the next big problem. As long as the world
is connected with computing systems and networks, you're going
to have those with the wherewithal, some of them because they
can, some of them because they desire to create chaos with
malicious or criminal intent are going to try to get into our
networks and our energy systems and our power grids are one of
those areas that would wreak havoc on America's economy, and I
think we can all agree with that.
Mr. Gaines, what in your mind does the integration of IT
systems and supervisory control and data acquisition systems
have in increasing the risk to grid operations?
Mr. Gaines. First of all, Mr. Johnson, hello. It's good
seeing you again.
Mr. Johnson. Good to see you, sir.
Mr. Gaines. Thank you.
I would like to start out by saying I don't think it's if;
it's when. The OT operational systems technologies and the IT
technologies are merging and they go back to exactly what I
suggested, that in a substation now, it looks like a small
communications network. It's got a device in it that
communicates with most of the assets, transformers, that
determine the health and in fact the condition of those
transformers. That's all communicated back to the SCADA system
into the IT systems. Secondly, the IT systems are tied to our
power grid and actually help us manage and monitor that from a
generation perspective. I think the industry is moving to
converge those, not necessarily manage them as you would manage
them on the grid as an operator but manage that space so that
one, they understand the health of it, they understand the
reliability of it, and the impacts that cyber, specifically
cyber, has on it.
I go back to the Metcalf incident. There were three things
that occurred within an hour: the cutting of a communication
line, the actual assault on the location itself, and then the
loss of load. Those all three were done within an hour, and
they were in the space that if you would've had monitoring and
the ability to alert and manage that, I wouldn't suggest that
you could avoid but you could have mitigated some of the
issues.
Mr. Johnson. Can you talk specifically about what
FirstEnergy is doing to mitigate this vulnerability?
Mr. Gaines. Yes. We in fact have over the past 12 months
built a security operations center, and we manage all three of
those from one center, so I manage the operations and the
health of those physical assets. We look at that from an IT
perspective and overlay IT to that, and then I physically
monitor the station through cameras, video and X-ray. And so I
see that single pane--as we define it, I single that single
pane of our critical assets, and that's not dispersed around
the company. I don't have a physical security desk, I don't
have an operating center, and I don't have a cyber center. I
have one operations center that looks at that, and they're not
looking at it on multiple systems; they're looking at it on one
system. We are one of the first in the industry. We've worked
with EPRI very hard so the industry gets it, and there's a lot
of work being done there.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. Well, thank you very much.
I had other questions but I think I've exhausted my time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your indulgence.
Chairman Weber. The gentleman yields back.
Well, I want to thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and the Members for their questions. The record will
remain open for two weeks for additional comments and written
questions from Members.
This meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:40 a.m., the Subcommittees were
adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
