- AN OVERVIEW OF THE BUDGET PROPOSAL FOR THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION FOR FISCAL YEAR 2017

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN OVERVIEW OF THE BUDGET PROPOSAL
FOR THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND
SPACE ADMINISTRATION FOR FISCAL YEAR 2017

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

March 17, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-68

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

20-838 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas, Chair
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         ZOE LOFGREN, California
Wisconsin                        DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ERIC SWALWELL, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             AMI BERA, California
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            KATHERINE M. CLARK, Massachusetts
RANDY K. WEBER, Texas                DONALD S. BEYER, JR., Virginia
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan          PAUL TONKO, New York
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California           MARK TAKANO, California
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
GARY PALMER, Alabama
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
DRAIN LAHOOD, Illinois
------

Subcommittee on Space

HON. BRIAN BABIN, Texas, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             AMI BERA, California
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ZOE LOFGREN, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
BILL POSEY, Florida                  MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            DONALD S. BEYER, JR., Virginia
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
STEVE KNIGHT, California
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas

C O N T E N T S

March 17, 2016

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Brian Babin, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Space, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    24
Written Statement............................................    26

Statement by Representative Donna F. Edwards, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Space, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    28
Written Statement............................................    30

Statement by Representative Lamar S. Smith, Chairman, Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    32
Written Statement............................................    34

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking
Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House
of Representatives.............................................    37
Written Statement............................................    38

Witnesses:

The Honorable Charles F. Bolden, Jr., Administrator, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    39
Written Statement............................................    42

Discussion.......................................................    51

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

The Honorable Charles F. Bolden, Jr., Administrator, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration...........................    73

AN OVERVIEW OF THE BUDGET PROPOSAL
FOR THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND
SPACE ADMINISTRATION
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2017

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 17, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Space
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m., in
Room 2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Brian Babin
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Babin. Without objection, the Chair is authorized
to declare recesses of the Subcommittee at any time.
I'd like to welcome everyone today to the hearing entitled
``An Overview of the Budget Proposal for the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration for Fiscal Year 2017.''
And I recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement.
The first and perhaps most important point that I want to
make today is that NASA is a worthwhile investment for the
taxpayer and for our nation. Space is as important to our
future as were the frontiers of land, sea, and air that we
faced in the past. NASA's mission to explore outer space and to
use outer space for the benefit of our nation and for mankind
is an endeavor worthy of a great nation, which we are.
NASA as an agency, its employees, and contractors deserve
our praise. I represent the 36th District of Texas and the home
of the Johnson Space Center. I can say from personal experience
talking with the folks out at Johnson that, regardless of the
budgetary and policy differences in Congress and within the
Administration, they are very passionate and are dedicated to
NASA's mission.
Unfortunately, this Administration has once again done a
disservice to NASA, its employees, and our nation by providing
a budget request that ignores the budget agreement, requesting
mandatory funding for NASA. I had hoped that the Administration
would demonstrate leadership by proposing a realistic budget,
but instead, we were presented with a list of unfunded
priorities.
The Administration has also once again disregarded the
priorities of previous bipartisan NASA funding bills that the
President signed. For example, even if we include the so-called
mandatory budget request, the budget proposal cuts the Space
Launch System, or SLS, and Orion crew capsule by $840 million
and the Planetary Science Division by $133 million. Without the
mandatory funding, SLS and Orion are cut by $1 billion.
Planetary Science is cut by $261 million. This is not
acceptable. This is a budget that takes our human spaceflight
program nowhere fast. This budget undermines our space program
and diverts critical funding to lower-priority items.
I have been, and continue to be, concerned that the support
in Congress and at NASA for the SLS and Orion programs is not
matched by the Administration. The Administration consistently
requests large reductions for these programs despite the
insistence of Congress that they be priorities. Orion and SLS
are strategic national assets and must be sufficiently funded.
Proposed cuts to the Planetary Science Division are equally
disturbing. The pipeline for outer-planet missions has been
woefully under-prioritized. It is critical that our nation
maintain a robust outer-planet exploration program.
Already, the effects of this diminished cadence are being
felt. To keep their staff employed, planetary science
institutions increasingly seek funding from foreign space
agencies to compensate for the lack of projects. This results
in transference of valuable skills and knowledge out of the
United States to countries like China. Experienced planetary
scientists are also transitioning to other fields, while young
scientists are choosing to not enter the field at all, gutting
our national capacity in planetary science. This is disturbing
and unacceptable and just plain bad for America from many
viewpoints.
It is important that NASA maintains a balanced portfolio of
science activities. Unfortunately, year after year, this
Administration has requested disproportionate increases for
Earth science activities, activities that are already funded by
more than a dozen other federal agencies. This year, the
President's proposal seeks to increase the science budget by
$111 million, a six percent increase. This amounts to a 70
percent increase since 2007. If this money had been put toward
our human spaceflight program, I don't think that we would be
spending hundreds of millions on Russian launch services.
The request also dilutes NASA's existing Earth science
research portfolio by conducting other agencies' work. It is
developing climate sensors for NOAA and land-imaging
capabilities for USGS. While NASA certainly has the expertise
to do this work, they don't have the budget or the
requirements. NOAA is tasked with maintaining operational
climate measurements, and USGS is tasked to maintain Landsat
measurements. This budget makes NASA the piggy bank for other
agencies. That must end.
If NASA is tasked to do other agency's work, it should do
so on a reimbursable basis, as it does successfully for other
programs such as the Joint Polar Satellite System and the
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite System.
Our nation has been spacefaring since 1958, only 58 years.
And while we have accomplished great things in these 58 years,
there is so much more to learn and to discover and to put to
practical use for the benefit of our nation and all mankind.
But we as a nation will not be leading this journey unless we
adequately fund NASA's human spaceflight and planetary science
missions.
Other nations, such as China, are working overtime to
displace American and become the global leader in space
exploration. The consequences of America getting it right or
wrong are not immediate, but they are enormous. The rules are
going to be made by those countries that are on the surface of
the moon and Mars, not those that have stayed home.
I want to thank Administrator Bolden for his testimony, and
I look forward to a robust discussion. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Babin follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Babin. And now, I recognize the Ranking Member,
the gentlewoman from Maryland, for an opening statement.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you very much, Chairman Babin, and thank
you for calling this hearing to examine the fiscal year 2017
budget request for the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, NASA.
I'd like to start by joining you in welcoming our good
friend and inspiring leader and exemplar of public service,
Administrator General Charlie Bolden. Thank you, General
Bolden, for your service to our nation. And we are very
fortunate to have you at the helm of our nation's space agency
for your consistency, your steadfastness.
Mr. Chairman, our space program is a shining example of
what we can accomplish as a nation when we harness the talents
of our workforce and the capabilities of our industry,
academia, and international partners.
The fiscal year 2017 budget request for NASA is $19
billion, a 1.3 percent reduction from the enacted appropriation
for fiscal year 2016. And I would like to say that I was very
pleased with that enacted appropriation. And so while this
proposal is a good starting point for the Administration for
this morning's discussion, I hope that we can at least get to
the $19.3 billion level that Congress appropriated for NASA in
fiscal year 2016. It's a gentle dance that we do every year.
I'm pleased that the request proposes to revitalize our
nation's aeronautics research activities with an exciting
initiative to use ``X-planes'' to demonstrate technologies
leading to cleaner, quieter, and more efficient aircraft.
Demonstrating and applying advanced technologies is important
to maintaining our competitive edge and sustaining the
significant economic benefits that commercial aviation
provides.
And I'm heartened that the request proposes increases above
the levels provided in the fiscal year 2016 appropriations for
the safety, security, and mission services account, which,
among other things, provides the funding to operate NASA's
field centers, including the Goddard Space Flight Center in
Maryland.
I'm also pleased that the request would sustain a robust
science program composed of research and data analysis grants
and small and medium and large missions, including development
of high-priority missions such as the James Webb Space
Telescope, the Wide-Field Infrared Survey Telescope, the Europa
Clipper, the Mars 2020 Rover, and the Solar Probe Plus
missions. NASA's science programs are furthering our knowledge
of our home planet and opening new windows into our universe.
And if humanity is one day to extend its presence beyond Earth,
we will need the scientific understanding to do just that.
We'll also need to take a series of steps along a pathway
involving technology development, demonstration of operational
capabilities, and development and testing of exploration
systems to make that move.
And while NASA has developed a ``Journey to Mars'' strategy
that provides an initial outline of a pathway to Mars, we
shouldn't have to say it again, but we need a baseline roadmap
and structure to support such a multi-decadal endeavor, and we
need that now. Such a roadmap would help put in sharp focus the
impacts that the proposed reductions to the Space Launch System
and the Orion crew vehicle, a combined 22 percent from the
fiscal year 2016 enacted level, would have on making progress
towards the humans-to-Mars goal.
Frankly, I'm a little bit puzzled by the deja vu we're
experiencing with the proposed reductions to the SLS and Orion
programs. I share that concern that the Chairman has expressed
from the levels Congress appropriated just this past fiscal
year in 2016.
Even more puzzling and somewhat concerning is a continued
talk of targeting an internal date for the first crewed Orion
and SLS flight and the EM-2 mission in 2021 when the resources
being requested are actually geared to a 2023 date, and so that
needs some explaining. The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel
raised caution about this kind of approach in its 2015 annual
report when it said ``NASA has briefed the ASAP on measures...
that appear to be making safety tradeoffs in order to maintain
a 2021 EM-2 launch schedule.'' The ASAP went on to say ``while
the desire to fly crew on Orion as soon as possible is
understandable, NASA is building a long-term exploration
program and adjustments to the near-term schedule or mission
content that result in far safer systems can be an advantageous
trade.''
Mr. Chairman, I know that you and I and many of our
colleagues here this morning want to get to Mars sooner rather
than later, but we must establish an enduring system that will
get us there and back safely time and time again. To do so, we
need to ask ourselves some important questions. Will Congress
and NASA be able to establish the budgetary and programmatic
discipline required to meet this goal? Will this committee and
the Congress be true to providing the funding stability,
sustainability, and constancy of purpose that we and others
have said are critical for NASA as we prepare to transition to
a new Administration less than a year from now? How will we
navigate the bifurcated 2017 budget request, including both
mandatory and discretionary funding, to provide the necessary
stability?
And, Mr. Chairman, we owe our next generation a vibrant
space agency, in partnership with industry, academia, and
international partners, to continue its historic mission and to
pursue the goal of one day sending humans to the surface of
Mars. The future is now. The choice is ours, and it's up to us
to ensure the future of our space program is a bright one.
I want to also acknowledge the presence here today of our
future, Kendra Wood, who's an intern in my office and a
graduate of the University of Maryland Eastern Shore. She is a
superstar, and we owe it to her generation, also to our
visitors from Spelman College, a senior at Spelman, Antonia
Hill, who's visiting with us here today. And so let's keep
these young people in mind as we talk about the future of
space.
And I yield the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Edwards follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee on Space
Ranking Member Donna F. Edwards (D-MD)
Chairman Babin, thank you for calling this hearing to examine the
Fiscal Year 2017 budget request for the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration--NASA.
I'd like to start by joining you in welcoming a friend, an
inspiring leader, and an exemplar of public service, Administrator
Charlie Bolden. Thank you, General Bolden, for your service to our
nation. We are fortunate to have you at the helm of our nation's space
agency.
Mr. Chairman, our space program is a shining example of what we can
accomplish as a nation when we harness the talents of our workforce and
the capabilities of our industry, academia, and international partners.
The Fiscal Year 2017 budget request for NASA is $19 billion--a 1.3
percent reduction from the enacted appropriation for Fiscal Year 2016.
While this proposal is good starting point for this morning's
discussion, I hope that we can at least get to the $19.3 billion level
that Congress appropriated for NASA in Fiscal Year 2016.
I am pleased that the request proposes to revitalize our nation's
aeronautics research activities with an exciting initiative to use ``X-
Planes'' to demonstrate technologies leading to cleaner, quieter, and
more efficient aircraft. Demonstrating and applying advanced
technologies is important to maintaining our competitive edge and
sustaining the significant economic benefits that commercial aviation
provides.
And, I'm heartened that the request proposes increases above the
levels provided in the FY 2016 appropriations for the Safety, Security,
and Mission Services account which, among other things, provides the
funding to operate NASA's field centers, including the Goddard Space
Flight Center in Maryland.
I am also pleased that the request would sustain a robust Science
program composed of research and data analysis grants and small,
medium, and large missions, including development of high-priority
missions such as the James Webb Space Telescope, the Wide-field
Infrared Survey Telescope, the Europa Clipper, the Mars 2020 rover, and
the Solar Probe Plus missions.
NASA's science programs are furthering our knowledge of our home
planet and opening new windows into our universe. And, if humanity is
to one day extend its presence beyond Earth, we will need the
scientific understanding to do so.
We will also to need to take a series of steps along a pathway
involving technology development, demonstration of operational
capabilities, and development and testing of exploration systems to
make that move.
While NASA has developed a Journey to Mars strategy that provides
an initial outline of a pathway to Mars, we need a baseline roadmap and
structure to support such a multidecadal endeavor. Such a roadmap would
help put in sharper focus the impacts that the proposed reductions to
the Space Launch System (SLS) and the Orion crew vehicle--a combined 22
percent from the FY 2016 enacted level--would have on making progress
toward the humans-to-Mars goal.
Frankly, I am puzzled by the deja vu we are experiencing with the
proposed reductions to the SLS and Orion programs from the levels
Congress appropriated for Fiscal Year 2016. Even more puzzling and
somewhat concerning is the continued talk of targeting an internal date
for the first crewed Orion and SLS flight--the EM-2 mission--in 2021
when the resources being requested are geared to a 2023 date.
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel raised caution about this
approach in its 2015 Annual Report when it said, ``NASA has briefed the
ASAP on measures.that appear to be making safety trade-offs in order to
maintain a 2021 EM-2 launch schedule.''
The ASAP went on to say, ``While the desire to fly crew on Orion as
soon as possible is understandable, NASA is building a long-term
exploration program, and adjustments to the near-term schedule or
mission content that result in far safer systems can be an advantageous
trade.''
Mr. Chairman, I know that you, I, and many of our colleagues here
this morning want to get to Mars sooner rather than later. But we've
got to establish an enduring system that will get us there and back
safely, time and time again. To do so, we need to ask ourselves some
important questions.

Will Congress and NASA be able to establish the budgetary
and programmatic discipline required to meet this goal?

Will this Committee and Congress be true to providing the
funding stability, sustainability and constancy of purpose that we and
others have said are critical for NASA as we prepare to transition to a
new Administration less than a year from now?

How will we navigate the bifurcated FY 2017 budget
request, including both ``mandatory'' and discretionary funding, to
provide the necessary stability?

Mr. Chairman, we owe our next generation a vibrant space agency, in
partnership with industry, academia, and international partners, to
continue its historic mission and to pursue the goal of one day sending
humans to the surface of Mars. The future is now. The choice is ours.
It is up to us to ensure the future of our space program is a bright
one.
Thank you and I yield back.
Chairman Babin. Thank you, Ms. Edwards.
I now recognize the Chairman of our full committee, Mr.
Smith.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Administrator Bolden, welcome. I'm glad you're here.
Mr. Chairman, this committee has demonstrated time and
again that U.S. leadership in space is a bipartisan priority. I
believe that many of the hardworking scientists, engineers, and
innovators working at NASA share our interest in ensuring
America leads the world in space.
There are some areas of agreement between the Committee and
the Administration in NASA's fiscal year 2017 budget request.
But this proposed budget continues to tie our astronauts' feet
to the ground and makes a Mars mission all but impossible.
This budget cuts funding for human exploration by nearly $1
billion, and robotic exploration by almost a quarter of a
billion dollars. The budget request once again underfunds the
Space Launch System and Orion programs. This Administration
cannot continue to tout plans to send astronauts to Mars while
strangling the programs that will take them there.
The Administration also attempts to redistribute funding
within NASA's Science Mission Directorate. For example,
Jupiter's moon Europa is one of the most promising destinations
we have in our own solar system for finding life beyond our
planet. However, this year's request of only $17 million for
the Europa mission is incredibly disappointing considering the
mission's potential. This represents roughly a 90 percent
reduction from the fiscal year 2016 level.
However, support for other priorities such as the James
Webb Space Telescope, the Transitioning Exoplanet Survey
Satellite, and the Wide-Field Infrared Space Telescope is
encouraging. Missions like these, as well as their search for
exoplanets and signs of life in other areas of our universe,
captivate the American public's imagination.
Overall, though, there is a lack of balance in the science
account request. One of the most glaring examples is the
disproportionate increase in the Earth Science Division
receives at the expense of other science divisions and human
and robotic space exploration. This represents a 70 percent
increase for the Earth Science Division since the fiscal year
2007 request. Over the same period, NASA's overall yearly
budget has only increased 20 percent.
The Earth science budget request is 42 percent more than
the planetary science budget request. In fact, the planetary
science budget request is a reduction of $113 million over last
year's level. The Earth science request also is more than the
Astrophysics Division, the James Webb Space Telescope, and the
Heliophysics Division combined. There are 13 other federal
agencies involved in Earth science research but only one that
is responsible for space science and exploration, and that's
NASA.
This budget also proposes $223 million to fund the
uninspiring Asteroid Retrieval and Redirect Mission. On April
15, 2010, the President directed NASA to conduct a crewed
mission to an asteroid by 2025. Then, with the 2014 budget
request, the Administration changed course and directed NASA to
redirect an asteroid to orbit the moon and then visit that
asteroid in lunar orbit. Then, last year, NASA decided to only
remove and redirect a boulder from a larger asteroid.
Originally scheduled for 2017, then 2020, this budget
request now slips the first robotic launch to 2021. The crewed
encounter will also slip to 2026 and more likely later based on
SLS mission requirements. In practical terms, the President's
own budget delays the ARM beyond the next Administration's
second term.
All of NASA's advisory bodies have criticized the project.
International interest is absent. The scientific community is
unimpressed. The Administration continues to push this mission
on NASA without any connection to a larger exploration roadmap
and absent support from the scientific community or NASA's own
advisory committees.
It is NASA's responsibility to provide a compelling plan
for space exploration and execute it. It is Congress's
responsibility to ensure NASA's budget is prioritized and
funded. This committee will do everything in its power to
support American leadership in space.
Mr. Chairman, before I yield back, let me compliment
Administrator Bolden because I think he is a committed public
servant. I think he is doing the best job anybody can do under
the circumstances. And I have a hunch if he were writing this
budget, it might vary slightly from the Administration's
proposed budget.
You don't need to respond to that, Administrator Bolden, we
all have our different priorities. But this is simply to say I
appreciate the job that you're doing, and I continue to be
impressed with your sincerity and dedication.
With that I'll yield back.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Smith follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I
concur.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Ms. Johnson of the full
committee, for a five minute statement.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me comment before my time starts on how pleased I am to
hear those remarks from my Chairman. And I really agree with
him, and that's extraordinary.
Let me say good morning to everyone and to acknowledge that
I have a student here with me today, Adia Moss, who is a senior
at Spelman, and hasten to say that I appreciate the long and
distinguished service to our nation and your steady leadership
of NASA, General Bolden. We know that this is a challenging and
exciting time in the agency's history. I know how passionately
you care about the nation's space and aeronautics program, and
I look forward to hearing your testimony today.
Today's hearing marks the beginning of the Committee's
consideration of the President's fiscal year 2017 NASA budget
request. The $19 billion budget request is a strong endorsement
by the President of the important role that NASA plays. We send
budgets out of here with a lot less, and then we complain about
what the President is doing, which is, to them, a lot less.
This is not to say that this is perfect for a NASA budget
request, but I do agree with all the elements of it. It is a
good starting point. It is Congress's deliberations. It is our
responsibility to send what we feel is a responsible budget
because it is what our focus should be today, what we want NASA
to accomplish, and what we are willing to invest in NASA to do
it so that we can achieve those objectives.
It may be tempting for some of us to spend our time
criticizing the President for what they consider shortcomings
in his budget request, but I think it's not a good use of
anybody's time. The President has submitted his NASA budget
request to Congress. It is now our job to determine the funding
that NASA will receive and the policies it will follow. If we
fail to do that, we will have no one to blame but ourselves.
That said, there is much to recommend in this NASA budget
request. For example, I'm excited by the aeronautics
initiative. I know the important role that aviation plays in
our economy and our society, and NASA's R&D has long provided
the underpinnings of new capabilities in aviation. I'm also
pleased by the investments made in NASA's science and
technology activities. History shows us that these investments
will pay dividends in increased knowledge and new technological
capabilities.
On the other hand, I'm disappointed that the funding for
the Space Launch System and the Orion spacecraft, the systems
that are essential elements of the nation's future human
exploration initiatives, have been cut in this budget request.
We can change that if we wish. Such cuts add just one more
challenge to those already facing the team of dedicated men and
women who are working so hard to turn these exploration goals
into reality. I would anticipate that Congress will reaffirm
its support for SLS and the Orion by the time this year's
funding deliberations are complete.
Which brings me to one final observation, namely, we will
have a new President by this time next year. I know that there
are those in NASA who feel the pressure to accomplish as much
as possible on the new exploration systems before a new
Administrator takes power. That's understandable. But it can
wind up doing more harm than good. In its latest report, the
Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel has raised concerns that
perceived schedule pressure, whether external or self-imposed,
can lead to excessive levels of risk being taken on in order to
try to meet arbitrary deadlines. That's not the path to a
sustainable or a successful program.
I hope that NASA management and workers will heed the
ASAP's concern and not defer needed testing or make overly
optimistic commitments in a shortsighted attempt to keep those
programs alive in advance of a new Presidential Administration
taking power. To all those NASA and contract employees, I would
simply say, Congress supports SLS and Orion and commercial
crew, and we will continue to do so no matter what we say here
to make the news or the record. We will do this in spite of a
new President taking office. We know that what we do actually
is rocket science. So take time and the testing needed to do it
right.
With that, Administrator Bolden, I again want to welcome
you. I look forward to your testimony. And I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Johnson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Full Committee Ranking Member
Eddie Bernice Johnson (D-TX)

Good morning. I would like to join the Chairman in welcoming
Administrator Bolden to today's hearing.
Administrator Bolden, I appreciate your long and distinguished
service to our nation and your steady leadership at NASA during a
challenging and exciting time in the agency's history. I know how
passionately you care about the nation's space and aeronautics
programs, and I look forward to hearing your testimony today.
Today's hearing marks the beginning of the Committee's
consideration of the President's FY 2017 NASA budget request. This $19
billion budget request is a strong endorsement by the President of the
important role that NASA plays in advancing America's R&D enterprise,
and I appreciate his willingness to attach a high priority to NASA in
this, his last Federal budget request.
That is not to say that it is a perfect NASA budget request or that
I agree with all elements of it. But it is a good starting point for
Congress's deliberations.
Because that is what our focus should be today-what do we want NASA
to accomplish and what are we willing to invest in NASA so that it can
achieve those objectives.
It may be tempting for some to want to spend their time criticizing
the President for what they consider shortcomings in his budget
request, but I think that is not a good use of anyone's time.
The President has submitted his NASA budget request to Congress. It
is now our job to determine the funding NASA will receive and the
policies it will follow. If we fail to do that, we will have no one to
blame but ourselves.
That said, there is much to recommend in this NASA budget request.
For example, I am excited by the Aeronautics initiative-I know the
important role that aviation plays in our economy and our society, and
NASA's R&D has long provided the underpinnings for new capabilities in
aviation.
I also am pleased by the investments made in NASA's science and
technology activities.
History shows that those investments will pay dividends in
increased knowledge and new technological capabilities. On the other
hand, I am disappointed that the funding for the Space Launch System
and the Orion spacecraft--the systems that are essential elements of
the nation's future human exploration initiatives--has been cut in this
budget request.
Such cuts add just one more challenge to those already facing the
team of dedicated men and women who are working so hard to turn those
exploration goals into reality. I would anticipate that Congress will
reaffirm its support for SLS and Orion by the time this year's funding
deliberations are complete.
Which brings me to one final observation, namely, we will have a
new President by this time next year. I know that there are those in
NASA who feel the pressure to accomplish as much as possible on the new
exploration systems before a new Administration takes power.
That is understandable, but it can wind up doing more harm than
good. In its latest report, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel has
raised concerns that perceived schedule pressure--whether external or
self-imposed--can lead to excessive levels of risk being taken on in
order to try to meet an arbitrary deadline. That's not the path to a
sustainable or a successful program.
I hope that NASA management and workers will heed the ASAP's
concerns and not defer needed testing or make over-optimistic
commitments in a shortsighted attempt to keep those programs alive in
advance of a new Presidential administration taking power. To all those
NASA and contractor employees I would simply say: Congress supports SLS
and Orion and Commercial Crew, and we will continue to do so when a new
President takes office. We know that what you do actually is "rocket
science", so take the time and the testing needed to do it right.
With that, Administrator Bolden, I again want to welcome you, and I
look forward to your testimony.

Chairman Babin. Thank you.
They have called votes, so we're going to move right along
here.
I'd like to introduce our first and our only witness today,
and that is Hon. Charles F. Bolden, Jr. General Bolden has been
the Administrator of NASA since 2009, and he's a man who has
devoted his entire career in service to our country, and I
thank him for that.
Prior to becoming Administrator, General Bolden served for
34 years in the Marine Corps, including 14 years as a member of
NASA's Astronaut Office. General Bolden has traveled to orbit
four times aboard the space shuttle, including the flight the
deployed the Hubble Space Telescope. General Bolden has several
honorary doctorates from a variety of prestigious universities
and received his bachelor's in electrical science from the U.S.
Naval Academy.
I would add that General Bolden and I share the honor of
having our sons graduate from the U.S. Naval Academy as well.
His son Che is a Naval aviator currently, and my son Leif was a
Navy SEAL.
Now, let's hear from General Bolden for the next five
minutes. Thank you, General.

TESTIMONY OF THE HON. CHARLES F. BOLDEN, JR.,

ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND

SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Hon. Bolden. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. And to you
and the Members of the Committee, it is indeed a pleasure and
an honor to discuss with you today President Obama's $19
billion fiscal year 2017 budget request for NASA.
And as I had to do the day before yesterday, I want to make
sure that my position is not mischaracterized by the Chairman
and others. This is my budget, and I had to battle----
Chairman Smith. Then I'll have to retract all those nice
compliments I gave you.
Hon. Bolden. That's why I want to make sure that the
compliments are earned and not just said to be nice.
I am very proud of this budget, and I think all of you know
that when it comes budget time, you go into deliberations, and
I have two sets of deliberations. I go into deliberations with
the Administration, and then I come and what I would like to do
is be involved in the deliberations with the Congress on how
the budget turns out.
So I'm very proud of the budget that we're presenting today
because it builds on what I think was an incredible budget from
this Congress in fiscal year 2016, and I cannot thank you
enough for that. You made us feel needed and appreciated, and
we want to keep doing that. So that's what we tried to do with
this budget.
It's been my honor to serve as the NASA Administrator
throughout the Obama Administration and, as we submit what is
likely my final budget--yes, ma'am--I am proud of the many
things this agency has accomplished on behalf of the American
people with the resources the President and the Congress have
committed to us over the past seven years. Together, we have
enabled our nation to continue leading the world in space
exploration and scientific discovery.
Two weeks ago, American astronaut Scott Kelly returned home
from the International Space Station after 12 months working
off the Earth for the Earth. His year in space will pay
scientific and medical dividends for years to come, helping
pave the way for future astronauts to travel to Mars and
beyond. Commander Kelly significantly advanced our Journey to
Mars, and I trust that you join me in saluting his service to
our nation.
NASA is closer to sending American astronauts to Mars than
at any point in human history, and this budget will keep us
moving forward. The support of this committee and the Congress
is essential to this journey. The International Space Station
is the cornerstone of our exploration strategy. Thanks to the
determination and ingenuity of American industry, we have
returned space station cargo resupply launches to U.S. soil,
in-sourced jobs, and helped establish a new private market in
low-Earth orbit.
American companies are now ferrying supplies to our
astronauts on the space station from the United States with
Orbital ATK set to launch again later this month and SpaceX
targeting a resupply mission in early April, both from the
Kennedy Space Center. In July, Orbital will conduct a return-
to-flight mission from the Wallops Flight Facility.
Thanks to the Administration's decision to invest in
American industry and to the full funding we received from
Congress for 2016, spearheaded by this Committee, this
Committee was the first to propose full funding for the
President's commercial crew program, and I really appreciate
that. But now Boeing and SpaceX continue to make great progress
towards certification in 2017 to safely transport our
astronauts to the space station from U.S. soil, ending our sole
reliance on Russia once and for all.
NASA is making significant progress on the Journey to Mars,
developing our newest, most powerful rocket ever built, the
Space Launch System and Orion crew vehicle, as part of the
sustainable and affordable deep space exploration system. This
budget supports the agency's baseline commitment for an un-
crewed test flight of SLS and Orion in 2018 and a crewed flight
by 2023. With additional funding provided by the Congress, the
teams will continue to work toward an earlier launch date for
the first crewed mission and are already designing and
procuring long lead hardware for subsequent missions.
The budget also increases funding for habitation systems
development, a key component of our steppingstone strategy to
send humans to Mars. The President's budget funds a robust
science program with dozens of operating missions studying our
solar system, the universe, and the most important planet in
our solar system, Earth. This coming July 4, Independence Day,
the Juno spacecraft will orbit Jupiter while the Cassini
spacecraft will prepare to execute its dramatic grand finale,
orbits of Saturn. OSIRIS-REx will launch to a near-Earth
asteroid to collect a sample for return to Earth in 2023. In
2017 and 2018, NASA will launch seven exciting space science
missions, including the James Webb Space Telescope.
Before we send humans to Mars, robots are paving the way
with Mars InSight now targeted for launch in 2018. Another Mars
rover set to launch in 2020, joining the Curiosity and
Opportunity rovers now exploring the red planet and work
underway to define the next Mars mission for 2022.
We are formulating missions to explore Jupiter's moon
Europa, as well as WFIRST designed to study dark energy,
perform galactic and extragalactic surveys, and explore
exoplanets. We're accelerating the building of Landsat 9 as
part of our sustainable land-imaging architecture to continue
our 40-year record of high-quality measurements of Earth's land
cover.
NASA technology drives exploration. With this request, NASA
will continue to conduct rapid development and incorporation of
transformative missions--space technology missions to enable
future human and robotic missions, increase capabilities of
other U.S. agencies, and address aerospace industry challenges.
Space technology investments will ensure that we continue to
lead the world in exploration and scientific discovery.
NASA's aeronautics program advances U.S. global leadership
by developing and transferring key enabling technologies to
make aviation safer, more efficient, and more environmentally
friendly. With this request, NASA aeronautics is ready to take
the next step to develop and fly X-plane demonstrators in
partnership with industry and academia, including ultra-
efficient subsonic transport experimental aircraft in the
world's first low-boom supersonic flight demonstrator.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the support that we have
received from this committee through the years, and I look
forward to your questions. And I, too, would like to commend
the young ladies who are in the audience today, all of them,
but a special shout-out to the ones from Spelman since that is
also the alma mater of my wife and my daughter.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of the Hon. Bolden follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Babin. Yes, sir, thank you. I appreciate you very,
very much.
And we stand adjourned--excuse me. We stand in recess until
five minutes after this vote, okay?
Ms. Edwards. He was like, easy.
Chairman Babin. No, don't go anywhere, General. All right.
[Recess.]
Chairman Babin. I would like to call us back to order after
our recess and again thank General Bolden for his testimony.
And now I'd like to recognize myself for five minutes of
questions.
And again, thank you for being here, General Bolden. I'd
like to ask you a question about the budget, of course. The
former space shuttle commander Eileen Collins was testifying
before our committee probably less than, what, three weeks ago
maybe about the decision to cancel the Constellation program.
That was not made by NASA at all but by the White House. She
said, ``I believe the program cancellation decisions that are
made by bureaucracies behind closed doors and without input by
the people are divisive, damaging,'' and she said ``cowardly,
and many times more expensive in the long run.'' Similar
complaints of White House meddling with NASA's programs counter
to NASA's own program managers surrounds the SOFIA telescope
aircraft, the Orion crew vehicle, Space Launch System, and
various Mars missions.
The point here is that this White House ignores NASA's
input but then tells you and your Associate Administrators to
defend their decisions before Congress. And as you mentioned a
while ago, maybe it's not just all of his decisions. That's
what we'd like to find out.
Did the White House consult you about this idea to fund
NASA through mandatory spending accounts?
Hon. Bolden. No, sir, they did not, but we had extensive
discussions after we saw the budget and--because I asked the
question of what's the difference when I had my conversation or
at least passing words between me and the OMB Director, I was
assured that our budget is $19 billion. And so if you ask me to
define for you what the difference is between mandatory and
discretionary, I'm going to take it for the record----
Chairman Babin. Right.
Hon. Bolden. --because my budget is $19 billion.
Chairman Babin. Okay. And then without this mandatory
spending, it looks like the White House's proposed budget for
NASA is about $1 billion less than Congress appropriated last
year, which was $19.2 billion. The White House is wasting
everyone's time with its mandatory spending proposal and trying
to obfuscate that they're proposing to cut NASA's budget by $1
billion. A continuing resolution would be better than this
request. And why are you advocating a cut to NASA?
Hon. Bolden. Mr. Chairman, I'm not advocating a cut to
NASA. We are advocating a $19 billion budget, and to be quite
honest, the reason it wasn't $19.3 billion was because we had
no idea that the '16 budget was going to be $19.3 billion. As I
said before, we were all startled pleasantly to receive a $19.3
billion budget from the Congress. Had we had to pass our final
numbers in prior to--had we had the benefit of knowing what the
'16 budget was going to be, we would have asked for even more.
But as I said before, I am very happy with the $19 billion
settlement that we came up with in our negotiations with the
Administration. And, you know, I think there are many other
things that had to be compensated for, and that's the reason
that I think they chose to use mandatory and discretionary.
There are some things that we didn't count on last year,
dealing with the census, dealing with some of our partners, for
example, dealing with refugees. There are a lot of different
issues that come up that come from the discretionary spending
pool, and so, you know, the President has really tried to push
research and development, technology development from the
moment he became President, and this represented a way to do
that.
And I think if you look at what is in the mandatory
section, it is mostly technology development, engineering type
things, whether it's in human exploration, science, or
anywhere.
Chairman Babin. I understand, but with a nearly $20
trillion national debt, and the biggest problem being mandatory
spending side of spending, that's a tough nut to crack.
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Chairman Babin. And I'd like to ask you about SLS and
Orion. In this year's budget request the Administration
continues to play the game of back-and-forth with Congress on
SLS and Orion funding, negatively impacting the schedule for
getting American astronauts back into deep space exploration.
NASA is formally committed to launch the first crewed
mission of SLS and Orion known as EM-2 no later than 2023. The
fiscal year 2017 request funds this commitment. At the same
time, NASA says that it is internally planning for an EM-1
launch in 2021. Why doesn't NASA simply request funding for a
2021 launch date?
Hon. Bolden. Mr. Chairman, the funds that we requested and
came in the President's budget request support our detailed
estimate of how much it would cost and what the time would be
to fly the first human mission in SLS and Orion, and that is
2023, utilizing a process that we call joint confidence level
process, and it gives us a 70 percent confidence that our
numbers are correct. So when we went through the formal process
of evaluating based on what we assume the budget might be,
that's how we came up with the 2023 time.
The Congress, when they appropriated more than was
requested, that's the number that we use when we say we're
working an internal number. You know, if the Congress decides
that they want to plus SLS up every year, you would be on a
path to an earlier launch. And the earlier launch, I don't know
what that date would be, but it would be earlier than the
President's budget request number.
Chairman Babin. Okay. Thank you very much.
I'd like to recognize the gentlewoman from Maryland,
please, for----
Ms. Edwards. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to follow on this date of the internal 2021 date
versus the external 2023, but I want to go to a different
place. The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel in its 2015 annual
report said that ``NASA had briefed the ASAP on measures...
that appear to be making safety tradeoffs in order to maintain
a 2021 EM-2 launch schedule.'' And if ASAP thought it was
important enough to raise, General Bolden, the question is
whether there is pressure that's been either perceived or real
with regard to safety tradeoffs.
And so I wonder if you've had an opportunity to talk to
ASAP about this and what are you doing to ensure that the
agency isn't making near-term trades in trying to meet a
schedule that could wind up negatively affecting the safety
needed throughout a long-term exploration program?
Hon. Bolden. Ms. Edwards, I talk to the ASAP all the time.
I generally make the ASAP meetings when I travel to wherever
they are, and Admiral Dyer and I have phone calls back and
forth.
I would emphasize to everyone, though, as the ASAP states
in their report, we have done an awful lot over the last 5, six
years. When you look at SLS core stages in production at
Michoud, we just had a big test firing, 500-second firing on
the main engine down at Stennis. The well for the Orion crew
module was completed, and it's been shipped to the cape so----
Ms. Edwards. Right. So those are the technologies.
Hon. Bolden. Those are our accomplishments.
Ms. Edwards. I'm talking about safety and the ASAP's----
Hon. Bolden. Yes.
Ms. Edwards. --concern with safety and whether this
pressure to meet a 2023 external goal--2021 rather, whether
that is too much to ensure the safety of the mission.
Hon. Bolden. No one puts more emphasis on safety than the
Administrator, than I do, and I share the ASAP's concern that
we not be blindly progressing toward a particular date, and
that's the reason that we have emphasized to the Congress
before that, as far as we are concerned, as far as the date
that the agency is committed to, it's 2023.
You know, if we are able to--there are two things that the
ASAP pointed out in the report that you cite, and I'll use the
terms they use. They talked about sufficiency and timing when
it comes to their concern about safety. Sufficiency is the
level of funding we get. The most important thing is timing.
When you get appropriations late each year, that means we're
operating with less money than we need. We're holding on
purchasing long lead items. We're holding on everything. It's
disastrous to industry. They can't plan. So that's the concern
that the ASAP has.
And I think--I hope the Congress doesn't miss their
message. It's a message to all of us that it's not just
important--it's not just important to have a certain amount of
money, but you need to be able to have a program, a development
program that can count on getting the money when you need it.
We went through this with----
Ms. Edwards. Well, I----
Hon. Bolden. --commercial crew and----
Ms. Edwards. I mean, look, I share that concern, but let's
remember that we also went through, for different reasons, the
Columbia disaster or Challenger disaster where there were these
pressures for time----
Hon. Bolden. Yes.
Ms. Edwards. --that ended up in what ultimately sacrificed
safety and cost lives. And I just want to make sure that we are
paying attention to those things here.
I want to go on to another--it would be great, I think, Mr.
Chairman, if you were to hold a hearing at some point or other
just examining this specific concern around safety that ASAP
has raised and maybe we can get to the bottom of this.
I want to ask you about Earth science in my time remaining.
Some people have criticized the level of funding that's been
given to Earth science in the 2017 budget request. We heard
that here today. And I think what's so often not understood is
how NASA's Earth science missions and research affect the daily
lives of Americans. And so I would like you to give us some
concrete example of how Earth science missions and research
have actually benefited the American people and our economy.
Hon. Bolden. I'll give you two, I think, really good
examples. We have two missions. One is called SMAP, Soil
Moisture Active Passive. The other one is called GRACE, and I
don't remember what the acronym stands for, but it looks at
changes in Earth's gravity, and it can therefore tell us what's
in a water reservoir under the surface of Earth. Those two
missions have been used to help us with water issues out on the
West Coast, as well as around the world. So they have both
economic and strategic value.
We look at a program called SERVIR that Earth science
supports where we provide 30 years of archived Earth science
data and real-time data from our Earth science satellites
around the world to help farmers in crop planting, water
resources management, disaster relief. An earthquake occurs
somewhere and an Earth science satellite is put, you know, at
work right away to try to help the disaster managers determine
what to do. So those are just a couple of examples of what is
done.
Today, for example, in Texas and Louisiana we probably have
a UAVSAR mission. It's an airborne mission, not a satellite,
airborne mission out of Armstrong with a synthetic aperture
radar----
Chairman Babin. That is happening.
Hon. Bolden. --that's helping to look at levees and dams
and the like to detect where there may be leaks so that we can
warn a community if--you know, we don't do the warning but we
provide the data to the state and local leaders so that they
can make decisions.
We've been credited with contributing to saving thousands
of lives In Bangladesh last year with SMAP because it predicted
it would--it enabled us to predict floods--flooding in the
annual rains in Bangladesh. So those are concrete examples of
how our Earth science program is not just a national program,
it is an international program highly respected and counted on
by nations around the world.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Babin. Thank you, Ms. Edwards.
Let's see. The next one is Mr. Rohrabacher, the gentleman
from California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right. Thank you very much.
General, I notice--welcome. Important I share the
Chairman's and other people's admiration and gratitude to you--
--
Hon. Bolden. Thank you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. --for the service you've been to our
country both as a Marine and both in your current position. I
notice you're wearing a green tie.
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Does that mean you're Irish?
Hon. Bolden. I am Irish through my daughter Kelly, who was
born today. So----
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right. Kelly----
Hon. Bolden. --she is Kelly O'Bolden, born on St. Patrick's
Day.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Now, let's see, there's Kelly and
there's--and then we have Scott Kelly.
Hon. Bolden. Scott Kelly, yes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So maybe you could answer me. The question
is I understand that the Mars rover has picked up these
pictures that have been identified as various elements of a
former civilization, and I do understand that they have found
an ancient bottle of Guinness on Mars, is that correct?
Hon. Bolden. I will go back and check that.
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right.
Hon. Bolden. I'll take that for the record.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And could it be that leprechauns were
ancient aliens, space aliens?
Hon. Bolden. I will take that for the record also, sir.
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right. Let me know about the line of
questioning that we just had, and that is the projects that you
outlined and our friends on the other side of the aisle are
pushing for NASA to be involved in. We have no question about
whether there is value to these Earth-related projects. The
question is only whether they should be part of the NASA
budget, and that's our main area of debate here.
And certainly if--now, I won't put you on the spot, but the
fact is if we weren't doing some of the Earth science things
and NASA's budget could stay the same. If we took those items
and put them into NOAA and other places that they belong or the
USGS, for example, you know, then I would take it that you
would not be as adamantly insisting how important they are, but
maybe somebody else could be paying for it.
Hon. Bolden. I would still insist that they're critically
important. Some of you may remember that in 2014 the
President's budget request proposed that funding for sustained
land imaging, the Landsat program, come from the Department of
Interior, from USGS's budget----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right.
Hon. Bolden. --and the Congress rejected that----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well----
Hon. Bolden. --and put the funds back in NASA----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right.
Hon. Bolden. --simply because they felt that we were the
appropriate organization to have it.
The other agencies of the government, we provide the
design, the build, the production and checkout for all the
imaging satellites, almost all that are----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes.
Hon. Bolden. --in the civil sector. The other agencies
don't have that capability, and so it's a partnership, and it's
worked for 43 years now in the case of Landsat. And, you know,
NOAA today has an effective orbiting weather satellite----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right.
Hon. Bolden. --when they're a little bit better off than
folk on----
Mr. Rohrabacher. I do understand NOAA aren't you
compensated from the NOAA budget for what you're doing with
NOAA there, as compared to the Geological Survey?
Hon. Bolden. We are indeed.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So I would imagine that if we could
actually fund these other--the Earth sciences and not take it
out of your budget, that it would be something that would be
positive, but I won't put you on the spot on that.
The--let's note that another thing that's saving us money,
however, is the commercial crew. And I want to thank all of my
colleagues and thank you for the leadership that you've shown
in trying to show this cost-saving methodology of bringing the
private sector in when we can and then letting NASA focus on
those things that the private sector can't do.
And I know that Virgin Galactic right now is deeply
involved in developing suborbital space transportation, which
is terrific. I would hope that we could also, for example, have
a commercial approach perhaps to lunar missions. And I know
that NASA is not focused on lunar missions right now, but
perhaps the private sector could be involved with lunar
missions, and we could have some kind of involvement there or
coordination but let the private sector pick up some of the
cost of going back to the moon if we can do that.
Hon. Bolden. Mr. Rohrabacher, you're absolutely right, and
I would say, you know, NASA is on a Journey to Mars. Our
destination for the nation--this is what we recommended and
what--I have to compliment--Chairman Smith isn't here right
now. I complimented Mr. Perlmutter. They wrote an absolutely
incredible op-ed or an article on, you know, the fact that we
are the greatest nation in the world. We need to be going to
Mars.
But everyone should understand--and I think we're
mischaracterized when they said we're ignoring the moon. We're
going to spend ten years, a decade of the '20s, in cislunar
space. And we call it the proving ground. And that is a period
of time when, if everything works the way we hope, commercial
entities, entrepreneurial entities, maybe even some of our
international partners will ask us to assist them in preparing
things like landers that may put humans back on the surface of
the moon on the way to Mars. But----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well----
Hon. Bolden. --this nation has to focus on the big thing,
which is Mars.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Why----
Hon. Bolden. If we don't, then nobody goes there.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, General, I think it's possible to
focus on the very next step in the stairway rather than----
Hon. Bolden. And that's the ten years in the proving
ground.
Mr. Rohrabacher. --rather than focusing on----
Hon. Bolden. That is the next step.
Mr. Rohrabacher. --the--where you're going at the end of
the stairwell.
One last note very quickly because my time is up, and that
is I hope that--one of the things we really need is to make
sure our country and the world is prepared for a possible
collision with some space rock that could kill millions of
people.
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I applaud you, I want to work with you on
making sure that NASA is playing its role in this global
defense against an asteroid or----
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rohrabacher. --a meteor. So thank you very much.
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Chairman Babin. Thank you.
And I'd like to recognize the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms.
Johnson.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much.
General Bolden, the New Aviation Horizons project is
certainly an exciting initiative, and this is a decade-long
initiative based on funding offsets that are part of the
Administration's 21st century ``clean transportation'' plan.
What are the potential benefits of the X-plane flight
demonstrations included in the plan?
Hon. Bolden. Well, there are four demonstrations--
demonstrators that we have, you know, right now that we would
really like to do. The one that we're attacking first is the
low-boom supersonic demonstrator. And people ask why that one
first, and it's because industry is poised to help us design
and build a low-boom supersonic demonstrator. It's going to
increase their ability to compete around the world in
supersonic transport.
And we've been working on this for number of years now, and
there are a number of companies like Lockheed, Boeing,
Gulfstream that have plans on the drawing board, and they just
need a demonstrator to help us change--get the FAA to change
the regulations prohibiting supersonic flight over ground.
The other one is Hybrid Wing Body. The Department of
Defense is very interested--not just civilian aviation but the
Department of Defense in terms of transport, cargo transport.
Hybrid Wing Body changes the efficiency of an airplane,
increases our fuel efficiency, gives them longer range, so
that's a second thing that's going to have an economic and
strategic impact for the nation.
And then finally, hybrid electric systems where we actually
sometimes you mix electric engines with regular turbine engine
and other times you just use electric engines. We've been
collaborating with our partners in the German space agency
because they are also--they were out in front of us, and so
this initiative will allow us to kind of catch up with them and
assume some of the leadership in looking at hybrid electric
systems.
Ms. Johnson. What are the implications of not sustaining
this project over the decade should the funding fluctuate over
time?
Hon. Bolden. The bottom-line implication is that the United
States will lose its place as the leader in aviation and
aeronautics. We're struggling to maintain that right now, and
that was one of the driving forces behind aeronautics coming up
with a new strategic plan in 2014 with the six strategic
thrusts that were a part of that plan. And now, being able to
announce with industry, academia, and others about two weeks
ago that the President supported this New Aviation Horizons
initiative that's going to allow the United States to maintain
their leadership.
Aviation accounts for the largest balance of trade item in
this country by a long shot, and if we don't get out in front
of everybody and do the types of development that will be
covered in the New Aviation Horizons, we'll lose that edge.
Ms. Johnson. Does it seem to have the possibility of
attracting young people to aeronautics----
Hon. Bolden. No question whatsoever. I go to college
campuses today, and it hasn't been that long since we started
talking about this initiative. Students who are in--studying
aeronautical engineering are--they're ecstatic. They're beside
themselves.
I had a special assistant from Langley by the name of Mr.
Erik Axdahl, who is a hypersonics specialist. After his 6
months up here with me, he left semi-depressed because he did
not hear that the United States was going to invest in
hypersonics. He now, you know, is a little bit happier camper
because he feels that he has not gone to school and been
educated and done stuff because the United States is going to
maintain their leadership in hypersonics because of that.
And every one of you, hopefully, has a copy of our little
flyer here and it's got information on the back, and we'd be
more than happy to come to your district or to your office or
anywhere and help you understand some of this. Thanks very
much.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Babin. Thank you.
I'd now like to recognize the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Brooks.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Bolden, first, I'd like to applaud your
choice of Todd May as Director of the Marshall Space Flight
Center located in my district. And I'd also like to thank his
predecessor, Patrick Scheuermann, for his many years of service
and leadership at NASA, especially at the Marshall Space Flight
Center. I'm excited about the continued success at Marshall and
throughout NASA.
That having been said, have you designated a NASA center
lead for rocket propulsion that would be able to integrate all
of NASA's expertise in deep space travel on the Journey to
Mars?
Hon. Bolden. Congressman, we don't use the term ``lead
center'' anymore. It has a bad connotation for people who were
around at the time of Challenger.
But what we have done is we have an effort ongoing. It
started out as something we call TCAT that I think we explained
it to everybody. Now, it's just baseline services assessment
where we're trying to identify centers who have the highest
level of capability in a particular field. There is no question
that the Marshall Space Flight Center is the--one of their core
capabilities is propulsion, and so no question whether we're
talking to DOD or anybody else outside of NASA that Marshall is
the place that people go when they want to discuss in space and
leaving the Earth propulsion issues.
Mr. Brooks. Well, for lack of a better word, I'm going to
use it again in my next question. While I'm asking about
program leads, who is program lead for Europa?
Hon. Bolden. The program lead for Europa presently if I--
and I'll--let me take it for the record, but as my memory
serves me, the Jet Propulsion Lab is the lead for procurement
things like the spacecraft ``bus'' and others, and then we have
other centers that are contributing to that. But JPL in your
terms would be considered the lead, although they're an FFRDC,
but it's because of their expertise in planetary travel.
Mr. Brooks. Well, isn't JPL a federally funded research and
development center?
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Mr. Brooks. And my impression, and correct me if I'm wrong,
is that federally funded research and development centers, by
their nature, can only supply one-of-a-kind research and
development and not be a program manager.
Hon. Bolden. That is--I don't think that is--let me take
that for the record. The definition of a program manager--I
don't think there's a prohibition because of their unique
experience and expertise in planetary flight, for example,
Curiosity and most of our Mars missions. JPL is the center that
has achieved that for NASA for decades. We have been providing
precursors on the way to Mars since the '60s, and Jet
Propulsion Lab has generally been the lead in doing that work.
So I'll take it for the record for your strict definition
of who can be a program manager, but program managers for
planetary missions have not always--have dominantly been at
JPL.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you. I'll move on to another area.
Earlier this week at an appropriations hearing you spoke
about the need for ``game-changing'' propulsion. Do you support
nuclear thermal propulsion and what role do you see it playing
in the Journey to Mars?
Hon. Bolden. We are on a Journey to Mars, and most people
believe that in the end, nuclear thermal propulsion will
probably be the most effective form of propulsion to get there.
Right now, we are funding at a very low level. Development of
low-grade nuclear fuel so that we don't have to go through what
we go through today. So we're taking a step-by-step approach to
getting to nuclear thermal--to the use of nuclear thermal
propulsion, but we are years away from doing that.
Again, Marshall is the dominant center. They have most of
the capability there, and they're working with some of their
local contractors who are helping them with developing nuclear
thermal propulsion.
Mr. Brooks. Congress authorized $20 million for nuclear
thermal propulsion for fiscal year 2016. How much is NASA
planning on spending in fiscal year 2016 on nuclear thermal
propulsion?
Hon. Bolden. I'll take that for the record, Congressman.
I'll just take it for the record. I think I remember, but I
don't want to guess.
Mr. Brooks. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Chairman Babin. Thank you.
I'd like to recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Beyer.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much. Thank you,
Administrator Bolden, for being with us again.
The planetary sciences come up again and again, and I think
in the opening Chairman's remarks he talked about why is NASA
paying for NOAA's satellite research? Why is NASA paying for
USGS's Landsat stuff? So why? Why don't they pay for----
Hon. Bolden. In the case of USGS and Landsat it is because
the Congress refused the President's budget request to transfer
money for Landsat into the Department of interior. So this
Congress decided that sustained land imaging is really
important, and they put the money back in the--you know,
according to my budget people, they put the money back into
NASA because we've done it for so long. I'll go back and
double-check my memory, but I think that--that's pretty simple
in that case.
Mr. Beyer. So you'd be fine to have it in the USGS budget
as long as we put up there?
Hon. Bolden. As long as the nation continues to do
sustained land imaging and weather and those kinds of things, I
think any Administrator is perfectly happy to make sure that we
support whoever's doing it. You would also have to transfer the
people from NASA when you talk about the design and build of
satellites because those agencies don't have the capability to
do that.
Mr. Beyer. Okay.
Hon. Bolden. So this is--we have expertise, and that's, I
think, why Congress comes back to us and puts the money in the
NASA budget. So you're talking about a little bit more than
just transferring money. You're probably going to transfer
people if you really want those agencies to do what we do.
Mr. Beyer. So on the case of the mandatory spending, the
$733 million from----
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Mr. Beyer. --cuts, consolidation, savings, did you do that
or did the budget--in order to adapt to BCA, the Budget Control
Act?
Hon. Bolden. I am told that the Budget Control Act was a
large factor in the Office of Management and Budget deciding on
how to divide the money. That is immaterial to me as the NASA
Administrator. My conversations with the Director of OMB
through his senior people was, look, you have $19 billion that
the President is supporting, so that's--I didn't--I don't work
with mandatory discretionary.
Mr. Beyer. Okay.
Hon. Bolden. My Chief Financial Officer, he can
understand----
Mr. Beyer. Different question then.
Hon. Bolden. Yes.
Mr. Beyer. You mentioned in your testimony that because we
were on a continuing resolution we didn't get the omnibus
spending until just before Christmas. Would you have requested
north of the $19.285 billion if you'd known when you were
putting the budget together that we were going to authorize or
actually appropriate $19.285 billion?
Hon. Bolden. Congressman Beyer, I always request more money
then we get and, you know, any Administrator, Director, or
anybody that doesn't go in with a significantly higher number
than they expect they're going to get is asking not to get
anything. I--you know, I think anybody would tell you the NASA
Administrator always comes in with a higher number then I
ultimately get.
Mr. Beyer. So that's----
Hon. Bolden. I do the same thing with the Congress.
Mr. Beyer. So it's safe to say that this 1.3 percent
reduction is at least partly based on the absence of the
information about where we're going to end up in fiscal year
2016?
Hon. Bolden. Largely based on that.
Mr. Beyer. Yes.
Hon. Bolden. Had we known that the Congress was going to
appropriate $19.3 billion, I would have been comfortable going
in and asking for even more than we asked for.
Mr. Beyer. So there are some cynics who suggested that OMB
and NASA deliberately understated deep space exploration, Space
Launch System, Orion, because they knew that the Space
Committee and Congress love those and would push them back.
Hon. Bolden. That is--I've heard that stated before, but as
I said again, at the President's requested budget level, we are
on target and we will produce the first flight of SLS and Orion
with a human crew in 2023, and we have a 70 percent confidence
level that we can do that. That's how we came up with the 2023
and, you know, we decided 70 percent was the number we want to
make, and it's a lot more fancy than I can explain in this
hearing, but that's the number we came up with. And if all we
got was the President's budget request, we would be launching
EM-2 in 2023.
I do have to say, we are focused on a program to get humans
to Mars, not the first two flights, and we could spend
everything in the world on EM-1 and EM-2 and then have nothing
left for a sustained program. So we're using--if you gave me
more money, I'd buy down risk, go back to Ms. Edwards'
question. There is always risk, and more money for me means I
can spend more to buy down risk. And it----
Mr. Beyer. We only have 20 seconds left so very quickly,
the roadmap, the Journey to Mars, many people have criticized
that we're--Congress and NASA are not yet on the same page in
terms of what that roadmap needs to be.
Hon. Bolden. I think we're much more on the same page than
most people are willing to admit. We don't know how--ultimately
how we're going to make the final step from cislunar space to
Mars. We just don't know, and it would be irresponsible of me
as the NASA Administrator to pick a particular design reference
mission the way we've always done in NASA and try to hold
everybody to that to try to determine what the final
architecture is going to be.
If we decided right now, the question that the Congressman
from Alabama asked, that says nuclear thermal propulsion is out
because I don't have a budget that sustains nuclear thermal
propulsion or VASIMR or any of those advanced propulsion
systems now. But I'm an optimistic person, and I think that by
the time we reach the end of the 2020s, the middle of the
2020s, we will have gotten sufficient funding from the Congress
and the Administration that we'll be well on the way to new
types of in-space propulsion. We'll be able to have much more
robust environmental control and life support systems, and that
just--we're not there yet, and so it would be irresponsible of
me to try to give you an architecture and a roadmap that has
milestone flights with a design of a vehicle. We're just not
there yet.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, sir, very much. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Babin. Yes, sir, thank you. I'd now like to
recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Knight.
Mr. Knight. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for having
this.
Administrator Bolden, I want to thank you. You know I'm
going to talk about the big A----
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Mr. Knight. --and I appreciate this picture very much. You
put an American hero on here. He is not looking at green there.
He's looking at a lake bed----
Hon. Bolden. I think he's----
Mr. Knight. --and he's looking at a B-52. But Bill Dana is
an American hero and I thank you for putting him on there.
From 1968 to about 2000 or 2002, hypersonic research went
from about the height to almost to zero and then we jumped
again with the X-43 program. We went from the X-43 to the X-51
and then again we decided that either money or it wasn't worth
our while. Probably the first was the reason why we weren't
going to go into hypersonic research.
Can you tell me what a commitment is from NASA, what a
commitment is from Congress to make sure that we continue on
with hypersonic research so America will be the leaders on
hypersonics and not China or someone else?
Hon. Bolden. If Congress accepts the President's proposed
budget, particularly the part that deals with aeronautics, it's
a $25 million annual amount that NASA's commitment to DOD, to
the integrated government--you know, DOD, intelligence
community, everybody else that needs hypersonics, $25 million
allows us to maintain our expertise but most importantly our
facilities at Langley, at Glenn, at Ames. Anything less than
that and we're going to be back where we were in those times
that you describe where we're down. We're going to be back
where we were when Erik Axdahl left to go back to Langley when
he felt that there was no future in hypersonics.
$25 million is the base that NASA needs to retain the
nation's primary capability for fundamental hypersonics
research. That is us. We do that. Nobody else does that.
Mr. Knight. Perfect statement. You do that. We want NASA to
be on the leading edge. I think that there are civilian
companies that would like to jump into that realm at some
point, but remember, typically, NASA will do an awful lot of
R&D before private companies will jump into the mix.
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Mr. Knight. And that is the case here.
Two other programs I'd like to talk about because you know
I'm going to talk about aeronautics quite a bit. The first one
is the low-boom demonstrator. Now, again, we went through
adjusting program for about a three-year period where we put a
big old almost pitot tube at the end of an F-15 and did some
jousting to do a low boom so that hopefully us Congressmen from
the West Coast can fly across this country in 2 hours one day,
and we will alleviate that restriction from the FAA that's been
going on since 1974 and all of these things that--you know, if
any of you have ever heard of sonic boom, I know you've
probably heard a thousand and I've heard a thousand. They're
disrupting, but with a low-boom demonstrator is almost a hum,
or a very--you almost----
Hon. Bolden. Murmur.
Mr. Knight. --wouldn't know it. It's a murmur, exactly.
Explain how important that would be to the economics of this
country, the economics of the world if we could get there.
Hon. Bolden. Congressman Knight, it would be critically
important to this nation economically because right now, the
European space agency--well, European aeronautics companies
because most of their flight is over water. They have said we
don't care. You know, we don't have the regulation that the FAA
has put on American aircraft not to fly supersonically over
ground.
So, as you said, the low-boom technology has allowed us to
really reduce its energy from sound that breaks windows and
stuff. The low-boom configuration actually causes it to be just
a murmur and comfortable to people.
We will have aircraft that will be able to get places much
faster. Businessmen, for example, can do their business--they
can get around the world in six hours instead of however much
time it takes today. Yes, I mean, anybody.
And, you know, there's a common misconception. I've heard
it said one of the reasons that people resisted our efforts in
this regard was because they said, well, the only reason for
having supersonic airplanes is so that rich people can go
places fast.
Mr. Knight. Not true.
Hon. Bolden. That's--you know, some of us normal people
want to go places----
Mr. Knight. That's right.
Hon. Bolden. --fast----
Mr. Knight. Some of us normal people want to go----
Hon. Bolden. --also. And I do a lot of intercontinental
travel. I would love to be able to get into an airplane and go
from here to Moscow or wherever else I'm going in a couple
hours instead of the 14 hours that it takes today.
Mr. Knight. And lastly, in my 15 seconds I'm just going to
thank you. We fully funded SOFIA again.
Hon. Bolden. Yes.
Mr. Knight. SOFIA is, to me, a moving classroom. It's not
unlike the space shuttle. We used the space shuttle in the
beginning for an awful lot of research and astronauts, but we
put teachers on. We did many things, as you know, with the
space shuttle program. We're doing that with SOFIA, so we take
fifth-grade teachers in there. They go back and they inspire
our fifth-graders to now be the next Charlie Bolden. They
inspire them to be an astronaut. And that is exactly what these
types of programs are doing. They're benefiting the country,
not just the science that we're getting out of SOFIA. So I want
to thank you for that, too.
Hon. Bolden. Thank you for your support.
Mr. Knight. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Babin. Thank you.
I'd now like to recognize the gentleman from California,
Mr. Bera. He's not here? Okay.
Mr. Perlmutter from Colorado.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you.
Chairman Babin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Perlmutter. I'm from Colorado and I'm a lot better
looking than Bera, so it's okay.
Mr. Knight sort of highlighted some of the things that have
been so inspirational recently, whether it's New Horizons or
talking about the SOFIA, things like that. And that's--I got to
tell you, I serve on two committees. My colleagues have heard
this before. One is Financial Services, the other is this
committee, the Science, Space, and Technology Committee. And
the way we are pushing the horizon and moving forward with our
science, even though it's kind of herky-jerky at times, we are
doing it. And it really--that's what Americans want to see us
do, you know, whether it's in a caucus in, you know, suburban
Denver or primary, people want us to know--want to know that we
can work together.
And on this Committee, you know, there are places where we
fight but we work together on a lot of issues. And want to keep
an eye on the budget obviously. That's part of our job as
Members of Congress, want to have good people in an agency like
yours who we can trust to be good engineers, scientists,
mathematicians, technicians, to take on these major tasks which
you said and everybody knows are not without risk. So the
Chairman and I wrote this op-ed----
Hon. Bolden. Right.
Mr. Perlmutter. --this article on getting us to Mars by
2033. And it came from information that we had at a hearing
about 3, 4 months ago. And I just--I'd like to use my prop,
this bumper sticker, ``2033, We Can Do This'' because we can.
And the responsibility of those of us up here is to provide the
financial platform for you all to design your program and the
building blocks that go into place.
Mr. Rohrabacher was talking about the moon. That may be
part of your building blocks. I am not a scientist. I can't
determine how you want to build the program that gets our
astronauts to Mars by 2033, but I can help you by assuring your
agency that Democrats and Republicans, Congresses from now
until 2033 and Administrations from now until '33 really do
have a major effort in place.
So how does NASA look at us when we say something like,
yes, get there by 2033? Is it with a little bit of skepticism I
would imagine?
Hon. Bolden. Not at all. When--you know, to have a Member
of Congress who has a bumper sticker that says we can do this,
we don't see--the American public doesn't see that enough. You
know, in this day and age what they--what the young people
sitting here see and hear all the time is we can't do this, we
are not a great nation, we are going to be but we're not right
now. That's just bunk.
We're the greatest nation in the world. We always have
been. And if we stay focused--Congressman Edwards used the term
constancy of purpose. She probably got that from the same
person I did, from Admiral Joe Dyer, the Chairman of my ASAP.
Constancy of purpose means exactly what you and Chairman Smith
wrote. And you--but you've got to believe that. The Congress
and the Administration have got to come together and they've
got to set long-term vision that's going to go beyond that
Administration. Most of what I do today I'm never going to see
it, you know, but I'm doing it for my grandchildren.
That's what you all should be doing. You know, you should
be looking out and saying whoever takes my place, I'm going to
brief them on why I supported this and make sure that they do
it. We plan to do the same thing with the incoming
Administration, the incoming candidates to be quite honest. We
want to let them know what NASA is doing and what the Congress
and the Administration, in spite of what everybody says, you
all work pretty well together now and then.
And so you have set us on a course to Mars. We can get
there in the 2030s, but it's a long, hard, risky slog and we've
got to do things on the International Space Station, we've got
to spend ten years in cislunar space. That's going to allow
people like Congressman Rohrabacher talked about who have these
visions of doing what we once did, putting humans on the
surface of the moon.
NASA can help them, but NASA can't stop at the moon. If we
set the moon as our primary objective, that's it. We're not
going any farther than that. So that's why we're focused on
Mars. And we've got a pretty good plan that will get us there,
but it is step-by-step. We've just got to stay together in
doing that.
Mr. Perlmutter. No, and I appreciate that. I mean, so for
us, our problem is a pretty, you know, substantial one, which
is to find the billions of dollars that will, you know, support
the effort. And I've learned some new terms. You know, one-year
appropriations, multiyear appropriations, and something called
no-year appropriations, which I still don't quite understand.
So--but we're working on it, and I think we're working together
and we want to get this done. So thank you, sir, for your
service.
Hon. Bolden. Thank you.
Chairman Babin. Thank you.
I'd now like to recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Posey.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, General,
for your service to our armed forces and NASA.
Hon. Bolden. Thank you.
Mr. Posey. I'd like to focus just for a moment on
Exploration Mission 1 referred to in all our paperwork as EM-1,
the first time that you'll fly SLS and Orion together hopefully
in 2018. The Government Accountability Office--let me just look
at--get his quote--and the NASA Inspector General have both
cautioned us that Exploration Mission 1 could be delayed
because of potential risks for the exploration ground systems
program. The Administration is requesting $403 million in
discretionary spending in fiscal year 2017, a reduction of $6.8
million from fiscal year 2016. How will this request impact the
Exploration 1 schedule? I mean, I understand we can fully fund
Orion----
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Mr. Posey. --we can fully fund SLS, we can fully fund all
the airplane research, we can fully fund all the weather stuff,
but if we don't have the ground systems in place, nothing's
going to get off the ground, General.
Hon. Bolden. Mr. Posey, you're preaching to the choir. And
this is what I've said to this and other committees for many
years. It is great to be focused on the vehicles, but unless
you have a launch complex like the Kennedy Space Center, the
world's most incredible multiuser launch complex, unless you
have that, you're going nowhere.
Mr. Posey. Yes.
Hon. Bolden. And that's--you know, when people talk about--
a critical part of SLS is the ground system. SLS with no ground
system is worthless. So we're given a limited budget, we try to
take the funds that are in the big category of exploration and
use them so that the ground system, the rocket, and the module
get to launch day together. And that requires doing what Bob
Cabana is doing in an incredibly fine manner down at the
Kennedy Space Center.
The other thing that has helped is having commercial
entities that now provide access to low-Earth orbit so that we
don't have to worry about that. If you go down to Kennedy now
and you look at Launch Complex 39A from where Neil Armstrong
launched, that's now American ingenuity. That's SpaceX. And I
haven't seen it recently, but everybody tells me it is mind-
boggling what they're doing to 39A. That's American ingenuity,
and that's what's going to take us to Mars. So I could not
agree with you more. We've got to focus on the infrastructure,
and that's exploration ground systems.
So when I say I want to take $1 million or whatever it is
that's--that people think is designated for the rocket because
I want to upgrade the security on the exploration ground
system, we're not doing that because we're being frivolous. We
see that EGS is not going to be ready in time to meet the
rocket's date----
Mr. Posey. Exactly.
Hon. Bolden. --unless we do it that way so----
Mr. Posey. Well, thank you. Those are magic words to my
ears, General. So I assume, then, that I can be assured that
we're not going to end up with an SLS and Orion and lack a
ground system that's ready to launch.
Hon. Bolden. I can assure you, sir, that with the
President's budget request at that level, the exploration
ground system, SLS, and Orion will be ready to launch in 2018
together.
Mr. Posey. Okay. Thank you for that assurance.
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. The Orion program received $1.27
billion in fiscal year 2016. The discretionary request from
NASA for fiscal year 2017 is $1.05 billion. Will this request
delay EM-2, Exploration Mission 2, where we're actually going
to put men in here? If NASA received $1.27 billion in fiscal
year 2017 for Orion, would EM-2 be delayed?
Hon. Bolden. At the President's budget request, EM-2 is
scheduled to go in 2023, and that's our commitment to the
President, to the Congress, to the nation. As I commented to
Congresswoman Edwards, if you gave me the levels that you
continue to give, then we're going to make sure that we will
make 2023. We could make it earlier, but I want to get away
from people focusing on an earlier date because that does bring
concerns about safety into the mix, and that's what the ASAP
was talking about.
You know, 2023 is a great date. If that's what we think we
can meet with a 70 percent confidence level, increased funding
even makes it even more certain we're going to make that date.
But the team always works to be ready earlier than projected,
so we probably could launch earlier than 2023 with increased
funding, but we have committed to 2023 and we'll make that at
the President's budget request.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see I'm out of time.
Chairman Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you.
I think we've got enough time for us to go back through one
more time. Or do we--did somebody just come in? Yes, we've got
every--I think everybody has already asked question, but let's
go back through one more time and let's may be limit it to
about two minutes if that's okay.
So my question would be on the mandatory spending, and I'd
like to--everybody to know the implications of this. And I'm
just wondering if the President and the Administration and you
are fully aware because I heard you mention a while ago whether
it's mandatory or discretionary, it doesn't matter to you, you
just want the money, but as us, as Members of Congress, I would
like for you to be fully aware of the consequences for tapping
into mandatory spending.
The budget request includes funding derived from mandatory
spending such as--and this will be--let me just tell you,
Social Security, Medicaid, Medicare, they're subject to the
PAYGO rule, which means that any new entitlement program must
be accompanied by a corresponding cut to an existing
entitlement or an increase in taxes. In other words, we've got
to pay for this.
In order to pay for NASA's entitlement spending, the
President's budget request calls for skyrocketing tax increases
across the board, as well as cuts to Social Security, Medicare,
Medicaid. And other proposed cuts include reduction to student
loans, their program, unemployment insurance, and veterans'
benefits. It would also create new fees for farmers, hunters,
air travelers, increase military health care copayments, and
federal employee health care and retirement costs. It would
increase the cost of our Postal Service, mail, reduce U.S.
postal services. These proposals would increase the cost of
every American's electricity bill, as well as the price they
pay at the pump.
Just a few months ago Congress fully funded NASA at $19.28
billion without any budget gimmicks, tax increases, or
entitlement cuts, and now the President is requesting a $1
billion cut to NASA and discretionary spending and asking for
pie-in-the-sky tax increases, cuts to mandatory benefits, and
increased entitlements with this mandatory side.
Why should Americans agree to this budget request when NASA
would receive more money under a CR, continuing resolution,
without any of the pain that this budget request would cause?
And I would invite you to please look at the President's budget
right here and take a look at table S-9, page 129 of the
President's budget. We will have nine pages of tax increases
and billions of dollars in cuts to programs that are already
there or increases in taxes.
So why should Americans agree to this budget request, when
we have more money under the proposed CR and not have any of
the pain that this budget request would cause?
Hon. Bolden. Mr. Chairman, I'm not a budgeteer.
Chairman Babin. Okay.
Hon. Bolden. I don't----
Chairman Babin. Well, I just wanted you to know----
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Chairman. Babin. --okay, because we have to look at this.
When it says mandatory spending, there are implications. There
are consequences to this, and the consequences--you're a
veteran.
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Chairman Babin. That's just one little aspect of some of
the consequences that it would hit veterans.
Hon. Bolden. Mr. Chairman, I would--if I may, I would say
one thing----
Chairman Babin. Sure.
Hon. Bolden. --and that was when we started the budget
process, we started several billion dollars below where we are
because we were told that sequester is still a possibility. And
it still is a possibility. It is not off the table, and that's
something that I think the budgeteers at least, you know, when
I talk to my guys, they are--they always remind me, you know,
we do have this thing called sequester. So in defense of the
budgeteers, I think they're trying to work with the Congress
and find a way to get that. It's a limit, but it can be solved
somehow.
Chairman Babin. Right.
Hon. Bolden. I don't know how to do that.
Chairman Babin. Okay.
I now recognize the gentlewoman, Ms. Edwards from Maryland.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And just a really quick question. We spent some time over
the last several Congresses really going to bat for the
education budget within NASA. Across the aisle, Republicans and
Democrats, we felt very, very strongly about keeping those
within NASA. I noticed that this year's budget request is--one,
it's $5 million less than what was enacted in 2016, which is
problematic. And what I really notice is that the Minority
University Research Education project is down $2 million. I see
a plus up in STEM education and then a significant decrease in
the Space Grants.
And I want to speak to the Minority University Research
Education because I have been really privileged to see some of
the fruits of this labor at Morgan State University, which is
conducting some joint research with NASA. I think it is a great
way to get this next generation to find these engineers and
researchers who are out there who are minorities, women, other
underserved communities.
And so this university research education project plays a
tremendous role with Historically Black Colleges and
Universities and underserved--and minority populations and with
getting women also engaged in the STEM fields. And so I'm
concerned about the decreases. I think this is where the next
generation is going to come from. And I'll just let you comment
on that.
Hon. Bolden. I share your concern, Congresswoman Edwards.
Every year, you know, I have to sign a report on funding for
HBCUs. And it's either the same or a little bit less, and so
that is troubling, but when we look at funds that are
available--so what we've tried to do is we've tried to let some
innovative ways to ensure that we can make HBCUs and minority-
serving institutions more competitive. One of the ways is in
small business. So whereas most HBCUs and minority-serving
institutions today look for grants, we are trying to team them
with larger research institutions so that they can learn how to
go after contracts so that they can enter into contracts with--
to allow their professors to actually do like--Congressman
Perlmutter knows this. The University of Colorado Boulder,
MAVEN--MAVEN is the University of Colorado Boulder. That was
the--that's the principal investigator is a professor--this is
a Mars--a critical Mars satellite.
We ought to be able to get HBCUs and minority-serving
institutions to learn from Colorado Boulder so that they can
compete for contracts so that the students who want to be
engineers can actually build satellites. We're starting little.
We're starting with SmallSats or CubeSats. And so while it's
not for MUREP or other kinds of programs, we're finding
alternative ways to get money to minority campuses. We're not
there yet, but we're trying to do that.
We call it Mentor-Protege where a large college takes a
small HBCU and tries to bring them along. Alabama Huntsville,
Morgan State, Hampton, they're unusual. They know how to--you
know, they have contract offices. Most HBCUs don't even have a
clue, and that's not--that is not a slight on the HBCU. It's
just that they've never known that that's available to them
also. And so we've got to spend time doing it. I share your
concern.
Chairman Babin. Thank you.
I'll now recognize Mr. Posey from Florida.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, just to kind of pick up where we left off last
time when I ran out of time, let's suppose that NASA received
an extra $1.35 billion in fiscal year 2017. What would that get
spent on?
Hon. Bolden. The first thing it would be spent on buying
down risk across the board in our programs, and a large portion
of it would go into human spaceflight.
And what does that mean, buying down risk? We would go out
and purchase long lead items for downstream vehicles so that
EM-3, EM-4, EM-5 would be--the vehicles for those flights would
be able to begin construction now rather than waiting three or
four or five years from now.
We would probably put more money into beefing up our Safety
and Mission Assurance organization or the Engineering
organization to make sure that we satisfy Congresswoman
Edwards' concern and that of the ASAP that we don't let launch
fever or those kinds of things happen. And of course, we would
try to get as much done quickly so that we could launch sooner.
But the big focus would be on buying down risk.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. For a long time we talked about EM-2
being in 2021 and now we're a big bump to 2023. Could just a
matter of funding put that back on track?
Hon. Bolden. Yes, a matter of funding could put EM-2 back
on track, but all the funding would not go to doing that,
again, as I said, because what I don't want to do is put a
bundle of money on EM-2, have no long lead items having been
procured, have tests that need to be done and don't get done
and we launch EM-2 earlier and we're stopped. So----
Mr. Posey. I get that.
Hon. Bolden. --it's not as----
Mr. Posey. I get that.
Hon. Bolden. It's not black and white.
Mr. Posey. And the economy of having more closer together
is there, too. I mean, I understand the economic benefits of
doing that.
Hon. Bolden. Yes. You know, development curve--a funding
curve for development program has a little hump in it. None of
ours ever have that. Ours is always straight line.
Mr. Posey. Yes.
Hon. Bolden. The work that people like Bob Cabana and Todd
May and Ellen Ochoa and the program managers do every single
year, Bill Gerstenmaier, in fitting a development program--and
we have, I think, five human spaceflight development programs
underway, never been done by this agency before. When you talk
about commercial crew, commercial cargo, suborbital flight,
Orion, SLS, EGS, and not to mention the science programs, we've
got a lot of stuff that we're trying to do and all of it is
incredibly valuable. We don't have anything that I would say,
you know, let's stop doing it because it's all important for
the nation.
Mr. Posey. Great. Thank you very much.
Chairman Babin. Thank you.
Let's see. Now, the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Beyer.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, Congress has expressed in the past--or the
concerns have been expressed that it's not safe to have missile
rocket launches and offshore oil rigs in the same area. In
2015, NASA stated that the presence of either temporary or
fixed structures at or below the sea surface within our range
hazard areas, would have significant detrimental effects on our
ability to conduct aerospace test activities.'' In addition,
there was a warning that ``impact with an oil platform would
cause catastrophic damage and would result in the complete loss
of expensive launch vehicles.'' So Tuesday, the Administration,
Secretary Jewell, reversed course on mid-Atlantic oil and gas
leasing program, at least through 2022. Could you tell us if
offshore oil and gas drilling and exploration off Virginia's
coast is consistent with the activity of NASA Wallops?
Hon. Bolden. Mr. Beyer, I'll take that for the record. I
will say one thing about the comment you made. Any spacecraft
that impacts anything here on Earth is bad for the--whether
there's an oil well there or not, if it comes back to Earth,
it's a bad day. So having an oil well there doesn't make a
difference, but I'll take it for the record to find the answer
to your specific question.
Mr. Beyer. Okay. Good. Because I was trying to quote NASA
there as much as I could so----
Hon. Bolden. Yes, sir. And I understand that. I have some
incredible people, a lot smarter than I am, and so they're
going to educate me so I can answer your question.
Mr. Beyer. Okay. Good. How about a brief progress report on
James Webb Telescope, and are we still on track for launch
October 2018?
Hon. Bolden. We are on track for launch October 2018, and
we actually have--I'll try to get this right--about a 7-1/2
month cost and schedule reserve, which we--in all probability
we'll need because there are some critical tests upcoming when
we move the spacecraft down to the Johnson Space Center, and
there's always something that comes up that you don't
anticipate. So it's the place you want to be. But we're on
track right now for 2018.
Mr. Beyer. It's very exciting. Thank you, General.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you. And I believe Mr.
Perlmutter, the gentleman from Colorado.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. And I just have a few
thank-yous I want to give. One is to Scott Kelly and his recent
record-setting journey on the Space Station. And for a short
guy like me, it was encouraging to hear that he was 2 inches
taller when he came down than his identical twin brother.
Hon. Bolden. Only temporary.
Mr. Perlmutter. I know. It didn't last long, but still,
there's hope. And I want to thank NASA. And yesterday, we had
another astronaut here testifying, Kathy Sullivan on behalf of
NOAA, and both of your agencies helped my office recently with
major weather--giant weather system Cyclone Winston that
clobbered Fiji. And we had some constituents who were missing
for several days, and we were able to get some pictures from
your agency, NOAA, some others to at least give the family
comfort that the part of the island where they were wasn't
completely flattened. And after several days and--the
communications were restored, but it gave comfort to the
families. So I want to thank you for that.
Also thank you with respect to the cargo missions. You
know, recently one of the companies in Colorado was awarded one
of the contracts to deliver cargo, Sierra Nevada, up to the
space station.
And lastly, you mentioned the University of Colorado, and
they're playing the University of Connecticut today in the
first round of the NCAA, so I do want to say go Buffs. But
TSIS, Total Solar Irradiance Sensor----
Hon. Bolden. Sensor, yes, sir.
Mr. Perlmutter. --is what we met about at CU a couple years
ago, built by CU students, and it's going to catch a ride to
the Space Station in 2018. And obviously very proud of the
university and the kinds of things it does working with NASA
and the things that it does in terms of getting students
involved with outer space. So I don't know if you want to
comment on any of those, but just thank you for your service
again, General.
Hon. Bolden. Sir, my--I appreciate all the compliments.
I'll try to make sure we get them out to everybody. I'll be
with Scott next week when we go to Moscow for his post-flight.
But I would go back to Congresswoman Edwards' question
about HBCUs and the like and say that's what we want to do with
schools like Morgan and Howard and Hampton. We want them to
have students who are working on spacecraft, and that's--that
takes some effort. And, first of all, you have to convince them
that they can. You've got to let them know that opportunities
are there. You're not--we use the term inspire all the time. I
had a young black engineer one time who told me if he heard me
say inspire one more time he's going to puke. And I went, what
do you mean? He said, we can't inspire anybody until we inform
them. And so there are kids from my community back in South
Carolina and all over this country that you all represent who
don't have a clue what they can do. And so the first thing--and
that's what NASA tries to do with the limited funds we do have
in our education program.
And I actually have a $19 billion education budget. I know
you all think I'm being trite when I say that because
everything we do in NASA is really focused on trying to inspire
and inform young people about what they can do to be a part of
the NASA family. And so I'm very, very thankful for the $19.3
billion that you all appropriated for us out of the Congress
last year. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you.
Chairman Babin. Thank you. And this really concludes our
hearing, and it's been an excellent hearing. And I want to
thank the witness, General Charlie Bolden, for your long
illustrious career and your leadership of NASA. And I want to
thank you on behalf of the entire Committee. I'd also like to
thank the Committee Members for their very informative and
great questions.
So with that, this hearing is adjourned.
Hon. Bolden. Thank you, sir.
[Whereupon, at 12:09 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Responses by the Hon. Charles F. Bolden, Jr.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
