- PROTECTING THE 2016 ELECTIONS FROM CYBER AND VOTING MACHINE ATTACKS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING THE 2016 ELECTIONS
FROM CYBER AND VOTING MACHINE ATTACKS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

September 13, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-91

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

22-560 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas, Chair
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         ZOE LOFGREN, California
Wisconsin                        DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             ERIC SWALWELL, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   ALAN GRAYSON, Florida
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             AMI BERA, California
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            KATHERINE M. CLARK, Massachusetts
RANDY K. WEBER, Texas                DON S. BEYER, JR., Virginia
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan          ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
STEVE KNIGHT, California             PAUL TONKO, New York
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   MARK TAKANO, California
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas            BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
GARY PALMER, Alabama
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
DARIN LaHOOD, Illinois
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio

C O N T E N T S

September 13, 2016

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Lamar S. Smith, Chairman, Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................     5
Written Statement............................................     7

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking
Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House
of Representatives.............................................     9
Written Statement............................................    11

Witnesses:

Dr. Charles H. Romine, Director, Information Technology
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    14
Written Statement............................................    17

Hon. Tom Schedler, Secretary of State, State of Louisiana
Oral Statement...............................................    27
Written Statement............................................    29

Mr. David Becker, Executive Director, The Center for Election
Innovation & Research
Oral Statement...............................................    35
Written Statement............................................    38

Dr. Dan S. Wallach, Professor, Department of Computer Science and
Rice Scholar, Baker Institute for Public Policy, Rice
University
Oral Statement...............................................    42
Written Statement............................................    44

Discussion.......................................................    56

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Charles H. Romine, Director, Information Technology
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology.....    88

Hon. Tom Schedler, Secretary of State, State of Louisiana........   107

Mr. David Becker, Executive Director, The Center for Election
Innovation & Research..........................................   110

Dr. Dan S. Wallach, Professor, Department of Computer Science and
Rice Scholar, Baker Institute for Public Policy, Rice
University.....................................................   113

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Washington Post article How to hack- and rig-proof U.S. elections   122

PROTECTING THE 2016 ELECTIONS
FROM CYBER AND
VOTING MACHINE ATTACKS

----------

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 13, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:11 a.m., in Room
2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Lamar Smith [Chairman
of the Committee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Smith. The Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology will come to order. Without objection, the Chair is
authorized to declare recesses of the Committee at any time.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``Protecting the 2016
Elections from Cyber and Voting Machine Attacks.'' I'll
recognize myself for an opening statement and then the Ranking
Member.
We are here today to discuss the subject of election
security. It's hard to imagine a more bipartisan issue.
Election security is fundamental to the fairness of elections
and democracy in the United States. Elections are a key
component of democracy, and voting is the very essence of what
President Abraham Lincoln meant when he said a government by
the people.
Voting is the means by which Americans express their
opinions about their government. It provides Americans with the
opportunity to affirm policies they like and change what they
don't. When our citizens vote, they not only elect their
leaders, they choose a direction and set priorities for our
nation. Elections with integrity strengthen democracy. They
confer legitimacy and boost public trust in government.
Concerns with earlier versions of voting and election
systems led to the passage of the 2002 Help America Vote Act.
This act requires the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, over which we have jurisdiction, to work with the
Election Assistance Commission on technical, voluntary
guidelines for voting.
Today, we will discuss the current technical voluntary
guidelines that are in place for States to protect their voting
and election systems. Though these guidelines are voluntary, I
hope to hear whether they are sufficient to safeguard our
elections and whether States effectively use them.
This discussion is timely as many concerns have been raised
in recent months about the vulnerabilities of electronic voting
machines, voting over the Internet, and online voter
registration. In response to these concerns, our discussion
today will review the security of the election system in its
entirety. We will examine what guidelines are in place, how we
currently protect systems from potential technical
vulnerabilities, and what kind of work--including research and
development in my home State of Texas--is underway to protect
future voting and election systems.
Last year, hackers from China infiltrated the Office of
Personnel Management's database and stole confidential records
and personal information on more than 22 million current and
former federal employees, including those involved in our
national security effort with the highest security clearances.
The attacks on voter registration databases in Illinois and
Arizona are the latest instances of such attacks, this time
with alleged ties to Russia. We have yet to take decisive steps
to defend ourselves and deter attackers.
The President says we are more technologically advanced,
both offensively and defensively, in cyber warfare than our
adversaries. So why won't he take the necessary steps to
prevent cyber attacks on our elections systems by foreign
governments? If we are attacked repeatedly and do nothing, we
will have surrendered unilaterally and put at risk our economy,
our national security, and our very freedoms.
This committee has held more than a half-a-dozen hearings
on cybersecurity issues in this Congress. We know it isn't
enough to respond to cyber attacks with diplomatic protest. We
are going to hear from witnesses today about how the Federal
Government can help States keep our election systems secure.
But the single most important way to protect our election
systems, to protect each American's right to vote and be heard,
is for this Administration--and for the next Administration--to
take decisive steps to deter and, if necessary, sanction
foreign governments that attack us in cyber space.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Smith follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Smith. That concludes my opening statement, and
the Ranking Member, the gentlewoman from Texas, Eddie Bernice
Johnson, is recognized for hers.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning.
Ensuring that our elections are fair, accurate, and freely
accessible to all American citizens is fundamental to our
democracy. Every instance of malfunctioning voting technology
and without question every cyber attack on our election system
is significant. And all efforts to improve voting security,
reliability, privacy, and access are welcome and important.
I am confident by the testimony of today's experts and many
others that we are in a much better place today than we were 10
or 15 years ago. I'm deeply concerned, however, by some of the
rhetoric in recent weeks that seems to--seems intended to erode
public confidence in our election system. Prominent voices have
suggested that the U.S. election system is riddled with fraud
and somehow rigged. Those conspirator allegations, like many
others, that have been floated in the public sphere this
election cycle are not supported by actual facts, and they
threaten the election process we have relied upon for more than
2 centuries.
I'm eager to hear from the distinguished panel today about
the challenges of securing our election system in the digital
age and what actions have been taken at the federal, state, and
local levels to strengthen cybersecurity. However, given the
reckless rhetoric, as well as other serious threats our
election system is facing, I want to take this opportunity to
put the cybersecurity challenges in context.
The U.S. election system is complex and highly
decentralized, encompassing approximately 10,000 local, county,
and state election offices. Further, there are few connections
between individual voting systems and the Internet. And at
least 75 percent of the voters will be able to verify their
vote with a paper ballot this fall. This compartmentalization
and paper trail provides a strong firewall against any cyber
threats.
The recently publicized attacks against voter registration
rolls in Arizona and Illinois are serious but have not resulted
in any changes to voter data or to any voters. In Arizona the
cybersecurity firewalls worked to contain the threat. What I
find most concerning are reports that these recent threats may
be linked to the Russian intelligence operation. So we must be
vigilant, and I hope these incidents will lead to improved
cybersecurity protocols and practices.
While security of the election system is important, voter
access is fundamental to our democracy. Baseless allegations of
widespread voter fraud have been used as an excuse to
disenfranchise large numbers of minority and young voters
through discriminatory voter ID restrictions.
News21, a journalism program established by the Carnegie
Corporation of New York and the John S. and James L. Knight
Foundation found voter impersonation fraud to be
extraordinarily rare. An analysis of 2,068 alleged election
fraud cases in all 50 States from 2000 to 2012 out of 146
million registered voters identified only 10 cases of voter
impersonation fraud. You don't enact laws because of 10 cases
of fraud in 12 years unless you have an ulterior motive.
Fortunately, the courts have been right through the most
blatantly discriminatory state laws.
In addition to the state-sanctioned voter ID laws, the
Brennan Center for Justice and others have continued to
document cases of voter intimidation, deliberate spreading of
misinformation to keep minorities and students from voting, and
other attempts to target and disenfranchise minorities and
young voters. These threats to tens of hundreds of thousands of
eligible voters were either orchestrated by public officials or
lone troublemakers should be taken as seriously as a cyber
threat.
Mr. Chairman, I know my remarks have moved beyond the
intended scope of this hearing, but you know well how
passionate I am about this issue. It is my hope that with this
hearing that we can have a thoughtful discussion of the
challenges and actions that have been taken related to
cybersecurity and other voting technology issues, while
avoiding adding to the noise and confusion surrounding these
issues just 8 weeks from the crucial election.
With that, I'd like to welcome our witnesses for being here
today. And this is a distinguished panel. I look forward to
hearing from our collective experience and expertise.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Johnson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Smith. Okay. Thank you, Ms. Johnson. And I'll
introduce our witnesses. Our first witness today is Dr. Charles
Romine, Director of the Information Technology Laboratory at
the National Institute of Standards and Technology. In this
capacity, Dr. Romine oversees a research program that develops
and disseminates standards, measurements, and testing for
interoperability, security, usability, and reliability of
information systems, which includes cybersecurity standards and
guidelines for federal agencies in U.S. industry.
Dr. Romine previously served as a Senior Policy Analyst at
the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy and is
a Program Manager at the Department of Energy's Advanced
Scientific Computing Research Office.
Dr. Romine received both his bachelor's degree in
mathematics and his Ph.D. in applied mathematics from the
University of Virginia.
I'll now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Abraham, to introduce our next witness, who happens to also be
from Louisiana.
Mr. Abraham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my pleasure to
recognize Hon. Tom Schedler, the Secretary of State from the
great State of Louisiana. Secretary Schedler was appointed to
the position in 2010 and was reelected in 2011 to serve a four-
year term. He is past President of the National Association of
Secretaries of State with his term ending this past July. And
he served as Co-Chairman for the National Association of
Secretaries of State Task Force on Emergency Preparedness for
Elections.
As Secretary of State of Louisiana, he is committed to
protecting and defending the integrity of every election in the
State and has worked diligently to streamline the election
process. The result is been a more efficient and cost-effective
system with Louisiana becoming one of the first States to
implement online voter registration and the first State in the
country to launch a smartphone app for voters to use to get
timely election information. My pleasure for you to be here.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Mr. Abraham.
Our third witness today is Mr. David Becker, Executive
Director and Co-Founder of the Center for Election Innovation
and Research. Mr. Becker founded CEIR to increase voter turnout
and give election officials the tools they need to ensure all
eligible voters can vote conveniently and assist them with
maximum integrity.
Prior to founding CEIR, Mr. Becker was the Director of the
Elections Program at the Pew Charitable Trust where he worked
on reforms in election administration. These reforms included
using technology to provide voters with information they need
to cast a ballot.
Mr. Becker received both his undergraduate and law degrees
from the University of California at Berkeley.
Our final witness today from my home State of Texas is Dr.
Dan Wallach, Professor in the Department of Computer Science
and Rice Scholar at the Baker Institute for Public Policy at
Rice University. Dr. Wallach's research covers a variety of
topics in computer security. This includes electronic voting
system security where he served as the Director of an NSF-
funded multi-institution research center, A Center for Correct,
Usable, Reliable, Auditable, and Transparent Elections, acronym
for which is ACCURATE. He also served as a member of the Air
Force Science Advisory Board from 2011 to 2015.
Dr. Wallach earned his bachelor's degree in electrical
engineering and computer sciences at UC Berkeley and his
master's and Ph.D. from Princeton University.
We welcome you all, appreciate your expert advice.
And, Dr. Romine, if you'll begin.

TESTIMONY OF DR. CHARLES H. ROMINE, DIRECTOR,

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY LABORATORY,

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY

Dr. Romine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Smith,
Ranking Member Johnson, and Members of the Committee, thank you
for the opportunity to discuss NIST's role in voting systems.
Improving voting systems requires an interdisciplinary,
collaborative approach that must be accurate and reliable, yet
cost-effective, secure, and usable and accessible to all
voters. The design and standards must consider the diversity of
voting processes and ballots across the States, and none of
these can be considered in a vacuum.
NIST expertise in testing, certification, information
security, trusted networks, software quality, and usability and
accessibility provides the foundation for our voting systems
work, but our experience working in multi-stakeholder processes
is critical. We must bring together election officials,
industry, technical experts, and advocacy groups to address
this challenge.
The NIST role is limited to the research to develop
standards, tests, guidelines, best practices, and assistance
with laboratory accreditation that the Election Assistance
Commission, or EAC, and state and local jurisdictions may use
at their discretion.
Since the signing of the Help America Vote Act, or HAVA,
NIST has partnered with the EAC to develop the science, tools,
and standards necessary to improve the accuracy, reliability,
usability, accessibility, and security of voting systems. Our
joint accomplishments include new voting system guidelines;
guidelines in support of Military and Overseas Voters
Empowerment Act, or MOVE; and the Uniformed and Overseas
Citizens Absentee Voting Act, or UOCAVA; the establishment of
accredited testing laboratories for voting system equipment and
a testing and certification program upon which many States
depend.
The Technical Guidelines Development Committee, or TGDC, a
federal advisory committee to the EAC chaired by NIST, assists
in the development of the voluntary voting system guidelines.
In 2015, the EAC approved the TGDC's latest recommendations,
Voluntary Voting System Guidance, or VVSG 1.1, with new
requirements for human factors, audit and election logging, and
new security requirements on access control, physical security,
auditing, cryptography, software quality, and software
integrity.
To support overseas and military voters, including the use
of the Internet to cast absentee ballots, NIST research
concluded that widely deployed security technologies and
procedures could mitigate many of the risks associated with
electronic blank ballot delivery but the risks associated with
casting doubts over the Internet were more serious and
challenging to overcome.
Based on that research, NIST documented security best
practices and considerations for election officials on the use
of electronic mail or the Web to expedite transmission of voter
registration materials and blank ballots. In early 2011, NIST
analyzed current and emerging technologies that may mitigate
risk to Internet voting.
We also identified several areas where research and
technological improvements are needed to ensure the security,
usability, and accessibility of Internet voting. Many of these
challenges are not unique to Internet voting such as strong
identity management, protection against malware, and the
resiliency of Internet-connected systems. The unique challenges
of Internet voting are the requirements and expectations,
notably ensuring the integrity of the voting process while
protecting privacy.
NIST and the EAC have recently organized public working
groups that provide an open and transparent development process
and give the EAC and state election officials the opportunity
to work directly with academic, industry, and Federal
Government experts. The working groups help inform NIST, the
EAC, and the TGDC in updating the VVSG.
There are three election working groups--pre-election,
election, and postelection--that are providing insight on
election processes. These groups are supported by four
technical groups--cybersecurity, human factors,
interoperability, and testing. The election working groups take
input from the technical groups to inform requirements
development for consideration by the TGDC.
Ensuring that voting systems are secure and auditable is
critical to providing trust and confidence in the voting
process. The cybersecurity technical working group is
developing guidelines and best practices to secure voting
systems. The group is focused on election security best
practices, including physical security, auditing, and
contingency planning.
To provide a firm foundation for next-generation security
guidelines, NIST is researching threats and vulnerabilities to
voting systems and the best practices and technologies that can
mitigate those risks. As part of that research, NIST has
catalogued published vulnerabilities and weaknesses in voting
system software. The goal is to understand the types of
vulnerabilities by looking at historical evidence and creating
a voter-specific list of vulnerabilities and mapping these with
weaknesses to requirements in the VVSG. This work has
identified issues that should be addressed in future security
requirements and test methods and by voting system
manufacturers.
NIST is committed to continue collaborating with the EAC
and others to fulfill our role defined in HAVA, MOVE, and
UOCAVA. We leverage our research, which is applicable to a wide
variety of organizations and used by industry and governments
throughout the world. Active collaboration between the public
and private sectors is the only way to effectively meet this
challenge, leveraging each participant's roles and
responsibilities.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on NIST's
work in voting systems, and I would be happy to answer any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Romine follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Smith. Thank you, Dr. Romine. And, Secretary
Schedler.

TESTIMONY OF HON. TOM SCHEDLER,

SECRETARY OF STATE, STATE OF LOUISIANA

Mr. Schedler. Thank you. I want to thank the Committee,
Chairman Smith, and Ranking Member Johnson for the invitation
to address you today. I think it's very important for you to
hear from actual election officials who actually conduct
elections. And our job--at least in my opinion, is to make
voting easier, more accessible, and to make it tough to cheat.
But in recent weeks, reports on cyber attacks have voters
questioning whether their vote will actually count, and that in
my opinion is more damaging than the potential for hacking.
We are all on high alert. This whole exercise has put every
one of the 50 States working on national security issues with
all national agencies in an effort to try to improve the system
we have or to recheck the system we have. But the fact is
States are always evaluating security measures and emergency
plans. As I speak, in Louisiana I'm dealing with 30 precincts
from the record flooding that we had in the Baton Rouge area on
contingency plans and what I'm going to do to move those
precincts, notify voters, and the like.
So yes, we--are we concerned about potential interference
into our election process? We absolutely are, but voter fraud
is much, much harder to accomplish than you may think. As was
pointed out by Ranking Member Johnson, we have some 10,000
jurisdictions of voting in this country hundreds of thousands
of voting machines in various locations. The complexity of our
election system has reinforced the election process, and what I
mean by that is if you think about the complexity of that, it
makes it very difficult for any player to go in and actually
disrupt a federal national election.
Specifically, States have developed online registration
some 31 States have the best practice to improve customer
service. They've also developed different ways to guard against
intrusion. In Louisiana, for instance, information collected
through our online voter registration system does not flow
directly into our statewide system. Instead of voter
information is sent from a Web site to each parish register in
the State of Louisiana. The register has direct access to the
database, not the voter.
While it would certainly be disruptive to have registration
systems hacked, as we saw in Arizona and Illinois, voters could
still vote and Election Day would still occur. Anyone who
discovers an issue with their voter registration status still
has the option of a provisional ballot. And remember, no voter
information was added or deleted in Arizona or Illinois, and
most States have electronic paper ballot backups.
In terms of voting machines, it's important to note that so
far scientists have only succeeded in hacking voting machines
when favorable conditions existed that do not exist on Election
Day, including plenty of time and unfettered access. There is
no evidence that ballot manipulation has ever occurred in the
United States.
No State--and I want to make this clear--has Internet
voting, and our voting machines are never connected to the
Internet. In Louisiana, all machines are stored in secure,
state-owned warehouses. All maintenance, including most up-to-
date software applications, as well as programming, is
performed by vetted Secretary of State employees, not outside
contractors.
Additionally, before every election, Louisiana publicly
performs a test-and-seal process in which we demonstrate that
each machine is working properly before it is locked with a
tamperproof seal. That testing process is also done at the end
of each Election Day to demonstrate that each machine is
functioning postelection, which is required by roughly 60
percent of the States. And, if necessary, the majority of
States can make paper ballots and audits available if a recount
or review becomes necessary.
Finally, please keep in mind that timing is critical.
Elections are no longer one-day events and voting is occurring
right now as we speak. Ballots have been printed, absentee
ballots are in the mail, and in-person voting begins in days in
some States. To say this is an inopportune time for election
officials to be discussing this subject instead of real-time
preparation is an understatement. The train has left the
station.
During a call with Secretary Jeh Johnson in mid-August, my
colleagues and I were assured there would be no intent to
declare an election system as part of the critical
infrastructure before the November elections. Some Secretaries,
including myself, have been very vocal that no matter when that
may occur, such a designation would undercut the Constitutional
role of the States and local jurisdictions. It would only
complicate our ability to properly secure elections.
As of today, there is not enough clear information on what
the designation would mean or why it's necessary. States get
what we need through existing networks, including the United
States Elections Assistance Commission and the National
Institute of Standards and Technology, which already identify
the kind of testing and certification.
And most standards needed to reveal signs of tampering,
there is a role for Congress in this. Most States purchase
their voting machines using federal dollars, HAVA, back in
2005, but there is little interest on the Hill when it comes to
helping replace our aging systems. I suggest you revisit HAVA
and see how an investment in voting technology could benefit
our nation in the long run.
In the meantime, we have received a sobering wake-up call
on the serious nature of cyber attacks. States will continue to
take a proactive approach to secure our election systems, and
at the end of the day, I want to assure every American--and I
speak for all of my colleagues, the Secretaries of State
Association--that your next President will be determined by the
vote of the people and every vote will count.
Thank you for allowing me my comments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schedler follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Smith. Thank you, Secretary Schedler.
And, Mr. Becker.

TESTIMONY OF MR. DAVID BECKER,

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,

THE CENTER FOR ELECTION INNOVATION & RESEARCH

Mr. Becker. Good morning, and thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
Ranking Member Johnson, for the opportunity to testify today on
the important issue of the security of our election system.
My name is David Becker and I'm the Executive Director of
the Center for Election Innovation and Research, a nonprofit
working in partnership with election officials like Secretary
Schedler and technology leaders to improve our system of
elections.
My experience in elections goes back about two decades,
starting with a seven-year stint as a senior trial attorney
with the voting section of the Department of Justice under both
the Clinton and George W. Bush Administrations where I observed
dozens of elections in hundreds of precincts nationwide and
then served for several years as the Director of the Elections
Program at Pew where I oversaw efforts to use technology to
improve the efficiency and security of elections.
As an initial matter, we should be clear about the election
systems that are in place and what they each do and what if any
relative vulnerabilities might exist. Voter registration
databases or a key election system have been in the news a lot
recently. As you noted, there was a breach of the Illinois
voter registration database where personal data from several
thousand voters appears to have been accessed. In Arizona, it
appears the State successfully detected an attempted hack of
their state voter registration database and prevented access of
any private data.
But in both cases initial investigations suggest no voter
data was changed. The voter registration lists remained intact
with the primary goal of the hack seemingly being to access
personal data for the purposes related to identity theft rather
than to manipulate the voter lists themselves.
While we should continue to be vigilant about these
centralized databases, to my knowledge, every State creates a
regular backup of their voter registration lists, and most
States on a daily basis, so that should anything go wrong with
the databases themselves, the list could be reconstructed prior
to the election.
And while there have also been concerns expressed about the
hack of the Democratic National Committee email system, that
system is completely different than the election systems in
place. That was an attack on a centralized email server and a
nongovernmental entity which bears no analogy to the highly
regulated systems in place in the States to administer
elections.
The voting machines themselves include paper ballots or
electronic devices on which votes are cast and include vote
tabulation equipment. And with regard to those systems, I can
say that while no system is 100 percent hack-proof, elections
in this country are secure, perhaps as secure as they've ever
been, and that voters should have confidence that their votes
will be counted and counted accurately.
There are four primary reasons that voters should feel
confident in our election system. First, our election system is
highly decentralized. Each State governs the administration of
elections independently, and within each State there are many
individual election jurisdictions--counties, towns, and the
like--totalling approximately 10,000 nationwide that actually
administer those elections.
Even within many States, counties use different systems and
dozens of different technologies to conduct elections, and
within those thousands of election jurisdictions there are well
over 100,000 Election Day precincts and polling places where
ballots are cast and collected, and that is just on Election
Day, not taking into account the thousands of early-voting
sites and tens of millions of mail ballots that will be
utilized this November. Thus, there isn't a single or
concentrated point of entry for a hacker. Rather, there are
thousands of points hacker would have to successfully navigate
to manipulate the results of a national election.
Second, voting machines are kept securely. These machines
are subjected to rigorous protocols for chain of custody and
testing in every jurisdiction. Machines are held under lock and
key with additional protections in place to ensure that nobody
without proper credentials can access the devices. It's
exceedingly difficult to gain unauthorized access to even one
of these machines and nearly impossible to gain access to more
than one. Prior to every election, not just federal elections,
but every time the equipment is used, these machines go through
a series of tests called logic and accuracy tests to confirm
that they are working as intended, recording and tabulating
votes accurately.
Third, unlike voter registration databases or email
systems, I know of no jurisdiction where voting machines are
connected to the Internet. This makes it nearly impossible for
a remote hacker, whether in Moscow, Russia, or Moscow, Idaho,
to access the equipment and plan malicious code or otherwise
hack the system. Without connectivity, it would require a
hacker to have unfettered physical access and enough time to
sabotage one machine just to impact the results on one device
in one polling place. To manipulate election results on a state
or national scale would require a conspiracy of literally
hundreds of thousands and for that massive conspiracy to go
undetected.
Which brings us to the fourth reason: Even if hundreds of
thousands of conspirators operated undetected on a diverse
range of systems, defeating the testing and chain-of-custody
protections in place, it would likely have no effect on the
vast majority of election results nationwide because well over
75 percent of voters vote on paper ballots or on a device that
creates a paper record.
And in most States--32 plus DC. as of 2014, there is a
postelection audit requirement that mandates States match the
paper record to the digital record, and if a discrepancy
exists, recount the paper ballots for use as the official
record. The States that require such an audit include the
battleground States of Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Nevada, New
Mexico, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and
Wisconsin, among others, so even if a grand conspiracy were
viable, a postelection audit requirement would almost certainly
discover it prior to the election results becoming official.
There's been a lot of hyperbole surrounding the selection,
but the processes in place to ensure the integrity of our
election system should not become part of the political
rhetoric. There are few loudly seeking to sow distrust in the
system, but there are far more working quietly and
collaboratively at the federal, state, and local level and
election officials across the political spectrum like Secretary
Schedler here who are working to secure our voting systems and
reassure voters that the selection will accurately reflect
voters' choices.
And voters can play a role as well, by attending pre-
election voting machine tests and especially volunteering to
serve as poll workers to see the process firsthand, whether
it's federal officials offering assistance and resources to the
States, state and local officials sharing best practices, or
citizens serving as poll workers, this cooperation and
diligence will protect our elections in 2016 and safeguard
future elections as well.
Thank you and I'd be happy to take any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Becker follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Smith. Thank you, Mr. Becker.
And, Dr. Wallach.

TESTIMONY OF DR. DAN S. WALLACH, PROFESSOR,

DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE AND RICE SCHOLAR,

BAKER INSTITUTE FOR PUBLIC POLICY,

RICE UNIVERSITY

Dr. Wallach. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Johnson,
Members of the Committee, it's a great honor to speak to you
today about our nation's voting systems and the threats they
face this November and the steps we might take to mitigate
those threats.
My name is Dan Wallach. I've been a Professor in the
Department of Computer Science at Rice University in Houston
for 18 years. And my main message for you here today is that
our election systems face credible cyber threats from our
nation-state adversaries, and it's prudent to adopt contingency
plans before November to mitigate these threats.
In particular, we've learned that Russia may have been
behind leaked DNC emails for the explicit purpose of
manipulating our elections. We've also learned of attacks on
voter registration databases in Arizona and Illinois, and
that's only the ones we know about. There might be more.
We must prepare for the possibility that Russia or other
sophisticated adversaries will use their cyber skills to attack
our elections, and they need not attack every county in every
State. It's sufficient for them to go after battleground States
where a small nudge can have a large impact. The
decentralization that we've heard about is helpful but it's not
sufficient.
My number one concern is our voter registration databases
because they are online, and if an attacker can damage or
destroy the voter registration databases, they could
disenfranchise a significant number of voters, leading to long
lines and other difficulties. The provisional voting process
requires filling out affidavits, it's slow, it takes time, and
that wouldn't work for million voters.
Paperless electronic voting systems and their tabulation
systems are also vulnerable. Despite not generally being
connected to the Internet, these systems were unfortunately
never engineered with security in mind, and expert analyses by
myself and others have found unacceptable security issues.
Our biggest nation-state adversaries have the capability to
execute attacks against these systems. For example, Russia was
behind an attack of this kind directed at Ukraine's 2014
election where a hacked tabulation system would have reported
results favorable to Russia. The Ukrainians were lucky enough
to catch this.
Our options between now and November are largely limited to
contingency planning. If we're lucky, we might detect attacks
before Election Day, but it's important to make plans now for
recovering from unforeseen cyber disasters in the same way that
we make plans for natural disasters, including running drills
and exercises and having plans written out and thought through.
If, for example, we were to conclude on Election Day that
our computer systems had been unreliable, a contingency plan
might be to rapidly print millions of paper ballots and rerun
the election the next day. Legislation passed in most States
following 2012's Hurricane Sandy appears to allow for such
mitigations. The details vary State to State.
Between now and November we should also be aggressive at
deploying expert teams to do security audits of relevant
networks and systems particularly in battleground States. If
something has been hacked, the sooner we know about it, the
better. And my understanding is a critical infrastructure
designation would allow States to request assistance from the
Federal Government in this role.
We must also plan for the next few years after November's
election is complete. Roughly 1/3--we've heard today--we've
also heard 1/4. I'm not sure what the real number is. Roughly
1/3 of American voters this fall will use aging electronic
voting systems with proven insecure designs. Some new hybrid
voting system designs with electronic user interfaces and
printed paper ballots are being designed by Los Angeles County,
California, and Travis County. That's Austin, Texas. These have
the potential to substantially reduce costs and improve the
security of our elections. Federal support could advance their
deployment nationwide, and if we do nothing, keeping our aging
systems in service holds our elections at risk.
As a quick note, our immediate future should not include
Internet voting. It's hard enough to protect the online systems
that we already have. Moving additional voters online increases
the risks. Traditional hand-marked paper ballots and these new
hybrid systems from Los Angeles and Austin are our best paths
forward.
As Don Rumsfeld once said, you go to war with the army you
have, not the army you might want or wish to have at a later
time. We face a similar situation this November with our
systems for voter registration casting and tabulation. None of
them are ready to rebuff attacks from our nation-state
adversaries, nor can we replace them in time to make a
difference.
Despite this, we can pursue a number of pragmatic steps
such as verifying the integrity of election database backups,
and we can make contingency plans for how we may respond if and
when we do detect attacks against our elections. If we can
somehow determine that tampering with an election voting system
did take place, we should have plans in place to print paper
ballots or otherwise keep the election going. The sooner we can
create and agree on these plans, the more resilient our
elections will be to foreign attack.
And even if nothing goes wrong and all this turned out to
be nothing but hot air, we should treat these events as a
warning. With modest investment, we can improve our practices
and replace obsolete and insecure equipment, defeating future
attacks like this before they ever get off the ground.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Wallach follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Smith. Thank you, Dr. Wallach.
I'll recognize myself for questions. And, Dr. Wallach, let
me address the first one to you. You raised a lot of
interesting issues. I guess my question is where do you think
our election systems are the most vulnerable? What are the one
or two areas that we'd need to guard against?
Dr. Wallach. So I believe my top concern is the voter
registration systems because they are generally online, and if
it's online, it's accessible from the Internet, and if it's
accessible from the Internet, it's accessible from our nation-
state adversaries.
And as I mentioned before, if you can either selectively or
entirely delete people who you'd rather not vote, the current
provisional voting system can't really scale to support a large
number of voters who are filling out affidavits and following
that process.
My second concern is the vote tabulation systems. Generally
speaking, these tend to be old computers running old operating
systems, in some cases Windows 2000 where security patches
aren't even available from the vendor anymore, and that means
that there are significant vulnerabilities where attacking a
single point could result in an interesting result.
Chairman Smith. Okay. Thank you, Dr. Wallach.
By the way, when I hear you all recommend paper ballots, I
wince a little bit because those of us from Texas have
sometimes read about what happened in the 1950s where a ballot
box was stuffed with paper ballots and it changed the outcome
of a Senate race and perhaps elected the next President. So I
sometimes worry about paper ballots as well.
Let me address a question to all the panelists here today.
And we've heard about some of the vulnerabilities. Let me ask
you to rate on a scale of one to five with five being the most
vulnerable, the most at risk, where you think we stand both in
this election, and let's take the long view--say this election
and the next election--how vulnerable are we to being hacked,
not necessarily successfully hacked, but how likely is it that
there will be attempts to interfere in our elections process by
foreign countries this election or the next? And again one to
five with five being the greatest risk.
Dr. Romine?
Dr. Romine. It's a little hard for me to answer that
question principally because it involves intent of malefactors,
and I don't really have any background to be able to determine
the level of intent.
Chairman Smith. Okay. Let's assume, then, how likely is it
that there would be intentional attempted hacking in the next
two elections? If you want to use----
Dr. Romine. It's not unreasonable to imagine attempts. In
fact, as others have testified, there have been a couple of
attempts to hack into voter registration systems currently. I
think most CIOs at most organizations will tell you that
there's a sort of constant current of probing of their IT
systems. And so with respect to voter registration, I would say
the possibility that an attempt could be made is not out of the
question.
With respect to the voter--the----
Chairman Smith. Maybe I should say likely or unlikely,
would you consider that to be an easier way to describe it or
not?
Dr. Romine. It's still difficult for me to answer that
question, but I would say I would put it somewhere in between.
I can't say that it's likely but I can't rule it out either.
Chairman Smith. Okay. Thank you.
Secretary Schedler?
Mr. Schedler. I'll take a stab at that. I'll say on the
registration side of it, as evidenced by the two States that
have had a problem, one of which, from what I understand the
code was giving and the other one was detected immediately. I'd
probably give it around a three. On the Election Day, one and
one half or two.
Chairman Smith. Okay. Good. Thanks. Mr. Becker?
Mr. Becker. Yes, I agree. I think it's not out of the realm
of possibility that there will be an attempted hack either
before the election or at any time, as there was with the voter
registration databases. But I think the chance that it would be
successful is down below two. I think vigilance is important
but it appears that the primary goal here is to disrupt
confidence in the election rather than actually manipulate
election results.
Chairman Smith. So likely attempt, unlikely success?
Mr. Becker. Correct.
Chairman Smith. Okay. Dr. Wallach?
Dr. Wallach. So in the cybersecurity lingo we often have
this phrase ``advanced persistent threat'' that we use as a
colloquial way of talking about nation-state adversaries who
have patience and skills and will take the time, might do
something years in advance. It's often the case that
adversaries are present in very secure and highly protected
networks for months at a time before they're detected.
So trying to rank these vulnerabilities, I'm going to rank
them relative to access. I think our voter registration systems
are most accessible so I'm most worried about them. I'm
secondarily concerned about the tabulation systems, and then
I'm concerned about the voting systems themselves, particularly
the paperless electronic ones.
Chairman Smith. Okay.
Dr. Wallach. It's very hard for a remote Internet attacker
to overwrite printed paper.
Chairman Smith. Okay. A final quick question, what more
should the Administration be doing to protect us from foreign
countries attempted hacking of our election systems? Anybody?
Dr. Wallach. So I think the short answer is providing
available expertise and teams to go and do intrusion detection,
network monitoring, and other appropriate tasks to just go
looking for it.
Chairman Smith. Okay. My time is up. Any other quick
responses to what more the Administration could be doing?
Mr. Schedler. Well, I think with we should be looking more
long-term with additional dollars to improve the States'
machinery or equipment at this time. It's been over ten years
since we did HAVA funding. And I do want to make one comment.
As far as Homeland Security assisting us, we already have that
assistance through FBI and Homeland Security, and you nearly
asked, you don't have to be a critical infrastructure to get
that service.
Chairman Smith. Okay. Thank you.
The gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Johnson, is recognized for
her questions.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I take all concerns and challenges over cybersecurity in
our elections very seriously. At the same time, we face many
other challenges to ensuring that every vote counts and we
count every vote. Some of these challenges are the direct
results of human action such as related to old technology, and
as we've seen in elections past, we even face risks from
natural events such as major storms. I'd like each of you to
comment on how you would rate the current cybersecurity risk in
our upcoming election as it relates to other issues.
Dr. Romine. Congresswoman Johnson, from my perspective my
entire orientation or the orientation of my organization is
looking at the cybersecurity risks and threats, and so all of
the other things that you've talked about are really sort of
outside of our purview with perhaps one exception, which is
that contingency planning that the States and other
jurisdictions and the local jurisdictions are encouraged to do
under the voluntary voting system guidelines can also protect
again these other kinds of natural disasters and other kinds of
things that you referenced.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Schedler. Yes, ma'am. I would put that risk again, as I
indicated earlier, on Election Day very low for the reason that
no State is on the Internet. I find it difficult to hack
something that's not on the Internet. All machines are not--
none of the machines are linked together. They're all separate
cartridges, so they're independent. My bigger concern on
Election Day would be something of a physical nature, a
physical threat that would be something much more difficult to
deal with. And I put that at a very high number.
But as far as cyber attack other than what's occurred on
the election side--and again, there's been no change. I think
that was more of a data collection attempt personally. I know
in Louisiana if you go--we are an online registration State,
Ms. Johnson. If you went into my system to change party
affiliation, address, whatever you may do, you may think you're
accessing my entire system. You're not. You're in a silo and a
person behind the scenes drags out that information,
disseminates it to the local register and puts it in the public
side, the campaign side, or in the registration side. So if
someone hacked you, they would only hack Ms. Johnson. They
wouldn't get the entire list.
Mr. Becker. Yes, I agree with that. I think, as Secretary
Schedler noted, election officials are on high alert, and
they're on high alert not just for this election. They're on
high alert for every election. And, you know, in many States if
it's Tuesday, it's Election Day because there are so many
elections now.
So not only are they trying to make sure that the security
of the systems are in place and that the process as a whole is
secure but they're also doing, I think, a remarkably good job--
probably better than ever before--of balancing that with access
to all eligible voters to make sure they can have a good
experience.
So whether it's more people having access to easy ways to
register to vote, more people having easy access to voting
information like things with the GeauxVote app in Louisiana and
many other States or more voters than ever before having access
to early voting and mail voting option, I think election
officials around the country, both Democrats and Republicans,
are doing a remarkably good job, probably better than ever
before, balancing out the access and security concerns.
Dr. Wallach. At the end of the day we need to worry about
every problem. We have to worry about hurricanes, we have to
worry about earthquakes, and we have to worry about cyber
issues and we need to have plans in place to deal with them
all. And the interesting thing is if you have plans in place
for an earthquake, the earthquake doesn't really care. It's
going to happen or not. But if you have plans in place for
cyber, you can actually dissuade a cyber attack. If your
adversary knows it's not going to work, then they're not going
to bother. So I think it's important to do the planning and the
forward thinking to make this not be a problem in the future.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much.
Another real quick question--I know my time is running out.
We would all agree that making it easier to participate in our
democratic elections process should be a priority. Registering
to vote and casting a vote shouldn't be an extra burden for
those who can't leave their homes or for people with three jobs
and for a family of caregivers. How do we balance our efforts
to make voting more accessible with the necessity of having
secure elections?
Dr. Romine. I'd like to take a slightly different tack.
We've actually worked with the Election Systems Commission on
accessibility issues and usability issues with regard to voting
systems so that people who have physical disabilities, whether
it's vision impairment or mobility impairment or other things,
do have access to voting systems that they can also use. And
one of the advantages of electronic voting systems, as they're
being rolled out, is that we can improve the accessibility over
paper and pencil, for example.
Mr. Schedler. First off, we do have early voting, certainly
something in the last decade that we didn't have prior to that,
a paper ballot, relaxed paper ballot laws now. I mean, we all
remember the days you used to have--almost have to have a
doctor's note or an airline ticket to be able to absentee vote.
That's no longer the case across the United States. And we do
have easy accessibility through nursing home programs, ADA
compliant with visually impaired and the like. So I think
there's been tremendous improvements made, and voting is
probably easier today than it's ever been.
Mr. Becker. Yes, I think thanks to the efforts of state and
local election officials all around the country and efforts of
the Election Assistance Commission and the Presidential
Commission on Election Administration and many others, voting
is easier today than it ever has been before. As I noted, more
people have access to easy voter registration options. Many
States--20 States, including Louisiana, have joined the
Electronic Registration Information Center, which allows them
to keep their voter registration data up-to-date and has
resulted in registering about a million--almost a million new
voters.
More people have access to voting information and
convenience voting options where they can vote by mail or vote
early. That trend has been remarkable, and I think we're going
to see and I hope that we're going to see the benefits of it in
this election and as it expands in many years to come.
Dr. Wallach. So we've heard about early voting and Election
Day vote centers. An interesting thing going on in Travis
County--it's Austin, Texas--every single precinct can handle
any voter from the whole county. They did that because of
redistricting. It was to avoid chaos. But it has the
interesting benefit that you can vote near where you work
rather than near your home. So I think that there's a lot of
opportunity for creative expansion of the availability to vote
without making radical changes in how we vote.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Ms. Johnson.The gentleman from
California, Mr. Rohrabacher, is recognized for his questions.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for holding this hearing. I didn't expect it would be
as interesting as it's been, so thank you to the witnesses as
well.
Let me just start off with one question in terms of getting
a sense of information here on one issue the broader issue of
whether or not the integrity of our voting process and our
election system will be maintained is really vital to the very
nature of our country. I mean, this goes to the heart of
whether or not we are who we say we are. If we don't have an
election process that has integrity, we don't have an election
process.
First let me ask this. How many examples do we have of
where the Russians have actually--or Russian-based, whoever it
is in Russia, have hacked in to our election system?
Mr. Schedler. I know of none. And to be quite honest with
you, I ask the question to Secretary Johnson of Homeland
Security, is there an imminent threat known? And his answer was
no, and that was reported in several news agencies. So I know
of zero.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Does anybody disagree?
Mr. Schedler. I had a request from a Russian Embassy out of
Houston to come monitor my elections in Louisiana----
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right.
Mr. Schedler. --and I would suggest to you if I allowed
that, I'd be run out of office in Louisiana, but especially----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, the----
Mr. Schedler. --with the conversation we're having. But I
know of zero.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Does anyone disagree with that on the
panel? Yes, sir.
Dr. Wallach. So the nature of the threat is that they don't
want you to see them there, so we can't assume that if we
haven't seen them, that they're absent. What we do know is that
we've established motive. The attack on the DNC's email server
is motive for a nation--it shows that they did it for
explicitly partisan purposes. And when you combine motive with
means and opportunity----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Excuse me. What example was that that you
just gave?
Dr. Wallach. Oh, I'm sorry. This was reported in the press
that Russian state actors allegedly hacked the DNC's email
server with the intent of releasing emails for partisan
purposes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. But that's not the election process,
but that is an entity that's involved in elections here so they
have capability of actually getting into various--whether it's
Republican, Democrat, or whatever, but actually in the election
process we have no examples of them actually hacking into the
system and compromising the integrity of any specific election,
is that correct?
Dr. Wallach. The only example I'm aware of happened in the
Ukraine in 2014.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right. Okay.Just to let you know, we have
seen article after article after article about how Russia is
compromising the integrity of our election system. And, Mr.
Chairman, the panelist is just saying that is false and just a
note.
For those of us who want our country to be safe but we also
don't want to just continually vilifying Russia turning them
into the bad guys. If we're going to have the integrity of our
system, I think we have to look at home for some of the real
threats to the integrity of our voting system and whether the--
as we say, the old-fashioned way of stealing elections has been
around for a long time and we should be insisting that we make
sure that we don't have people, for example, voting who are not
eligible to vote because they're perhaps not citizens or here
illegally.
We have people who are trying to suggest that we don't even
have any real demand to identify someone's self whether they
are here--whether they are actually who they say they are when
they go to vote.
So we have a real challenge to make sure our system is, as
I say, safe from being defrauded because the people of the
United States, their ballots are being negated by every other
ballot that's cast is cast by someone who does not have a right
to vote here.
Now, with that said, we actually did confront this.
Congress confronted this whole issue back in 2002 with the Help
America Vote Act. And just very quickly to the panel because my
time is running out, that's been around now since 2002.
Congress passed this act specifically aiming at protecting the
integrity of our system. Is our system now more or less at risk
from cyber attacks due to this legislation? And very quickly,
if we could have the panel answer that.
Dr. Romine. I think the legislation has improved our focus
on security issues associated with the voting system. My
organization has been working in partnership with the Election
Assistance Commission under HAVA for 14 years to provide the
best guidance possible to States and municipalities.
Mr. Schedler. I would certainly echo that comment. And if
you allow me just to claw back on you previous comment, I mean
the whole Russian argument has--they've actually accomplished I
think--even if they're not trying, we've done it for them,
quite frankly.
Mr. Becker. Yes, I agree. I think the Help America Vote Act
has helped improve security since it was enacted, but even more
importantly, what we've learned since it has been enacted has
helped improve the security. I think the 2016 election is going
to be one of the most secure we've seen in recent memory but
there's no question that I think based on what we're talking
about here and this discussion and the conversations we're
having, the 2018 and 2020 elections will be even more secure.
Dr. Wallach. So HAVA helped us get rid of punch cards and
helped us get rid of lever voting machines, and that's a good
thing. HAVA was really two parts. It helped create the EAC,
which could then help improve standards, and it also helped
fund the purchase of new equipment. The equipment was largely
purchased before the EAC standards effort was in action, and I
think it would be an excellent thing to revisit to get new
equipment up to new standards.
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right. Well, thank you very much and
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Mr. Rohrabacher.
The gentlewoman from California, Ms. Lofgren, is
recognized.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It was interesting to listen to my colleague from
California inquire about the role of the Russians in this
election. And, I think, you know, the focus of this hearing is
on the voting systems, but really the question is about the
election and it's not limited to voting systems. And it's
pretty clear that the Russians have attacked--have engaged in a
cyber attack on the DNC and the DCCC. We've received reports on
that. I thought it was unfortunate that the Republican
candidate for President either thought it was a good idea or
was making a joke about it--we don't know which. But this is a
serious matter.
What we've been told is not just that the material has been
taken but that the pattern of the Russians is not just to
release material but to forge material and to alter it in an
effort to try and impact outcomes of elections. And that's
certainly--they have a history of cyber attacks in an attempt
to discredit Democratic elections in Ukraine, in Bulgaria,
Romania, the Philippines. So this is something I think we need
to take very seriously. To my knowledge, this is the first time
the Russians have actually so boldly attacked a Western
democracy, in fact the most important democracy in the world.
Now, I think the focus of this hearing is unduly limited,
and I agree that a large-scale attack on distributed voting
precincts is unlikely to succeed, although I do think we've
underestimated the potential impact of air-gap tabulation
systems, and I think that is something to be concerned about.
But the question isn't really whether the actual vote
tabulations could be altered because I don't think that's very
likely, but whether chaos could be induced into the system.
That is the goal of the attack on the Democratic Party, and I
think it may also be the goal of the cyber attacks on the state
systems.
What could be done with this voter information? Obviously,
there are backups on the database so no one can alter who can
actually vote. But what would happen if emails were sent to all
of those voters or are just the Democratic voters telling them
the date of the election had been changed or their precinct had
been changed? Wouldn't that create chaos in a system if even a
small percentage of those voters believed an email misadvising
them?
I do think that there's a vulnerability in the overseas in
system. The House Administration Committee has the primary
jurisdiction over election systems, and I remember we had a
hearing talking about our lack of concern, the lack of concern
that electoral systems professionals had about emailing the
ballot to overseas voters provided that the ballot itself was
mailed in. The more we think about it, with these hackings, if
you altered the ballot on the email, you would again create
chaos in the electoral system.
So I think that's really the goal here is not necessarily
to impact the tabulation, although there may be efforts to do
it, but to create long lines if people go to the wrong places
to create chaos and to attack the faith and the confidence that
the American people have in their elections systems through
long lines and all sorts of mischief.
I do think that to downplay the role that the Russians have
had in this is a huge mistake when you take a look at what they
did to the DNC and the DCCC. And I'll just close with this. I
do think that it's been disappointing. The reaction has been
disappointing that if you attack one of the major political
parties, somehow that's okay if it could be to your advantage.
I like to think if the Russians had attacked the Republican
National Committee the Democrats would be as outraged as
Republicans because it's an attack on America. It's not an
attack on a party. And the fact that there hasn't been outrage
expressed at all levels of both parties about the effort of the
Russians to disrupt this election is--it's sad commentary on
leaders of that party and it also is very chilling when you
think about what could happen come this November.
And I see that my time is expired. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren.
And the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Abraham, is
recognized for his questions.
Mr. Abraham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And we'll get back on
track here.
Secretary Schedler, let's go to the 30,000 foot view. In
your opinion is the integrity and the security of the voting
systems in all States--you being the past President of the
Secretaries of State, you have I think some knowledge of the
subject. You think it's good, bad, average?
Mr. Schedler. Congressman, I would say it's good. I mean,
we did a survey before this hearing and we got a response from,
I think, 19 of 20 States to try to ascertain that. Aside from
my knowledge from serving, and I don't profess to be an expert
on every state system, but there's a lot of similarities,
there's a lot of differences in the States and that's what
makes it so unique. But I feel very comfortable again--and the
representative from California who appears stepped out.
Keep in mind the Democratic National Convention, the
component that was hacked was the campaign side of it. Each and
every one of us like me is elected. All of you have used a
campaign commercial list to determine a mail issue, a walk list
in a neighborhood, whatever it may be. Those are readily
accessible. I'd sell you mine. If you know me well enough, I
might give it to you.
But that is vastly different than the registration
component and certainly vastly different than the Election Day
component of equipment. So I think you have to understand that
forefront to get into this subject. There's no one minimizing
what happened with the Democratic National Convention. I know I
have and I know with one of my colleagues, and that makes no
difference if you're in a red state, blue state, or purple
state.
But the bottom line is maybe it's just our knowledge of the
system that gives us this feeling of somewhat--not
overconfidence because I think this is a good thing that we're
going through, but we all remember the year 2000 when the world
was going to end at one second after midnight. I'm still using
batteries my wife bought for that event. That does not mean
that we did not have reason to believe with studies and we
should have been prepared. We went through that gyration. Or
when a ballgame--when the scoreboard goes out on a football
game, if you're sitting in the stands, you know what's going
on. And guess what? There's other people taking track of those
statistics at that same time.
It's the same with election systems. If one component goes
down, we have various components that come in and--it may delay
it some but it doesn't create a nuclear war.
And I can't speak to what happens in the Ukraine. I can
only speak to what happens in the United States, and I'll tell
you, the election system in the United States, just like many
other things in this country, in spite of maybe what we think,
is the best system in the world. Is it fool-proof? Absolutely
not.
And I'd also tell you there's no such thing as a perfect
election. Anybody that tells you that don't know what they're
talking about because anytime you've got 10,000 machines at
play and 15,000 people from 65 to 90 years old, things are
going to happen. It's how you handle that. It's how you
document that and move forward.
So I'm very confident in it with caution lights on. And
there's no disrespect to anyone who believes otherwise. We're
looking at it. It's forced us to do so. But I am deeply
concerned, and I can speak to my Democratic colleagues and my
Republican colleagues that have been on conference calls over
the last several weeks with this issue. We are in unison. This
is the worst situation we could be talking about as we enter
this election. We've been going through a chaotic convention
process. We have voters who are more disgruntled than ever. And
we are adding to that participation rate in a very negative
fashion.
And I feel very comforted in saying that I speak for all of
my colleagues that we are deeply concerned with the rhetoric
that's going on right now from the national press, and we're
not trying to minimize it. We're double-checking, but there's
little that could be done in eight weeks, little. We just need
to stay the course, have confidence in what we're doing. And
again, I'm very confident that on November 9, you're going to
wake up and you're going to have unofficial result of who won
the President of the United States because keep in mind it's
unofficial. We go through that audit in every county, every
parish, every State postelection before it becomes official and
you go to your electoral college.
Mr. Abraham. Thank you.
Mr. Schedler. Thank you.
Mr. Abraham. I'm out of time, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Mr. Abraham.
And the gentlewoman from Oregon, Ms. Bonamici, is
recognized for her questions.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
all for your testimony.
Mr. Becker, you said in your testimony you emphasize that
voters should feel confident in our voting system, and we
certainly have heard a lot of messages about the importance of
that confidence here today and how it will lead to greater
participation, and certainly that's good for democracy. I think
just getting the information out to the public that the voting
machines themselves are not connected to the Internet is going
to help. I think there's a misconception about that.
Well, I'm from Oregon, and we all vote by mail in Oregon.
We've done that for more than a decade. It's a very secure
process. It also makes it very easy for Oregonians to vote. The
Secretary of State's office mails paper ballots to each and
every registered voter a couple of weeks before the election,
along with a voter's pamphlet with all the information about
the candidates and the initiatives on the ballot so Oregonians
have plenty of time to not only study the issues but then fill
out their ballots and get them back in to be tallied by the
local election offices.
And there are privacy and security measures at each step of
the way. I was a trained election observer years ago and it
gave me a lot of confidence to see each step of the way and to
watch that tally happen at the elections office.
So I wanted to ask you a little bit about are there lessons
to be learned from a State like Oregon that does use vote by
mail with a paper ballot for everyone and really with a focus
on the two different issues, there's the voter records and then
there are actually what happens at the--with the ballot and the
tally, the voting machine, if you want to talk a little bit
about the lessons that can be learned from that system.
And then I also want to ask, Dr. Romine, I know NIST has
mostly concentrated its work to date in standards development
for the actual voting machines, but you're now, I understand,
working to identify systems dealing with the voter registration
systems. So--and just before you respond, both of you--I know
Dr. Wallach mentioned something about the possibility of this
selective disenfranchising of voters by deleting them from the
database. It's really easy in Oregon for anybody to check
whether they're still in the database, and getting the ballot
early means that there would be an early notice that, well,
maybe there was a problem assuming that somebody did get
through a very secure system.
So, Mr. Becker, do you want to start and then Dr. Romine?
Mr. Becker. Sure. Thank you. The--you know, of course
Oregon and Washington have had long-time success with mail
balloting in their States, and there are lessons that other
States are learning from that. Not every State is the same, and
other States have reached different decisions about their
population of that, and that's entirely appropriate.
But States like California and Arizona and some other
Western States offer the option of becoming a permanent mail
voter, which you have to check a box, but after that you'll
receive a ballot for every election. And I think very
interestingly, Colorado has experimented with a model--actually
has put a model in place that--California just passed a similar
bill that is a hybrid of sorts where every voter gets a mail
ballot, but they can choose to mail that ballot in, drop that
ballot off at a drop site, go in for early voting at a vote
center as Dr. Wallach mentioned, which is they can go to any
one within the county or they can even go on Election Day to a
vote center and vote anywhere within the county. And they've
seen some pretty strong initial successes there. So I think
we're----
Ms. Bonamici. But just to--I don't mean to interrupt, but
just to clarify, in Oregon if somebody wants to go vote at
elections--at the elections office on elections day, they can
do that. They can stand in the booth there and vote. Anybody
can do that.
Mr. Becker. Absolutely.
Ms. Bonamici. Most people don't because it's much easier to
mail it.
Mr. Becker. Right, and I think like--I think the States are
learning from that experience and are trying to figure out
what's best for their State based upon the successes that
Oregon and Washington and Colorado and other States have seen
with their particular systems.
I think also, importantly, you brought up the note between
the voter registration systems and the voting machines and
tabulation devices themselves. And I think particularly with
mail voting it's very important because the voter lists are the
way to deliver a ballot to someone because that's the list that
generates the mailing to the voters. Of course, in States where
they don't get ballots it's not that voters don't receive
something else. They're usually receiving a card that's a
reminder.
To the question earlier about chaos, which I think is a
very important question, I think there's been a lot of work,
contingency plans put in place by States to avoid chaos just in
the last 10 to 15 years. One thing that's true now is
particularly for Presidential election it's going to be very
hard to avoid information about when the election is and what's
going on. In fact, I'm guessing a lot of people right now would
like to get away from information about the election.
So whether it's the work that Facebook is doing pushing
information out about it's Election Day, click here to find
your polling place, whether it's the work Google is doing the
same way, whether it's the work of many other tech partners and
States are doing partnering with those entities to make sure
that information gets out, that's all a great protective
measure to ensure that if a voter does experience a problem or
might--think they might experience a problem, they can in
advance go and make sure that they're getting the right
information.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. And, Dr. Romine, if you could
briefly tell us what NIST is doing with regard to the actual
voting machines now.
Dr. Romine. I think your question involved the whole
lifecycle now from registration all the way through guidelines
for the voting systems. The voluntary voting system guidelines
that we work in collaboration with the EAC on involve the
voting systems themselves, but I think we have a decades-long
history of security as a management of risk exercise, and I
think the States have taken that very seriously. Our
interaction with the EAC and with election officials in the
States suggests that they are managing risk to the voting
systems and to the registration systems in a way that
incorporates the best practices that NIST has been promoting
for a number of years.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. I see my time is expired. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Ms. Bonamici.
And the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk, is
recognized for his questions.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank all the
witnesses for being here today, a very important issue.
And rightly, we should be concerned about the integrity of
our election system because we're only as good as the integrity
of the selection system. After spending 30 years in the IT
business, this is something that is very important to me and an
area that I do understand at least from the technological side.
Another area that I think we have to be very conscious of
is the federal involvement because typically whatever we get
involved with doesn't run as well as if a State is doing it
themselves, so I want to be very conscious of whatever role the
Federal Government plays is very limited to--especially in an
authority stance.
But I do understand that we do have some things that we can
do as far as setting recommended standards, but recently, the
Secretary of Homeland Security has reported saying that DHS is
considering whether the state electoral apparatus should be
designated as critical infrastructure. Dr. Romine?
Dr. Romine. Romine.
Mr. Loudermilk. --Romine, is this appropriate that--in your
opinion?
Dr. Romine. Well, that's a policy decision that's way above
my pay grade so I don't have any input that I can provide you
for that.
Mr. Loudermilk. Well, I mean, do you have any idea what the
benefits or the disadvantages would be of declaring these as
critical infrastructure?
Dr. Romine. I can't speak to that. I know that NIST
provided a significant benefit in partnership with the private
sector on the development of a cybersecurity framework for
improving the cybersecurity of critical infrastructures that
has received a lot of attention and a lot of accolades. But
that's not limited to critical infrastructures. Any
organization of any size in any sector is free to adopt that
framework.
Mr. Loudermilk. So you are working with DHS to help the
States understand the critical nature of their electoral
systems or----
Dr. Romine. Absolutely. We're partnering with DHS and with
the Department of Justice on trying to understand how we can
ensure widest dissemination of best practices to the States and
municipalities. And as was mentioned earlier, request to DHS
for assistance is not predicated solely on whether you are
designated as a critical infrastructure. That request can be
made without that designation.
Mr. Loudermilk. This includes cyber hygiene?
Dr. Romine. My understanding is it includes request for DHS
to do scanning of systems, for example, but only upon request.
Mr. Loudermilk. So that would be voluntary? It'd be like a
stress test on their system?
Dr. Romine. It would be----
Mr. Loudermilk. Are we applying lessons learned from the
Presidential Commission on Enhancing National Cybersecurity in
making these recommendations for the States?
Dr. Romine. So the Presidential Commission on Cyber
Security has not yet reached the stage of finalizing the
recommendations, so those are not being incorporated in these
guidelines. And I would put it sort of in the reverse in the
sense that the commissioners are actually taking a look at best
practices out in the field and discussions with the IT industry
and with stakeholders around the country to try to develop the
best possible recommendations for the benefit of this
Administration and the next.
Mr. Loudermilk. So NIST's stance on this is to work within
the framework of the Federal Government to come up with
recommendations that the States may or may not implement and
with flexibility to where they can be customized to the States'
individual networks?
Dr. Romine. That is correct.
Mr. Loudermilk. Secretary Schedler----
Mr. Schedler. Yes?
Mr. Loudermilk. --how do you feel about that?
Mr. Schedler. Well, I do not think critical infrastructure
is needed at all. I mean, as was indicated by Dr. Romine and I
did a little bit earlier, we can go to Homeland Security now,
we can get those tests by FBI. We have a committee--matter of
fact, your Secretary of State Brian Kemp, who has been very
active in this whole process with several of us, is one of the
committee members that we've appointed from NIST to serve on
the Homeland Security Committee and to do best practices and
the like.
So most States are cooperating with their local FBI agents
when needed, and you know, again, I don't mean to be flippant
but do we really want to create a new TSA for elections in this
country or a new Postal Service? I just don't think we need
that. The Constitution says very vividly that it's up to the
States for the time, place, and manner in which we conduct
elections.
It is a constitutional issue, and I understand that from
the rhetoric that's not the intent, but to go and put the
national elections on par with the banking system and the
electrical grid, in my point--in my position is way overreach,
unnecessary, and we can accomplish the same goals. It's not
that we don't want their support and assistance when we need
it, but we can accomplish that in a far less intrusive way, I
think, if we just keep things on pat now.
And again, I think the answer is part of new equipment, new
HAVA dollars, whatever it may be to improve these systems.
We're working on trying to get a system where you can vote
anywhere in the State, just like was represented earlier.
So critical infrastructure would be an absolute--and I
think I speak again for--I don't know of any Secretary of State
that's voiced an opinion that they want to be part of that.
Mr. Loudermilk. Do you feel what NIST is doing is
beneficial to you?
Mr. Schedler. Yes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Do you feel in any way that what's
happening right now is a camel nose under the tent?
Mr. Schedler. No.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. All right. Thank you. I yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Mr. Loudermilk.
And the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, is recognized.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome to the
panelists, and thank you for your information.
Mr. Becker, the 2014 Presidential Commission on Election
Administration recommended that audits of voting equipment be
conducted after each election as part of a comprehensive audit
program. According to verified voting, approximately 3/4 of
voters in November will be using voting machines with a paper
record of their vote. And I'm--just share a concern perhaps
about the potential for mishaps or potential hacking for the
voting machines with no paper trail. Can you please describe
the role auditability plays in elections and the impact
individual voters casting their vote?
Mr. Becker. Yes, thank you. So in--we--of course,
auditability is important. If--it's very helpful when there is
a permanent record created that should a count need to be
reviewed for some reason--and in fact there's a process in
place to discover even if you're not sure whether the count
needs to be reviewed that you can discover that, and that's
what a good postelection audit does.
In 2014, about 32 States offered--had a requirement for
postelection audits. You know, I'll be honest. Some are better
than others. There's very good standard practices where States
pick random precincts across the State and check the paper
count against the electronic count. There's even something
called a risk-limiting audit where you escalate the number of
ballots you have to count to ensure the result as the election
gets closer, and these are practices that are put in place in
many States.
What we are seeing is that it is easier to audit a system
when you have a permanent record, a paper record that the voter
has reviewed, and more voters are going to be voting on paper
than we've seen since HAVA was enacted. States like Maryland
and Florida, which had used paperless direct recording
electronic devices, have switched. I believe this is actually--
I'm a Maryland voter, but I--this is the first Presidential
election since the passage of HAVA where Maryland will be using
a paper ballot that's read via optical scan.
I've recommended for years--and States along with the
Presidential Commission--that postelection audits are a good
idea, and having a system that allows for full and transparent
postelection audits and paper right now appears to be one of
the best systems for that, affords the best opportunity to
ensure that the election results are--do reflect the will of
the people.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And, Secretary Schedler, would you
please describe what you have in place in Louisiana in terms of
postelection auditing, and how would you rate other States
overall?
Mr. Schedler. Well, we do have a post-audit function. Now,
we do not have a paper ballot system after we are looking at
that when we go out for RFP next year on a new system, but we
do--of course, our screen under HAVA does--after you complete
voting, it pops up and gives you everything of who you--every
person you voted for, position you voted for. They give you one
more opportunity to rectify that if you want to change it or
there was an error.
What we see a lot on highly sensitive machines is an
elderly person may be dragging their hand and it inadvertently
hits the button below or a lady with long fingernails,
sometimes it will have a problem, but you do have the
opportunity to rectify that. But we do audit after every
election. We audit at the end of each day on early voting to
ascertain the correctness of the vote and basically balance the
balance sheets so to speak so----
Mr. Tonko. Right. And so you--there are the paper ballots
that you're devising an audit process for?
Mr. Schedler. That is correct.
Mr. Tonko. What are some of those factors in that audit
that you absolutely see essential? What--have you looked at
other States and what they might be doing or----
Mr. Schedler. Right. We've actually gone out to Denver. The
county of Denver has a very similar situation that is now being
used in California and other States with the paper ballot where
the majority of folks actually want to bring that ballot in and
put it into a box so to speak at a site. So we've looked at
that system.
We've looked at the printing of a paper ballot instead of
on the screen that would go into a locked box. I would be
personally against that voter taking that ballot out of the
precinct. I think there's one State that does that.
But overall, to answer your question, I mean I think the
systems are sound, but everyone has to remember every State is
different, and that--I think that's the uniqueness of the
system, a lot of similarities, but each State is very unique in
the way they do their elections. Some may have a week of early
voting, some may have 30 days. Some States have no early
voting, and that is the prerogative of that State.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much. Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Mr. Tonko.
Mr. Davidson is recognized.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Wallach, your testimony addresses the possibility of
inserting malware into voting machines themselves. Can you
elaborate on how malware could be loaded onto machines that are
not connected to the Internet and further explain what it means
that each and every single voting machine has to be
manipulated? Or is there a different way where you could just
hack one machine and that would transmit a bug to other
machines in the precinct, again, even though they're not
connected to an Internet?
Dr. Wallach. Sure. So before we had an Internet, we had
computers with floppy drives and there were computer viruses
that could spread from one computer to another over floppies.
Electronic voting machines, some of them use memory cards, some
of them have these big battery packs, some of them have local
area networks.
Studies conducted in 2007 by the State of California State
of Ohio, State of Florida found security vulnerabilities that
could take advantage of these to engineer viruses where one
compromised voting machine could then infect eventually the
entire fleet of machines for an entire county.
Mr. Davidson. Okay. So, you know, it's accurate to say that
just because something is not connected to the Internet, it
does not have vulnerability to cyber attack?
Dr. Wallach. Being disconnected from the Internet helps,
but it's not a panacea.
Mr. Davidson. Okay. Perhaps as Secretary of State, Mr.
Schedler, you could talk about--I spoke with our Secretary of
State Husted about their protocols, but perhaps you could
elaborate on how do your procedures protect against that risk
should something like that occur?
Mr. Schedler. Well, I think it's important to remember
that, you know, we never link machines together. I know that
some new systems that are being touted like a Wi-Fi and if you
had a multiple-precinct site where you have a Wi-Fi, now that
to me is a little scary.
But when you consider the concept of each individual
machine has a cartridge that's delivered by my office--now,
we're a top-down system. We're not by county in Louisiana so we
are vastly different. But--two or three days before, we
literally deliver all the cartridges for all 10,000 machines to
the various parishes, counties, to the clerk of court. The
morning of the election--and we--when we deliver a secure
laptop that is our equipment, it's not used to go shop on
Amazon or anything else.
And the morning of the election the commissioner in charge
for that precinct picks up those cartridges and puts that
cartridge individually into the machine, turns the machine on,
and at the end of the night that cartridge is retrieved. It is
driven back to the clerk of court with a sheriff's escort
usually, and it's imported into that laptop. And it is on a
closed-circuit line sent to my office in Baton Rouge.
Mr. Davidson. Okay.
Mr. Schedler. So, I mean, it is a little bit different, but
to my knowledge no State interlocks machines so the concept of
getting into one machine with one cartridge and you
miraculously change all 10,000 across the State is ridiculous
because you'd have to go into each machine individually and
you'd have to have the programming.
Mr. Davidson. Right. So in your system you have one card.
Ohio system is similar. You have one card goes to one machine.
Dr. Wallach, you mentioned a case study in Ohio. Perhaps
you could elaborate on what that real vulnerability is.
Dr. Wallach. Right, so the study in Ohio was called
Everest, I believe. The similar study in California was called
the Top-to-Bottom Review. I was part of the Top-to-Bottom
Review. And each of these studies found ways that regular poll
workers and election officials going through their standard
procedures and standard operations could unwittingly be used to
transmit viruses from one machine to another through the
motion--typically, at the end of the Election Day you move a
memory card through each of the machines in the precinct, and
that's to collect the vote totals. That process can spread a
virus. And there are other processes. The details vary from
machine to machine.
Mr. Davidson. Would a centralized federally controlled
national voting infrastructure increase or decrease that risk?
Dr. Wallach. That depends how it was built. I've been
working with Travis County on trying to design something new
where this wouldn't be a problem. The system that Los Angeles
County is working on, this wouldn't be a problem. The reason
why is because they generate paper backups--or rather paper
ballots, which could then be audited against any electronic
results.
Mr. Davidson. The machine itself has memory, the card has
memory, and it prints a roll tape that stays secure inside the
machine and you can audit any one of those, so it's a good
system in Ohio. It's been tested a lot. And Ohio will likely be
front and center again in this election.
Dr. Romine----
Dr. Romine. Romine.
Mr. Davidson. Romine, sorry. You stated in your written
testimony that the NIST voting programs partnered with the AC
to develop the science tools and standards necessary to improve
accuracy, reliability, and usability and security of voting
equipment used in federal elections for both domestic and
overseas voters. How do you measure these improvements? How do
you quantify them? Are there qualitative, quantitative
measures?
Dr. Romine. There are both. I don't have the details today
on exactly the measurement of those improvements. I'd be happy
to provide those to you. I think the issue, to a large extent,
has been listening to the accessibility community. The human
factors research that we've been able to do demonstrates
certain kinds of changes that can be made to improve the
accessibility and the usability of electronic voting systems,
and we've documented those in various reports. I can give you
pointers to those reports for the way in which those systems
have been improved.
Mr. Davidson. Okay. Aside from identity theft--my
apologies. My time is expired.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Mr. Davidson.
And the gentlewoman from Maryland, Ms. Edwards, is
recognized.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
witnesses. I apologize I had to step out for a bit, but I came
back because this is a really important subject to me.
I just want to be clear--and a yes or no answer from each
of the witnesses would really help. Is it your--do you concur
in the belief from the Department of Homeland Security that it
was Russian state actors who hacked into both the Illinois--or
attempted Arizona and also the party hacking that occurred
earlier in the year? Dr. Romine?
Dr. Romine. I have no information on that other than what's
in the press.
Ms. Edwards. Secretary Schedler?
Mr. Schedler. Well, I mean the only thing I know of the
Russian is the DNC issue. I don't know if they've ever
determined where it came from in Arizona or Illinois.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you. Mr. Becker?
Mr. Becker. Yes, I don't have any specific information.
I'll defer to the national security professionals on that.
Ms. Edwards. And you believe they're capable of making that
determination based on the signature or whatever?
Mr. Becker. I can't answer that without knowing the
information they have. I don't have any information to the
contrary to support it.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you. Dr. Wallach?
Dr. Wallach. I only know what I've read in the press.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you. And, Dr. Romine, in fiscal year
2016, NIST received about $1.5 million in appropriations from
the EAC. That is down from your budget of, I think, about $2-3
million in the previous couple of fiscal years. Do you think
that that's sufficient for you to be able to provide the kinds
of certifications that you need of election systems?
Dr. Romine. So let me clarify by saying NIST doesn't do
certifications of systems. We do provide support through the
development of guidelines in partnership with the EAC, and we
also provide assistance to the EAC in the voluntary laboratory
accreditation program the testing laboratories that do test
equipment for certain--some States who choose to do that.
Obviously, the--you know, the truism you can do more with
more, but we believe that the current budget that we're
receiving is adequate for us to continue to provide expert
advice in security and interoperability for voting systems.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you. And, Mr. Becker, in--you--in part
of your testimony you indicated that the--I think it was your
testimony that the technologies that we're using for these
voting systems is now about a decade old for an awful lot of
these systems. Can you share with us what you believe, if
you've analyzed it, what would need to be an updated version of
HAVA that would enable us to keep--to really keep track with
the technology developments?
Mr. Becker. Yes, and I think that might have been Dr.
Wallach who said--who made one of those points. The--of course
the--there is a rash of bought purchasing new equipment right
after HAVA passed with a funding model that came through as a
result of that. We've already seen some States like our State
of Maryland and like Florida go to a second system after using
the HAVA dollars.
I think in talking with the States there is a great desire
to be able to leverage new technologies that will improve
access, as well as the integrity of the systems, that will also
be cheaper to maintain and that--I don't have a specific dollar
figure. If we were to replace all these systems nationwide,
it's definitely in the billions.
But, you know, to build--to encourage systems that are more
component-based that use more off-the-shelf components that are
easier to swap in and out so that you don't have a system that
has a 10-year-old touch screen that you can update the touch
screen as--with just the touch screen as it happens, I think
that be a huge advantage to election officials. And if they had
resources to do that, I think you'd find them doing some really
exciting things.
Ms. Edwards. And, Dr. Wallach, because--I apologize. That
was your testimony.
Dr. Wallach. Sorry. No problem. Part of what--so I've been
working with Travis County for four years now on trying to
design a better voting machine, and very much our intent is to
use off-the-shelf hardware with custom software to the extent
that we can for exactly that reason. When you buy a giant touch
screen computer from Hewlett-Packard, Dell, insert your
favorite tech company, you can get cheaper warranty support,
you can replace the machines whenever you need to, and that
helps reduce your maintenance and ongoing support costs.
Ms. Edwards. Doesn't it increase your vulnerability though?
Dr. Wallach. Not necessarily. The design of these systems,
first and foremost, produces a printed paper ballot. So no
matter what goes wrong with the computer, you have these
printed paper ballots that the voters can see and verify. And
everything else on top of that is gravy.
Ms. Edwards. Thanks. And then just as a conclusion, I want
to thank Secretary Schedler because I think in your testimony
you indicated that the Secretaries of State across the country
have great confidence in this election, and I think that's an
important message to convey to voters so that we can make sure
that we don't, with all of this talk, depress voter turnout.
And so thank you very much for your remarks.
Mr. Schedler. Yes, ma'am. I appreciate that. And I know I
speak for all of them. We're very concerned about the rhetoric
at this time.
And if I could just add on the cost issue, I do have just
on Louisiana, currently, we have roughly 10,000 voting machines
that cost roughly or did cost $5,200 each on under HAVA so
that--to replace those by today's dollars, if you could get the
machine--which you can't--$152 million.
If we went to a system similar to what Mr. Becker just
indicated to you--and I'm overly simplifying an iPad concept,
whether it be proprietary or store-bought, less than $300 each.
Now, you do need two to three per machine so the hardware costs
for us in Louisiana, $152 million on the replacement if you
could get it, roughly $50-60 million, 1/3 of the cost. And 75
percent of it is in the programming cost. The hardware is only
10 or $11 million.
Chairman Smith. Thank you, Ms. Edwards.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. LaHood, is recognized.
Mr. LaHood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
witnesses for being here today.
In my State of Illinois we've had a lot of changes in the
last several years. We now have same-day voting registration,
40 days of early voting, extended grace periods, absentee
voting has a lengthy period of time. And couple that with some
of the issues we've had particularly in Chicago over the years
with issues related to voting there, I guess in terms of
educating poll workers or training poll workers or election
judges and looking at methods, particularly as it relates to
the integrity of voting on Election Day and as we look at
potential hacking of machines, I mean, is there a good model
out there that has worked in terms of how we educate folks that
are there at the polls?
I'll also mention in a prior life I was Assistant State's
Attorney in Cook County in Chicago. On Election Day, we would
go out as prosecutors and be there at the voting booth. And a
lot of times we didn't know what we're looking for or what we
were supposed to be doing.
And I guess, Secretary Schedler, can you maybe shed a
little light on examples of what we need to be doing in terms
of educating and working with our folks that are at the polls
on Election Day?
Mr. Schedler. Well, training is paramount. That came out in
the Presidential Commission to all Commissioners or poll
workers, whatever you want to refer to them as. We do a strong
education component at the clerk's level. We assist with that.
We have a very unified videotape that we use so we have
consistency across the State. But we do heavy training and
certification, and we require them to get certified annually. I
think that's a huge benefit because the better trained, the
better experience you're going to have on voting day.
We also use people in voting lines, especially at larger
precincts for questions or promoting that GeauxVote app where
you could let individuals take a look at a mock ballot and
actually mock vote that ballot on that phone to use as a guide
to shorten lines and have a better experience in the voting
booth.
And the other thing that to me is a strength of poll
workers and your voting boards in counties in regards to the
subject we're talking about today, we all know our poll
workers. They've been there a long time in most cases, great
Americans. They do it for love of country, love of the
experience. They don't do it for the money, that's for sure.
And if you could just think about the greatest deterrent is
that both Democratic, Republican poll workers together, do you
realize if someone was going to affect an election, they'd have
to go against that 80-year-old lady that's been there 30 years?
I don't think that's going to happen whether they're Democrat
or Republican.
And to me that's one of the hidden jewels in our system,
whether you have the best state-of-the-art equipment or
whatever we have, you've got people on the ground with two eyes
and they're looking at the process. They know the process. And
to me that's the strength of the American system at its core.
And it's really fundamental. It's the same way we did it 240
years ago. And I just think that that's something that we need
to recognize in this whole debate.
Mr. LaHood. And just as a follow up on that, the level of
what you go through in Louisiana, are you confident that that
type of education and training is consistent across the
country?
Mr. Schedler. That I couldn't speak to. I think it's
dominant across the country, but I wouldn't say every State
does it that way.
Mr. LaHood. And, Dr. Wallach, with all these changes we've
seen recently with voting and how we vote--and I went to the
litany there--what is the future of voting look like?
Dr. Wallach. Well, I think what we've learned today is all
the 50 States will be voting differently, and it's hard to make
a broad-brush statement. I think that there will be a lot of
hand-marked paper ballots scanned by machines. There will be a
lot of computer-assistive technologies available, and there
will be some States that are voting by mail and that's okay.
Mr. LaHood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Babin. [Presiding] Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Beyer.
Mr. Beyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Becker, I think in your comments you stated and wrote
that there are 20 States in this Electronic Registration
Information Center that you helped found. Why not 30? And then
how do we motivate the other 30 to be part of it? And is there
any suggestion that we'd ever require that?
Mr. Becker. I feel like I planted that question with you,
and just for the record I--we've never talked about this
before.
So the Electronic Registration Information Center, ERIC, is
a data center that States voluntarily choose to join, and they
share information so that they can identify when a voter record
is out of date so they can notify that voter, make sure that
voter gets the right information at their new address and also
reach out to all the people who are eligible to vote but aren't
yet registered and direct them to the easiest way to register.
It was founded in 2012 with just seven States, so it's only
four years old, and now 20 States plus DC. are in it so I think
that's pretty good for a--you know pre-K 4-year-old.
But certainly, you know, we are working very hard with the
States that are already in it, including Virginia, who was one
of the founding members, to see more States join. And as the
word gets out, States like Virginia and Louisiana and many
other States are spreading the word that this is helping them
keep their voter rolls up to date and, in turn, what that's
doing is actually reducing costs and increasing integrity
because they're not sending mail out to people who no longer
are there.
The Presidential Commission on Election Administration, of
course, did recommend that States join systems like ERIC, and
that has been a tremendously positive influence. And I think by
the time we get to the 2020 election I think we will be at more
than 30 States, as I've talked to other States around the
country.
Mr. Beyer. Great. A parallel question for Dr. Wallach. In
Mr. Becker's testimony, he talked about how the postelection
audit requirement that mandates States match paper to digital
is only 32 States doing this right now. And you wrote the mere
possibility of a recount or audit of the paper ballots acts as
a deterrent, dot, dot, dot. So what do we need to do with the
other 18 States that don't have this post-audit reconciliation
of paper and electronic?
Mr. Wallach. Well, I'm certainly a big fan of reconciling
paper and electronic records when you have both. Many of the
States, that's not an option because you don't have paper
records like, for example, the entire State of Georgia votes
entirely on electronic machines without any paper records. So
there's no way to do a meaningful audit. I would love to see
the sun-setting of those machines and replacing them with the
next generation of machines that will have paper.
Mr. Beyer. There was the mention that we have $396 million
of authorized but un-appropriated HAVA money. Is that enough to
replace the old machines, the bad machines?
Dr. Wallach. I'm not sure. If we could do it on a
shoestring or if we'd do better to spend more money and do it
properly. I don't have a good answer for you today.
Mr. Beyer. Thanks. Many of you wrote about how the machines
aren't connected to the Internet. So, Secretary Schedler, if
they're not connected to the Internet yet, Dr. Wallach pointed
out that they are at the time of initialization and tabulation.
I think someone else pointed out that they're usually connected
to the voter databases, you know, 365 days a year. So how--is
that actually a strength that we can talk about that we're not
connected to the Internet, or are those holes at initialization
and tabulation----
Mr. Schedler. I would think it's a strength because, as I
look to the--I mean, people--the most common question asked of
me is, Secretary Schedler, when are we going to be able to vote
on the Internet? And my answer is I hope never because the
world is evolving and we see it. I mean, the Department of
Defense gets hacked into. Everything gets hacked into. And
that's why I'm so adamantly--I want to keep it with the States
to decentralize it, make it much more difficult. But the day we
go on the Internet, all bets are off as far as in elections.
Now, I want to caveat the comments. There are a couple of
States that do allow a return of an overseas military ballot
via the Internet. I think four, I believe, Alaska being one and
I don't know--remember the other three. So I want to clarify
that. Now, that's a small percentage of the overall vote. But
they do allow a return of--but I will say this in defense of
that, although we don't do it, it is a secure--you know,
military--they have to get a pin, you've got to have access.
You just don't just send them an email and here it is. They
have to get access and have ability to open that file up and do
something with it. So it is a little bit different. But
certainly, under the argument and discussion we're having
today, could be vulnerable.
Mr. Beyer. Great. Great. Thank you, Secretary.
Dr. Romine, a quick question. On this postelection audit
requirement of reconciling paper and digital is--will--is this
a NIST suggestion or a NIST standard or should it be?
Dr. Romine. Part of the voluntary voting system guidelines
that we worked with in the EAC was a strong recommendation that
there be an auditability or audit capability, and certainly
paper records provide a really robust way to do that, but it
doesn't mandate specifically paper records.
Mr. Beyer. Okay. Thank you very much. Mr. Chair, I yield
back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you.
I now recognize myself for five minutes.
Secretary Schedler.
Mr. Schedler. Yes?
Mr. Babin. By the way, I just spent two days in Baton
Rouge, and my heart goes out to you----
Mr. Schedler. I thank you for----
Mr. Babin. --and your State.
Mr. Schedler. --coming. I came back with Representative
Honeycutt. I came to Washington yesterday with him----
Mr. Babin. Right.
Mr. Schedler. --with Garret Graves and Steve Scalise, flew
with them, and he had the same expression to me so----
Mr. Babin. Unbelievable. I represent the 36th District in
Texas right across the Sabine so--and we had--in March we had--
--
Mr. Schedler. Well, you all know shares of rain, too.
Mr. Babin. Absolutely. But I've never seen anything like
that.
Mr. Schedler. No, it was pretty--30 inches of rain in some
spots, 25, 30----
Mr. Babin. Absolutely.
Mr. Schedler. --inches of rain.
Mr. Babin. In a population center like that.
But I'd like to ask you a question. You stated in your
testimony that ``I'm happy to report there's no evidence that
ballot manipulation has ever occurred in the United States as a
result of the cyber attack.'' And, Dr. Wallach on the other
hand states that ``If our paperless electronic voting systems
were attacked, we'd be unlikely to see evidence of it in the
voting machines or tally systems.''
So I just want to hear both of your opinions on this
matter. I'm not trying to start----
Mr. Schedler. No, no, no.
Mr. Babin. --any problem.
Mr. Schedler. I know you're not trying to start a war----
Mr. Babin. Yes.
Mr. Schedler. --or anything. I'm a pretty simplistic kind
of guy----
Mr. Babin. Okay.
Mr. Schedler. --you can see in my delivery. I asked a
simple question and I do not profess to be an IT expert, but I
come at the derivative of saying if you're not on the Internet
with voting, how do you hack into the machines? And I'm just
coming at it very simple----
Mr. Babin. Yes.
Mr. Schedler. --apple pie. I don't know much more than
that, but if you're not on the Internet out in the cloud how do
you hack it? If they're individual machines with cartridges----
Mr. Babin. You bet. Thank you. Thank you. And, Mr.--Dr.
Wallach?
Mr. Schedler. If he gets deep on me, I'm not going to be
able to argue with him.
Mr. Babin. Thank you.
Dr. Wallach. Right. The example that I think we can look to
to understand this was the Stuxnet virus, which was apparently
engineered to damage the Natanz nuclear refinement facility in
Iran. That nuclear refinement facility was also meant to be
secure. It also was not connected to the Internet, yet somehow
this Stuxnet malware was able to do its job. We don't know many
of the details, but it's quite clear that where there's a
will--and presumably a budget--then there's a way.
I don't know whether our nation-state adversaries have
chosen to make that investment, but I know that it's
technically feasible to mount these sorts of attacks and that's
why it's important to take mitigations and defensive steps
against them.
Mr. Babin. I agree with that. I sure do. Thank you. Thank
you very much.
The next question would be for you, Dr. Wallach. Is it
possible for someone to conduct a cyber attack in case of
voting or election systems while pretending to be Russian,
Chinese, North Korean hackers so as to falsely assign blame for
the hack on a foreign nation? And have you ever come across any
instance of such in your experience?
Mr. Wallach. So the issue of attribution of cyber attacks,
broadly speaking, is a well-known problem and nation-state
actors will pretend to be other nation-state actors for exactly
the purpose of trying to throw off attribution.
Mr. Babin. Yes.
Dr. Wallach. So I am not privy to however we have this
Russian attribution. I have to assume that the people who said
that know what they're doing.
Mr. Babin. Okay. And then, Secretary Schedler, one more for
you. Considering the range of vulnerabilities--and this follows
up on what you said just a second ago--the range of
vulnerabilities that exist for electronic systems, do you think
that more States will eventually return to paper ballots? And
if so, can you explain to us how paper is the more secure
option?
Mr. Schedler. Well, there seems to be a trend if you
consider a trend what four States, five States now, but in many
cases it's done for cost reasons also. I mean, you have to
factor that in.
Mr. Babin. Right.
Mr. Schedler. I'll say this. You have to have some other
protections, and I think Oregon and some of the others do, but
I mean I've always said that the best way and easiest way to
perfect fraud is right here in my hand.
Mr. Babin. Yes.
Mr. Schedler. You know, when I mail out a paper ballot, I
have no earthly idea who actually votes that ballot. I may be
able to verify a signature, but I can tell you that we've had a
couple of cases in Louisiana on mail ballots with frail and
elderly in a small jurisdiction where the individual canvassing
the area goes to Ms. Suzy and Mr. Joe's house, knocks on the
door, says, oh, can help you fill out your mail ballot? And
they do. Need I tell you how they vote? We caught one guy.
Instead of keeping the addresses of 15 elderly people, he sent
it from his campaign headquarters.
But the point being, you have to have some checks and
balances even under that system even if you're verifying the
signature with electronic machine or signature, not naked eye.
So I always contend that this right here is the easiest way to
perfect fraud in the system. Now, it doesn't mean that it's
wrong to do it because I'm very respectful of other States and
how we do it.
But I will just say this. In the entire subject matter we
had HAVA dollars ten years ago, and I think this will set the
stage with sparse dollars in States and in this country at this
time. We have $386 million of un-appropriated HAVA dollars
purportedly still out there. I gave you an example of what are
the costs to replace Louisiana systems. So $394 million may go
a long way, if not completely retool all 50 States with
assistance from the Federal Government.
But we can put layer on top of layer on top of layer of
what ifs and what have you, and as long as you all can write
the check, we'll do it. But at some point you've got to use
practicality here, and I am again--myself, and I think I speak
for all 50 of us--we are very confident in the system we have.
We have trifecta backups, audits and the like, and even under
some of the worst-case scenarios that I've heard here today, I
am still very confident that you may not have results November
9 if catastrophe hits, but if you're a little patient with us,
we'll get you the results and you'll have a new President of
the United States.
Mr. Babin. That's a good answer. Thank you. And I know I'm
out of time, but, Dr. Wallach, just as short as you can, what
do you consider the chances with many States going back to the
paper ballots?
Dr. Wallach. Well, if for no other reason than electronic
voting systems are very expensive, as the Secretary told us
earlier----
Mr. Babin. Right.
Dr. Wallach. --and paper systems are cheaper, and for that
reason, if nothing else, while these electronic systems are
wearing out, we're moving to paper sort of by default.
Mr. Babin. Okay. All right. Thank you.
Let's see. I recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Lipinski.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. And I thank all the witnesses for
your testimony. And I have--I'm not sure if I can get to my
questions because some other ideas came to mind as you're
talking here. So let me ask a couple things here so I better
understand. I know States--everyone does it differently, and
the idea of not having our--the machines directly connected to
the Internet makes sense.
But, for example, if you do have a voting machine, you're
voting, usually then at the end of the day when the votes are--
polls closed, votes are tabulated, how are those votes then
communicated then from the polling place? So--because I would
expect that they are done oftentimes over some sort of
connection to the 'net.
And then the other part of that is I go online election
night and I'm looking at the results coming in so I can go
online and connect in at least to see the results that they're
displaying. So hopefully, I'm not displaying too much lack of
understanding here, but aren't there some connections there to
the Internet that are going on?
Mr. Schedler. Not--no. Each machine has a separate
cartridge and it's independent. They're not--none of those
machines are linked together. And to answer your question, what
occurs at the end of that night is that cartridge is retrieved
from that machine. It is taken to the clerk of court or the
central location in that county--at least in the parish in
Louisiana--and it is put into a secure laptop and transmitted
on a closed-circuit line, not on the Internet.
Now, we do have--I mean, there's other systems. There's a
tape on all machines that we can replicate. If a court
challenge to an election--I can't tell you how you personally
voted but I can certainly tell you if you voted and I can
reconcile that tape. And there's one other method. Even in the
transmission of those results on the nightly news that you
referred to, there is a delay and there is a reason why we have
that delay, to be able to detect any interference in that
process.
And again, even it occurred, delaying in getting you
official results--because keep in mind on election night the
results are unofficial. We all know that from being elected.
The news media is out there declaring winners before the polls
even close. That's their job. Our job is to make it accurate
and effective.
Mr. Lipinski. Well, that's good to hear. Is this--is that
the common way it's done everywhere?
Mr. Schedler. Yes, sir, pretty much. That's--to my
knowledge, it's the way everybody does it.
Mr. Becker. Yes, I can't speak for every place, but in the
places I know of, they actually physically transport the
cartridges or the memory devices with the counts that occurred
in the precinct to the county office, which is often a
frustration for people who are looking for election results
because if they hit traffic or something like that, there's
going to be a delay in getting those results. And only at that
point--and most of these devices or many of them at least have
duplicate cartridges as well, so one of them will go to the
central count to be incorporated and you can check them.
This is not completely foolproof and this--but it's--the
problem that we often see is that voters get frustrated because
there's a little bit of a delay in getting it because there's a
physical transportation of the memory cartridges.
Mr. Lipinski. And I think that--hopefully, that helps
alleviate a lot of concerns that people do have that you--it's
not being transmitted electronically in the way that can be
hacked into.
One other question that I had, the paper tapes I think
are--certainly, I agree--a great idea. How often, though, and
at what point would there be a check of those against the
electronic numbers?
Mr. Schedler. It usually dictates--I mean, it's usually
dictatable by the closeness of the election. I mean, usually a
challenge or if there was some major malfunction, but typically
it's triggered by a challenge by a candidate, someone, you
know, wins by 10 votes or loses by 10 votes, challenges that
and requires a recount to be taken.
We are also very public with the certification of our
machines or you as a candidate or a campaign can watch us
certify those beforehand in the warehouse and also when we
reopen those machines to recertify candidates are allowed to
come in or representatives to actually watch that process and
to watch all that matching go on.
I gave an--I testified last week at the EAC on this
subject, and if you can bear with me a minute, it probably is a
good representation of your question. I watched in utter awe
with major networks with an individual that was claiming he had
a handheld device that he could put early voting cards into and
vote as many times as he wanted. Now, I don't argue the point
that you can have a piece of machinery like that. They do it at
gasoline pumps and the like. But what I did question was in the
early stages they never, ever brought in anybody that ever
conducted an election to dispute that.
And you have to allow for an early voting site that someone
is going to sit there and watch as somebody keep injecting a
card--how times are they going to vote? We have time limits in
most States. But at the end of the day, even if you have that
piece of equipment, you still have to have the programming of
what engaged that card. And at the end of the day, if there
were 100 people they came in to early vote by signature next to
your name and we had 106 votes, we're going to be able to
determine by that number on that card that you don't see of--
that you voted six times. We don't know how you voted, but we
know you voted six times so we'll catch you.
Mr. Lipinski. I am from Chicago, though.
Mr. Schedler. I'm from Louisiana. We've got a lot in
common. But we've cleaned that act up.
Mr. Lipinski. Similar.
Mr. Schedler. We no longer throw ballot boxes in the
Mississippi River. We don't do that anymore.
Mr. Lipinski. We have a big lake to do that.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Schedler. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir, thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Hultgren.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you all for being here. This is such an
important subject. I don't know if anything more important than
making sure that our ability to vote is protected and that we
feel confident that everything is being done to make it open
and accessible to everybody and using technology to do that but
at the same time making sure that we're protecting information
and protecting that confidence that our voting booths are
accurate and are being abused in any way. So I really do want
to thank you for being her. Thank you for your work.
It's certainly clear the nature of our increasingly
connected world has opened up new vulnerabilities which were
originally unforeseen. It's also brought about new great things
that we all can agree improve our lives, the functionality of
our democracy, and it does it in ways in which we can exchange
goods and services with each other as well.
A little over a year ago, I had a chance to visit Estonia
with a group of my colleagues and saw many of the innovative
ways they are integrating technology into their government
services. They actually have online voting in many elections
and most forms and bureaucratic paperwork are submitted online
in more easily searchable formats.
While this is encouraging to me, I also realize that
Estonia has as many people as New Hampshire or Maine, so there
are things they can do differently than we as a country of
almost 330 million people can do. So our States still need to
have the flexibility to innovate and the Federal Government's
role should be assisting but not passing down new unfunded
mandates on them which we hear--I hear so often from my
constituents and my local government officials and the
challenges they face.
Dr. Wallach, if I could address my first question to you.
Regarding the recent cyber attacks on the voter registration
databases in my State Illinois and also in Arizona, why would
an individual or an organization want to hack into States'
voter registration information? Are they looking for the same
kind of information other data breaches in the retail sector or
just personal information or what's the purpose behind these
attacks?
Dr. Wallach. So there's a lot of different motives that we
can ascribe. If we're talking about garden-variety, you know,
identity theft, they just want to have the information in the
database. If we're talking about the nation-state actors, their
motive could be to get information, but a lot of that
information is available through other channels. It could be to
tamper with information, and we've talked at length about the
sort of chaos that you could potentially cause.
Mr. Hultgren. Specifically with tampering, once a hacker
has gained access to a database, would it be possible to add
fictitious voters or delete legally registered voters?
Dr. Wallach. If it's a database on a computer, it's
possible to do all of those things.
Mr. Hultgren. Yes. Okay. Dr. Romine, I wonder if I could
address a couple questions to you. Is the walling off and
protection of voter registration databases part of the
technical guidelines for NIST?
Dr. Romine. The voluntary voting systems guidelines are
principally for the voting systems themselves. However, we do
have other guidance that my organization has developed over the
years to protect information systems broadly, and this would
fall under that category. And I think, yes, separation there is
a legitimate way of trying to prevent certain kinds of
interactions.
Mr. Hultgren. So that separation is happening or is it----
Dr. Romine. What's actually happening in the States is
something that I'm not privy to.
Mr. Hultgren. Also, Dr. Romine, from what is known, what
kind of guidance for protecting voter registration databases
were in place in the two affected States that I mentioned
earlier, Illinois and Arizona, and will NIST be considering
updates to its technical guidelines to include voter
registration databases?
Dr. Romine. I think we will be considering that with regard
to our partnership with the EAC to provide guidance to the
States and municipalities for protecting voting systems with a
broader remit perhaps as one way to look at it. The guidelines
that we have in place for IT systems have been developed over a
number of years and involve integrity checks, identity
management issues, and other things that can protect
information and information systems. And so the cybersecurity
framework that I alluded to earlier helps to--helps
organizations to craft a way to manage risk in this space.
Mr. Hultgren. Well, again, my time is almost up. Thank you
for your work. Please let us know how we can be helpful going
forward. And with that, I yield back to the Chairman. Thank
you.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Weber.
Mr. Weber. I thank the gentleman.
I want to do something before we get into the election
discussion today regarding the earlier comment from one of the
members on the other side of the aisle that she was appalled
that there was no Republican outrage over the Russians'
apparent hacking of the DCCC. I would note that there's
probably about the same amount of outrage from the Democrats
over Hillary Clinton's dumping of a bunch of emails and
destroying evidence in a federal investigation.
Having said that, in full disclosure I was an election
clerk and election judge and a precinct chair for about 16
years in Texas in Brazoria County when we had good old-
fashioned paper ballots. I was one of the few who raised my
hand when they said, look, we want to pass a resolution
encouraging electronic voting. I said I don't. I like the paper
system. I don't trust the Internet. That was back in the '90s.
It seems as if we've come full circle now that you all are
saying that there are some States who are literally considering
going back to paper ballots.
So here's a question for, I guess, all of you one at a
time. We'll start with you, Dr. Romine. Well, first of all,
let's do it this way. How many States have paper?
Dr. Romine. I think there's only five States that are
completely without paper. There are some States in the middle
that have a mix, depending on the county, of paper and on paper
systems.
Mr. Weber. Okay. What States in your opinion has the best
system, Dr. Romine?
Dr. Romine. I don't have insight into the systems that are
being used State by State.
Mr. Weber. So you really haven't formulated an opinion in
that regard?
Dr. Romine. I don't have the data.
Mr. Weber. Okay. Fair enough.
Now, if you say Louisiana, Secretary Schedler, I'm just
saying.
Mr. Schedler. My response to that would be the best system
for which the people of that State feel comfortable in voting.
Mr. Weber. Touche.
Mr. Schedler. Okay. Because New Hampshire, I mean, if you
can just think of the variety that we have across the board
from the East Coast to the West Coast in Oregon, I mean, just
totally different constituencies, totally different comfort
zones, and, you know, if some people still like going to vote
in their neighbor's garage and if that's what they want to do
and then that's good for that State.
So, I mean, I guess that's the best answer I could give
you. No, I wouldn't say that we're the best, although a few
years ago Pew had us at number 18, which would surprise you I
bet because I used to always say if you interview people on the
streets of New York on the late-night television show, they'd
never mention Louisiana in the top 20, but we're there. We've
done a lot of----
Mr. Weber. And they usually don't know what they're talking
about anyway.
Mr. Schedler. That's correct. That's correct. But I think
that's probably--I know that's kind of a politically correct
answer, but out of respect for all my colleagues and all the
States, I think you have to make that decision.
Mr. Weber. Okay. Mr. Becker?
Mr. Becker. I'll also be diplomatic here. I think if you
ask most election officials around the country at the state or
local level, most of them will say that the technology they're
using, none of them have found the ideal system yet, that
they're looking for something new to come around.
Mr. Weber. So you don't have an opinion about that?
Mr. Becker. I don't have an opinion about a particular
State. I think the work that's being done in places like Los
Angeles County to come up with a system that's based on off-
the-shelf components----
Mr. Weber. Okay.
Mr. Becker. --that is largely accessible is going to be
very instructive to the entire field.
Mr. Weber. Dr. Wallach?
Dr. Wallach. Well, I'm going to toot the horn of three
different States where I enjoy what they're doing.
Mr. Weber. Okay.
Dr. Wallach. I like California's use of risk-limiting
audits where you can audit paper and compare it to electronic
results. I like what Florida has done where they got rid of the
paperless electronic voting machines. My parents live in Fort
Lauderdale and they now vote on a laser printer will print out
a ballot on demand so they can have early voting in vote
centers. So Florida is now doing remarkably good stuff.
And, of course, I have to say something good about Texas. I
think in Travis County we're building a really great system and
it could potentially be applied in a lot of other places.
Mr. Weber. Are you from Travis County?
Dr. Wallach. No, I live in Houston. I grew up in Dallas.
Mr. Weber. Okay. So let me just also say here, having been
the recipient of--when a lot of those ballot boxes were
carried--Brazoria County is a big area. Apparently, where I
grew up is like 40 miles north of the county seat. And as an
election judge, in the general election I was, of course, in
the primary in the general election, too--we would always take
our Democratic counterpart in the general election, take the
ballot boxes down, turn them into the county. I've been on the
receiving end of when it took, you know, 45 minutes to an hour
just for the drive time and people were wanting those results.
One quick question because I'm the last one, is that right,
Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Babin. [No audible response.]
Mr. Weber. Okay. What is the most critical time of a cyber
attack?
Dr. Wallach. I would say that a cyber actor who knows what
they're doing is acting months to years in advance and--because
they don't necessarily have access to----
Mr. Weber. But I'm talking about if they were going to
affect a November election coming up, is that something done
the night of, the week before? You're saying years--are you
saying they get into the system----
Dr. Wallach. Yes. You get in way in advance and then you
have whatever effect you're trying to have. If your goal is to
create chaos, then you want to have your effect very late. It
all depends what you're trying to do.
Mr. Weber. Okay. All right, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Babin. Thank you. I appreciate that.
I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony and the
members for your questions. And the record will remain open for
two weeks for additional written comments and written questions
from members.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:25 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
