- BUILDING A 21ST-CENTURY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR AMERICA: THE STATE OF RAILROAD, PIPELINE, AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY REGULATION AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR REFORM

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUILDING A 21ST-CENTURY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR AMERICA: THE STATE OF
RAILROAD, PIPELINE, AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY REGULATION AND
OPPORTUNITIES FOR REFORM

=======================================================================

(115-11)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RAILROADS, PIPELINES,
AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 26, 2017

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-309 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
Vice Chair                         Columbia
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        JERROLD NADLER, New York
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  RICK LARSEN, Washington
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
JEFF DENHAM, California              ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            Georgia
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
JOHN KATKO, New York                 ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut,
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   Vice Ranking Member
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana             LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia           CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         JARED HUFFMAN, California
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  JULIA BROWNLEY, California
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
DOUG LaMALFA, California             DONALD M. PAYNE, Jr., New Jersey
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas            ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
PAUL MITCHELL, Michigan              MARK DeSAULNIER, California
JOHN J. FASO, New York
A. DREW FERGUSON IV, Georgia
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
JASON LEWIS, Minnesota

(ii)

Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous Materials

JEFF DENHAM, California, Chairman

JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 DONALD M. PAYNE, Jr., New Jersey
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           JERROLD NADLER, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JOHN GARAMENDI, California
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
JOHN KATKO, New York                 ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas            MARK DeSAULNIER, California
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
PAUL MITCHELL, Michigan              PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon (Ex
JOHN J. FASO, New York, Vice Chair   Officio)
JASON LEWIS, Minnesota
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    vi

TESTIMONY

Linda Bauer Darr, President, American Short Line and Regional
Railroad Association...........................................     5
Roger Nober, Executive Vice President, Law and Corporate Affairs,
and Chief Legal Officer, BNSF Railway..........................     5
Paul W. Rankin, President, Reusable Industrial Packaging
Association, on behalf of the Interested Parties for Hazardous
Materials Transportation.......................................     5
Robin Rorick, Group Director of Midstream and Industry
Operations, American Petroleum Institute.......................     5
Donald F. Santa, Jr., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Interstate Natural Gas Association of America..................     5
John Tolman, Vice President and National Legislative
Representative, Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and
Trainmen.......................................................     5

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Linda Bauer Darr.................................................    47
Roger Nober......................................................    68
Paul W. Rankin...................................................    75
Robin Rorick.....................................................    81
Donald F. Santa, Jr..............................................    90
John Tolman......................................................    95

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Paul W. Rankin, President, Reusable Industrial Packaging
Association, on behalf of the Interested Parties for Hazardous
Materials Transportation, response to question from Hon. Peter
A. DeFazio of Oregon, and extension and clarification of
remarks........................................................    20

ADDITIONS TO THE RECORD

Letter of April 26, 2017, from Chris Jahn, President, The
Fertilizer Institute, to Hon. Bill Shuster, Chairman, Committee
on Transportation and Infrastructure, et al....................   103
Richard Patterson, Executive Director, Sporting Arms and
Ammunition Manufacturers' Institute, Inc., views on certain
hearing topics.................................................   105

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

BUILDING A 21ST-CENTURY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR AMERICA: THE STATE OF
RAILROAD, PIPELINE, AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY REGULATION AND
OPPORTUNITIES FOR REFORM

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 26, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous
Materials,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m. in
room 2167 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Denham
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Denham. Good morning. The committee will come to order.
Today we meet to take stock of the landscape for safety
regulation across all of the industries under the committee's
jurisdiction, and consider opportunities for reform.
Much has been accomplished on rail, pipeline, and hazardous
materials safety, most recently through the Fixing America's
Surface Transportation, or the FAST Act, and the Protecting our
Infrastructure of Pipelines and Enhancing Safety Act of 2016,
or the PIPES Act. I am proud that we have consistently worked
on a bipartisan basis, and I want to thank Chairman Shuster and
Ranking Members DeFazio and Capuano for their work on these
bills.
Safety is our top priority, and will continue to be so. But
the breadth of regulation has grown significantly in recent
years. And so we are here to ask stakeholders about the impact
and burden of regulation on their businesses, and ways to ease
the burden without compromising safety.
Are these the--[lifts volumes from table and reads:] ``2016
Regulations and Codes.'' We are very focused on safety, but
this has more than doubled in the last--how many years? Since
2000. So, quite a bit more compliance here. Again, safety is
our number-one priority. But we also want to make sure that, as
we move forward, we are doing so in a way that allows all of
you to conduct business appropriately.
In 2004, when the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration, PHMSA, was created, the number of pages of this
CFR governing pipeline and hazardous material had increased
over 200 pages. Regardless, we are adding more regulations
without considering the cumulative burden on industry. And all
of the industries represented here today are facing growing
regulations, not just from the DOT, but from other agencies,
such as the Department of Labor, as well.
Today's hearing is an opportunity for our stakeholders to
tell us what is working, what is not, and what needs to be
modified in terms of regulatory process. Are regulations based
on sound science? Is guidance being used appropriately? Are the
appropriate rulemaking processes being followed? Can
performance-based regulations be more effective than command-
and-control regulations in achieving safety goals while
imposing less of a burden on industry? These are just some of
the issues I hope that we will explore today.
I am also interested in hearing from our witnesses about
how the agencies are implementing the FAST and PIPES Acts, and
whether they are following congressional intent. PHMSA has
still not implemented congressional directives from 2011,
something we have expressed concern about over the past few
years.
So I want to hear from each of our witnesses, and thank
each of them for being here today.
I now call on Mr. Capuano for any comments that he may
have.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Great introduction.
Let's get to the hearing.
Mr. Denham. I now call on the chairman of the full
committee, Mr. Shuster.
Mr. Shuster. That is why I love Capuano.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Denham. I now call on--are you going?
Mr. Shuster. Yes, I am going.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Shuster. Capuano doesn't love me that much, because I
talk more than he does. Would the chairman recognize me?
Mr. Denham. The chairman of the full committee, Mr.
Shuster, is recognized.
Mr. Shuster. I appreciate that. I am really glad we are
having this hearing today, and everybody has heard the
President of the United States talk about doing a big
infrastructure bill. I feel confident we are going to do a big
infrastructure bill. It will cover more than just the modes
that we deal with here in the committee.
It will deal with--I think broadband will be in there, and
the electric grid, the power grid will be part of it, plus many
other things.
As I have told people, you know, he just dropped the MOAB,
the mother of all bombs, on Afghanistan. Well, I think this is
going to be the MOAB of bills, the mother of all bills. I think
it is going to be a big bill, I think it is something that we
can find common ground across the aisle with our counterparts,
because when you talk about the infrastructure of this country,
everybody knows we need to invest.
And again, I feel very confident we are going to be able to
do something with our Democratic colleagues and, more
importantly, I think even with our Senators over there,
Republicans and Democrats, if we get them going in the right
direction.
And when we talk about the infrastructure bill, two of the
two industries that I talk to--and I have talked to the
President and some of his folks--it doesn't require Federal
dollars for the railroad industry and the pipeline industry.
They are already spending billions of dollars on their own
infrastructure. I know last year, I believe, the number was $30
billion the railroad industry spent. And if we allow the
railroad industry to keep more of their profits, I am confident
that that $30 billion will grow, and they will rebuild--
continue to rebuild their infrastructure.
The same with the pipeline industry. In Pennsylvania we
have two pipeline projects, one a $3 billion pipeline project,
one a $1 billion project. The $3 billion pipeline project is
being held up because FERC and the Corps of Engineers can't
agree on where to permit it to build it, and it is just
ridiculous, when you see this thing is going to be safe--
pipelines are the safest mode to move hazardous materials. So
we have to make sure that we move forward.
And I am confident that the--you know, the mistakes happen
out there, things happen, but moving by pipes is extremely
safe, as well as the railroad industry is incredibly safe.
My dear friend who has departed us, Jim Oberstar, and we
had this big hearing one day on rail safety, and he was
questioning whether the railroads are safe enough, and I was
saying they were, and he talked about when he was a young man
he jumped off the back of a railcar. He was working for the
railroad up in Minnesota. He jumped off the back of a railcar,
slipped, and he said, ``My head missed the rails by inches. I
could have split my head open and been killed.''
Well, they happened to call the vote at the time, so I
walked down the hall and the entire rail industry was there to
greet me. And they said, ``If he would have jumped off that and
we knew it, we'd have had to fire him,'' because you have to
hold both the rails going down the steps the back of a railcar.
So, you know, the railroad industry is committed to safety.
Any time you meet with them you got to go through a safety
briefing. And again, I know the pipeline industry, I know the
folks in the hazardous material business are really--that is
the number-one priority. For your industries I know it is, and
it is for this committee. So we want to make sure that we are
working together to reduce the regulatory burden.
It is crazy, when you look at those things and how they
have grown over the past 15, 16 years. And it has gotten safer.
And not necessarily because of those regulations. You know,
again, if we could get these things done faster, smarter, let
people keep more of their money, it is going to benefit
everybody, it is going to benefit the economy as we move
forward.
And, with that, I will say sorry, Mr. Capuano, for taking
up so much time, but I am ready to go. Thank you very much,
Chairman.
Mr. Denham. I now call on the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. DeFazio, for a brief opening statement.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will have an
opening statement, because I think this merits a lot of
discussion and scrutiny by this committee.
And, I mean, there are a few examples out there: the
Enbridge Pipeline, which leaked for quite a period of time, 1
million gallons of tar sands, mostly unrecoverable, in the
river, because simple leak detection was not effective; the gas
explosion in San Bruno, California, killed eight people because
of problems with the pipe and the pipeline itself.
And, as someone mentioned, PHMSA, a pretty much
dysfunctional agency, has yet to implement rules from our 2011
bill. So, before we start messing around with the things that
are pending, we ought to actually see what they produce and
then review what their products are.
And then, finally, one that is of extraordinary concern to
me, is lithium batteries on airplanes. We just had another
lithium battery incident. Luckily, it was not in the hold of an
airplane. Otherwise, we would have seen dead people. It was
Sunday night, a Union Pacific train. The car was removed from
the train when it started smoking. Later there was an explosion
inside. And it contained cargo of small lithium batteries. If
that happened in the hull of an airplane, it would come down
and people would die.
We have the example of UPS flight 6 near Dubai, which
created a giant crater. Twenty-seven minutes, forty-five
seconds. That is how much time between when the fire alarm went
off on the cargo plane until the plane cratered into the
ground. I think there is a visual of that. The manifest said
there were no hazardous materials on board. In fact, there were
three shipments of lithium batteries that had quite a variety
of cells inside.
Two minutes after the flight--fire warning, the flight
leveled off. It had already started to burn through the flight
controls. Four minutes, the cockpit was full of smoke. Five
minutes, the smoke was so thick the crew had a hard time seeing
their instruments. Nine minutes, the captain was unconscious or
dead, first officer couldn't see the controls inches in front
of him. And 28 minutes later, the plane cratered into the
ground with the pilots deceased. Luckily, they did not crash
into a large, inhabited area.
The International Civil Aviation Organization, which is not
known for taking a tough stance on things, finally, after the
manufacturers of Airbus and Boeing came out and said there is
no way to repress these fires on board an airplane, they
adopted some very minimal standards regarding the charging of
the batteries and that, and also that they should not be on
passenger aircraft.
The industry says that ICAO standard is a really bad idea.
We should put them on passenger aircraft, and we shouldn't
restrict them on airplanes. You know, it only takes one half-
charged lithium battery, the size of a water bottle, in a pack
of eight to take down an airplane. So the fact that the DOT was
working on adopting the very minimalist ICAO standards, and
that has been stayed by the Trump administration, which said it
would not stay regulations which are critical to health and
safety--I don't know what is critical to health and safety if
airliners falling out of the sky isn't critical, both to the
people on board and the people on the ground underneath.
There are times when regulation becomes absurd and over-
regulated. But other times regulation is absolutely essential
in the public interest. And now the passenger airlines in the
United States have said, voluntarily, they won't carry lithium
batteries.
But given the insufficient labeling requirements, we are
not sure whether they are or are not in the carriers. And
secondly, it is voluntary. So maybe one of the low-budget
airlines will say, ``Hey, no one else is carrying them. The
industry will pay us a premium to move these things around. We
will put them on board. Nothing to worry about.''
So, you know, let's not be cavalier about this and
aggrandize the places where we have over-regulated with places
where we need to regulate for the critical national safety and
health interests of the people of the United States of America.
With that, I look forward to the hearing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. I would now like to welcome our
panel of witnesses.
First, Ms. Linda Darr, president, American Short Line and
Regional Railroad Association.
Mr. Roger Nober, executive vice president, law and
corporate affairs for BNSF Railway.
Mr. Paul Rankin, president, Reusable Industrial Packaging
Association, on behalf of the Interested Parties for Hazardous
Materials Transportation.
Mr. Robin Rorick, group director of midstream and industry
operations for American Petroleum Institute.
Mr. Donald Santa, Jr., president and chief executive
officer, Interstate Natural Gas Association of America.
And Mr. John Tolman, vice president and national
legislative representative for the Brotherhood of Locomotive
Engineers and Trainmen.
I ask unanimous consent that our witnesses' full statements
be included in the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
Since your written testimony has been made part of the
record, the committee requests that you limit your summary to 5
minutes.
Ms. Darr, you may proceed.

TESTIMONY OF LINDA BAUER DARR, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN SHORT LINE
AND REGIONAL RAILROAD ASSOCIATION; ROGER NOBER, EXECUTIVE VICE
PRESIDENT, LAW AND CORPORATE AFFAIRS, AND CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER,
BNSF RAILWAY; PAUL W. RANKIN, PRESIDENT, REUSABLE INDUSTRIAL
PACKAGING ASSOCIATION, ON BEHALF OF THE INTERESTED PARTIES FOR
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION; ROBIN RORICK, GROUP
DIRECTOR OF MIDSTREAM AND INDUSTRY OPERATIONS, AMERICAN
PETROLEUM INSTITUTE; DONALD F. SANTA, JR., PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, INTERSTATE NATURAL GAS ASSOCIATION OF
AMERICA; AND JOHN TOLMAN, VICE PRESIDENT AND NATIONAL
LEGISLATIVE REPRESENTATIVE, BROTHERHOOD OF LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS
AND TRAINMEN

Ms. Darr. Thank you, Chairman Denham and Ranking Member
Capuano and members of the committee. I am Linda Darr,
president of the American Short Line and Regional Railroad
Association, representing the Nation's 600 class II and class
III railroads. Together, short line railroads operate
approximately 50,000 miles of track, or nearly one-third of the
national railroad network. Thirty members of this
subcommittee's thirty-two members have at least one short line
operating in your district.
There are three important differences between short lines
and the large, class I railroads. First, short lines are small
businesses. Our combined annual revenues are less than the
annual revenues of any one of the four large class I railroads.
The average short line employs 30 people or less.
Second, most short lines operate track headed for
abandonment under previous class I owners. These marginal lines
receive little or no capital investment, resulting in
significant deferred maintenance. Consequently, short lines
must invest over 25 percent of their annual revenues in
rehabilitation, making us one of the Nation's most capital-
intensive industries.
Third, short line operating characteristics are far
different than those of the class I's. Short lines are
generally operating in a much smaller geographic area. These
shorter distances, combined with slower speeds and shorter
trains, produce more predictable work schedules and more
routine patterns of interchange and delivery.
These three characteristics--our size, our capital needs,
and our operating requirements--shape our view of the safety
regulations that impact our businesses. We need regulations
that are more efficient, more goal-oriented, less reliant on a
one-size-fits-all mindset, and much more focused on costs and
benefits.
We understand the need to make railroading as safe as
possible, and we understand that Government has an obligation
to step in when necessary. But Government also has an
obligation to step in responsibly. Too often Government
regulation forces companies to spend huge sums of money and
solutions that don't solve much.
Most damaging are the one-size-fits-all regulations that
provide no basis for the presumed benefits and that ignore our
unique operating characteristics. I cite four examples in my
written testimony, but let me briefly describe one of those.
The part 243 minimum training standard rules. The proposed
rule imposes an enormous paperwork burden on short line
railroads, with no corresponding safety benefit. The rule was
drafted pursuant to the Rail Safety Improvement Act, but we
believe that, ultimately, the FRA's interpretation goes far
beyond anything contemplated by the statute.
If I might be permitted the use of a prop here, they told
me to drop it on the table for extra emphasis, so I will do
that.
Following the proposed rule, we hired a safety professional
to produce a template manual that met all the requirements of
the rule for just 1 of the 26 crafts, or job assignments, on
the railroad. So this is the manual that was produced. This
notebook would have to be duplicated 26 times to cover all of
the crafts in our industry for our small businesses.
We gave this book to the FRA, and we asked them to comment
on and approve it as a template that could be used by all the
short lines. It took FRA 3 years to reply: a good indication of
the complexity and the time-consuming nature of this directive.
We believe this regulation should be repealed, and the
underlying statutory requirement revised.
Let me conclude with an anecdote that symbolizes the
importance of safety for our industry. Before joining the short
line association, I represented the trucking industry for just
about 17 years. When we had big meetings, they were usually
kicked off with a pledge to the flag, or sometimes even a
prayer. In the short line industry, we start each and every
meeting, big or small, with a safety briefing. It is a central
focus of what we do. It reflects our commitment to safety, and
it is an effort to make us safer today than we were the day
before.
With the help of Congress, we stood up the Short Line
Safety Institute to help us drive a sustainable, strong safety
culture throughout our industry, and to carry forward that
commitment to safety. You are undertaking an important task. If
you make regulations more efficient, more goal oriented, and
more focused on benefits and costs, you will have done our
industry and the public a great service, and we are deeply
appreciative of that effort. Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Ms. Darr.
Mr. Nober, you may proceed.
Mr. Nober. Good morning, Chairman Denham, Chairman Shuster,
subcommittee Ranking Member Capuano, and Ranking Member
DeFazio. Thanks for the opportunity to testify before you this
morning on behalf of BNSF Railway. And I have to say it is
always a privilege to be able to be back before this
subcommittee and this committee to be able to talk about this
topic in particular: safety, regulatory matters, and ways to
improve the regulatory process, a subject which I spent much of
my 25 years in transportation policy focusing on.
At the outset, I would like to commend this committee for
its work during the last Congress to enact a significant amount
of legislation that is beneficial to railroads. And in this
Congress we look forward to again working closely with this
committee on a proactive agenda, including updating and
improving regulation, and ensuring that transportation
infrastructure policy, as Chairman Shuster mentioned earlier,
treats railroads equitably.
Transportation issues and this committee have always been
bipartisan and solution-oriented, and we think the subject of
today's hearing lends itself to those two important
characteristics.
Today's topic of safety regulation improvement is
difficult, but it is important. BNSF has been discussing it
with policymakers for years.
And with BNSF, growth is at the core of our business model.
And, like many businesses around the country, we look to
Congress and the administration to promote policies that help
grow the economy, so that we can grow with our customers. Now,
our ability to grow and earn adequate revenues and reinvest in
the company is directly related to the topic of today's
hearing: safety. Reinvestment is the foundation of the railroad
safety record that you and we have come to expect, and
operating safely and reliably is at the core of our ability to
attract new business.
Now, the laws of physics that make railroads the most
efficient mode of surface transportation also make railroads
the most unforgiving. This risk has been significantly
contained through the years through large capital investment in
our track, structures, equipment, and road bed, and
implementing innovative technologies and processes. Today we
have an incredibly safe railroading environment. These
technologies, as well as the effectiveness of our annual
maintenance and ongoing employee training and rules compliance
programs, have driven train incidents and employee safety
records to historic lows.
Now, we have not yet achieved our safety vision. Incidents
and accidents still do occur. However, we believe that they are
outliers. Operating safely every day on every move is now our
normative outcome and our expectation.
Now, turning to today's hearing, at BNSF we believe that
technology is a key to our next level of safety improvement.
BNSF believes it is important for regulators and regulation to
catch up with and encourage technological innovation. This will
promote a virtual cycle of continued investment in the
development of technologies, allowing railroads to advance
safety, while also potentially achieving more productivity.
This is a commonsense approach that is supported by recent
Executive orders, and also those issued in previous
administrations, and it has been consistent across time.
Altering existing rules to keep up with changes in
technology or operations has not been easy. And I am fond of
saying in railroading you are never far from history. And well-
meaning safety regulators can be extremely risk-averse in their
approach to reviewing or changing regulations, especially those
that have been long in place, even in an increasingly
technologically transformed work environment.
An improved approach to regulatory oversight would empower
the regulators to embrace innovation and technology-enabled
advancements in safety, rather than make them more difficult.
As I have discussed in my written testimony, there are many
areas where technology and innovation run into historical
regulation. Rail systems are generally regulated with time and
mileage-based manual inspection regimes, testing, and overhaul
activities. But today, signal systems, grade crossing
equipment, railcars, brakes, and locomotives have
microprocessor technologies that monitor and report actual
asset health on a real-time basis.
There is still a role for visual inspections, but
regulators need to recognize the enhanced safety value of
automated inspections and diagnostics. Similarly, our
investment in wayside technology has improved our track
inspection technology.
Electronic recordkeeping and communications rules are ripe
for updating, with railroad technology and digital
communication able to drive safer and more efficient outcomes.
There are also a variety of track and ballast regulations which
should be revisited to allow compliance through inspection
technologies and appropriate standards to bring this area of
regulation up to date, as well.
Now, improving administrative processes is critically
important. The FRA has a regulatory waiver process that can be
improved. And to the extent that railroads request waivers to
demonstrate technology, regulators should view them as
opportunities to create common understanding about rail
operations, similar to pilot programs.
Waivers should be speedy, cooperative, and transparent, and
can be a precursor to moving rail safety regulation to a
performance-based regulation, where safety outcomes, rather
than activities, are incentivized.
Finally, we believe regulators should curtail the practice
of regulating through non-APA regulations like guidances,
emergency orders, and safety advisories.
In conclusion, regulatory innovation does not happen
overnight, and it is especially difficult in a long-lived
industry like railroads, where there have been more than 100
years of how it has always been done. But there are many
railroad-related regulations that call for review which could
be done cooperatively, if we could just get started. And this
committee can play an important role in their implementation.
I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Nober.
Mr. Rankin, you may proceed.
Mr. Rankin. Chairman Denham, Chairman Shuster, Ranking
Member Capuano, and Ranking Member DeFazio, thank you very much
for giving us the opportunity to talk here today. I am Paul
Rankin. I serve as chair of the Interested Parties group, which
is a volunteer coalition of 46 organizations that share a deep
and abiding interest in legislative and regulatory issues
related to the safety and security of hazardous materials
transportation, both domestically and internationally.
At the outset, I want to make clear to the subcommittee
that members of the Interested Parties are deeply committed to
ensuring the safe and secure transportation of hazmat in both
domestic and international transportation. Safety is of
paramount concern to the industry, and our exemplary record in
this area and support for reasonable and effective regulation
underscore this goal.
We support a robust, efficient, and centralized hazmat
transportation regulatory program that is located within the
Department of Transportation, specifically PHMSA, and which has
clear, cross-modal, and international authorities.
The Interested Parties do support reasonable Federal
regulation in the field of hazardous materials transportation.
As I am sure the members of the committee know, the
transportation of hazardous materials in domestic and
international commerce is essentially prohibited, unless
authorized by a regulation, special permit, or approval. As
such, reasonable regulation is needed to ensure the safe and
uninterrupted--I will get that, soon--flow of these materials
and commerce.
In line with our desire for reasonable Federal regulation
is the support for preemption authority, the purpose of which
is to promote safety by ensuring, to the extent practicable,
that a patchwork of State and/or local regulations do not
impede interstate commerce, or encourage communities to export
transportation risks to their neighbors.
Because hazardous materials may only be transported if
appropriately authorized, regulatory flexibility is needed for
such activities as authorizing one-time movements of hazardous
materials and facilitating the emergence of new and innovative
technologies. Special permits and approvals are the regulatory
mechanisms that PHMSA uses for these purposes. We are grateful
for the attention that Congress and this committee, in
particular, has given to addressing delays in the special
permits and review process.
And, although PHMSA has made appropriate and significant
progress in recent years to streamline the special permits
program, including a recent rulemaking incorporating some
special permits older than 10 years into the hazardous
materials regulations, we believe more can and should be done
to improve this program.
Specifically, we recommend PHMSA regularly review all
special permits of general applicability, and publish annually
a special permit rulemaking that incorporates those deemed to
be safe into the hazardous materials regulations.
Turning to international affairs for a moment,
international trade in hazardous materials is a global and
significant business. To ensure these commodity movements are
safe, the Secretary of DOT has delegated authority to PHMSA to
represent the United States in various international regulatory
forums, including the U.N. Subcommittee of Experts on the
Transport of Dangerous Goods, which the U.S. presently chairs.
The Interested Parties encourage Congress and this
committee to continue its strong support for DOT's
international work. More specifically, we want you to know that
we believe it is important that a PHMSA representative serve as
an ICAO panel member, and lead the Dangerous Goods Panel
delegation to ICAO.
In terms of enforcement issues, although MAP-21 contained a
provision directing PHMSA to develop uniform performance
standards for inspectors and investigators, the Interested
Parties believe PHMSA can and should do a great deal more to
improve this program. The Interested Parties suggest the
creation of an online consultation program patterned on similar
programs offered or overseen by, among other agencies, the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
We envision such a program being offered to small and mid-
sized businesses throughout the United States, and we think
this kind of a program will do much to ensure safety across the
board.
Turning to a general regulatory reform matter, the IPs
support adoption of administrative reforms for PHMSA like those
enacted by Congress in the FAST Act, applicable to the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration. Such reforms would include
inclusion of a regulatory impact analysis for each proposed and
final rule that considers the effect of the rule on different
segments of industry, and utilizes the best available science,
and requiring that all significant rules be initiated with an
advanced notice of proposed rulemaking or, alternately, a
negotiated rulemaking.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Rankin.
Mr. Rorick, you may proceed.
Mr. Rorick. Good morning, Chairman Denham, Chairman
Shuster, Ranking Member Capuano, and members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me to speak today. With
over 625 members, the American Petroleum Institute is a
national trade association representing all facets of the oil
and natural gas industry. As group director of API midstream
and industry operations, I am responsible for all energy
infrastructure issues, including storage, rail, pipelines,
marine, and all of the modes of oil and natural gas
transportation.
The United States is leading the world in the production,
refining, and processing of oil and natural gas, and at the
same time in the reduction of carbon emissions, which are at
the lowest levels in almost 25 years. In less than a decade, we
have transitioned from an era of energy scarcity and dependence
to one of energy abundance and security. This energy
renaissance has helped the U.S.--has helped U.S. families save
on their energy bills, created greater job opportunities for
American workers, bolstered U.S. manufacturing, strengthened
our economy, and helped to enhance our national security
interests domestically and abroad.
An energy infrastructure system that keeps pace with
growing production demand is essential. Yet, despite having a
robust system, a recent ICF study found that the U.S. will need
up to $1.3 trillion in energy investment--energy infrastructure
investment through 2035 to keep pace with supply and demand.
This investment, on average, will support up to 1 million jobs,
and add up to $100 billion to GDP, annually.
Safety is our industry's core value. Since 1924, API has
been the leader in developing voluntary consensus,
internationally recognized industry standards that promote
safety and reliability. This program is accredited by the
American National Standards Institute, or ANSI, the same
organization that accredits similar programs at several
national laboratories.
Today, API has more than 600 recommended practices that are
used by the industry throughout the world. These were developed
with technical experts from Government, academia, industry, and
the public, and are referenced more than 430 times in Federal
and State regulations, covering multiple Government agencies,
including the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration.
In our experience, performance-based standards which
provide adaptable frameworks for conformance enable the
industry to significantly advance safety by addressing issues
such as technology, management systems, best practices, and
training in an efficient manner.
As an example, our recently completed recommended practice
1173 helps pipeline operating companies establish a culture of
safety through the development of the pipeline safety
management system.
Beyond our work on standards, API remains committed to
regulatory structures that promote safety, environmental
protection, and responsible operations. We continually look for
ways to collaborate with regulators to cooperatively address
challenges in the industry. We strongly support the adoption of
a performance-based regulatory model which gives operators
flexibility in implementing comprehensive programs to
effectively address risks associated with a facility or
company's unique operations.
However, we are concerned that recent regulatory action by
PHMSA, including the natural gas transmission and gathering
lines rule, the hazardous liquid pipelines rule, and the
underground natural gas storage facilities rule are too
prescriptive in their approach. We strongly encourage PHMSA to
modify these pending rulemakings to ensure that any actions
taken to advance safe operations are based on the most current
information and utilize the latest technologies and techniques.
Certainty and consistency in a regulatory process is of
critical importance to oil and natural gas operators,
especially when it comes to the development of energy
infrastructure projects. Oil and natural gas operators
typically look at 10- to 20-year planning horizons, based upon
individual analyses and contractual agreements with customers.
The impacts of large regulatory and policy swings, particularly
those that are poorly designed, can create a chilling effect
throughout the industry that stifles growth and ultimately
negatively affects consumers throughout the Nation.
We appreciate Congress' recent efforts on the passage of
the FAST Act, and the President's recent Executive orders on
infrastructure streamlining and regulatory reform. Efforts like
these recognize the need for infrastructure, but also advance
safety, and are good for the industry, its workers, and the
people who depend on the products we produce.
I would like to suggest several actions that can be taken
in the near term to ensure investment in critical energy
infrastructure continues to keep pace with our country's energy
needs and demands.
First, we strongly urge the President and the Senate to
reestablish a quorum at FERC. Until a quorum is established,
the review and permitting of natural gas infrastructure
projects cannot occur, preventing critical infrastructure
projects from advancing.
Second, we urge the President to move forward with
appointing leadership at agencies like PHMSA that have a key
regulatory role over energy infrastructure.
And finally, we urge Congress to hold Federal agencies and
States accountable to fulfill their obligations and timelines
under the established permitting processes.
Let me close by reiterating that API and the oil and
natural gas industry are committed to delivering 100 percent of
its products to their destinations without incident. We look
forward to continuing our work with Congress and the
administration to ensure that we build and maintain an energy
infrastructure system that continues to advance safety, and
allows American families and businesses to take full advantage
of our Nation's energy renaissance.
Thank you for having me today, and I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Rorick.
Mr. Santa?
Mr. Santa. Good morning, Chairman Denham, Ranking Member
Capuano, members of the subcommittee. My name is Donald Santa,
and I am president and CEO of the Interstate Natural Gas
Association of America, or INGAA. Our members, interstate
natural gas pipelines, transport the vast majority of the
natural gas consumed in the United States through an
approximately 200,000-mile network of transmission pipelines.
These transmission pipelines are analogous to the
Interstate Highway System. In other words, they are large-
capacity transportation systems spanning multiple States or
regions.
My remarks are focused on the rulemaking process at the
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration. We all
want PHMSA to be an effective regulator, and that includes the
ability to promulgate important regulations on a timely basis.
It also includes the ability to rescind legacy regulations that
more recent rules have rendered redundant.
Stakeholder dialogue is especially important when the
subject of the rulemaking is a complex technical topic such as
pipeline safety regulation. New rules should leverage
stakeholder knowledge and expertise to facilitate the
deployment of new technologies that may be more effective, more
efficient, and less disruptive than older technologies that may
be endorsed by existing regulations.
The PHMSA rulemaking process has become unusually
protracted. The case in point is the proposed natural gas
transmission and gathering rule to implement the mandates in
the 2011 pipeline safety law.
This delay is the cumulative result of three flaws in the
rulemaking process. The first is the failure to embrace
consensus-building as an early step in developing the proposed
rule. The second is the agency's choice to address too much in
a single rulemaking. The third is the prefiling process used by
the White House Office of Management and Budget, which
compounded the consequences of PHMSA's choices.
The natural gas transmission and gathering rule is a
gigantic proposal that assembles what could be 16 separate
rules into 1 rulemaking, some of which were in response to
congressional mandates and NTSB recommendations. Many of these
initiatives could have been and still could be implemented
individually or in small groups in a comparatively short time,
and thus complete many of the unfulfilled congressional
mandates. We suggest that PHMSA avoid these catch-all rules in
the future.
INGAA suspects that PHMSA bundled these initiatives into a
single mega-rule out of concern that it would not succeed in
getting OMB approval for the full array of separate rules
needed to implement applicable mandates and recommendations.
The OMB prefiling negotiation is an unnecessary added layer
of review since the APA notice and comment process provides
ample opportunity to vet the merits of a proposed rule and its
associated cost-benefit analysis. Without its creation, the use
of the OMB prefiling process expanded during the prior
administration. We urge the new administration to scale back
the OMB prefiling obligation.
Another opportunity for improvement concerns PHMSA's recent
use of interim final rule authority. While an IFR may be
appropriate in some cases, it produced a flawed underground gas
storage rule. The underground gas storage IFR includes clear
mistakes that could have been identified and easily fixed, had
the normal notice and comment procedure been used. Instead,
those mistakes now are part of a rule that took effect 30 days
after publication.
PHMSA's regulations also provide for something called a
direct final rule, which can be an alternative to an IFR when
PHMSA adopts a standard developed under a consensus process.
With a direct final rule there is front-end buy-in and
communication with the stakeholders. A rule is issued with a
proviso that will become final, unless there is a significant
objection.
The Pipeline Safety Act requires that a safety standard be
practicable and designed to meet gas pipeline safety needs and
protect the environment. Achieving this balance requires PHMSA
to consider outside input. Yet PHMSA recently seems to avoid
seeking this input in the formative stages of its rulemaking
initiatives. This is unfortunate, especially because PHMSA has
the means to do so, via the Gas Pipeline Advisory Committee.
In conclusion, let me emphasize that INGAA continues to
support PHMSA's completion of the rulemakings to implement the
various statutory mandates for new regulations. We suggest that
the end results of PHMSA's rulemakings can be improved with
better stakeholder outreach and involvement, and with internal
improvements to the regulatory process.
The pitfalls that have undermined the pending natural gas
transmission and gathering rule and the underground gas storage
IFR hopefully can be avoided in future rulemakings. We also
suggest that it is not too late to apply the lessons learned to
the development of final rules in these two proceedings. It is
important for natural gas pipeline operators to have the
certainty that will come with finalizing these regulations.
Thank you once again for the opportunity to testify today.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Tolman?
Mr. Tolman. Good morning, Chairman Denham, Ranking Member
Capuano, Chairman Shuster, and Ranking Member DeFazio. As you
said, my name is John Tolman. I am a vice president and
national legislative rep for the Brotherhood of Locomotive
Engineers and Trainmen, a division of the Rail Conference. I am
also a locomotive engineer, and I have been in the industry for
45 years.
In the last 20 years I have been working on safety issues.
I have seen firsthand problems that we encounter when our
Nation's railroads and other infrastructure are not properly
maintained. Safety is the number-one issue of the railroad
industry. It is also the number-one issue for the unions,
across the board.
According to FRA study data covering the periods of January
2016 to January 2017, accidents in the rail industry cost
nearly $300 million. Included in this number are 1,500
derailments, 10 collisions, 70 other types of incidents, and 48
injuries. The railroads could do much better in the area of
human factors by ensuring that advances in technology are
implemented with deliberate speed, and not used as a
justification for downsizing the workforce.
If the issue of fatigue on the Nation's railroad is not
addressed in the near future in a serious and fundamental way,
catastrophic accidents will not cease. Technologies such as PTC
[Positive Train Control] alone will not solve the problems. PTC
will do much to make rail operations safer, but it is not and
will not--is not designed to prevent all collisions. Crews on
freight trains work at random times and are on call 24/7. A
two-person crew provides a level of safety that doesn't need a
study to prove it is safer than a single-person staff. It is
just common sense.
One can't reduce the fatigue discussion and problem to one
single sleep disorder, sleep apnea. Sleep apnea does not begin
to explain the causes of fatigue in the rail industry. And that
means that a sleep apnea program cannot deliver the silver
bullet for solving challenges posed by fatigue.
Another issue that we are dealing with presently is at
least one of the four largest class I railroads is now posing a
concept they refer to as ``super pool,'' where train and engine
crews could be expected to know territorial physical
characteristics of up to 1,500 miles of railroad. This is
drastically increasing safety risks.
There is also the issue of rail carriers' repeated
resistance to regulations that would govern the installation of
electronic-controlled pneumatic brakes. Conventional brakes
have been in use today for over 150 years. They work. But
clearly, there's newer and better technology available that can
slow and stop trains up to 70 percent faster, and make it
easier and more efficient to stop trains quicker and safer in
the event of an emergency.
The history of the railroad industry demonstrates clearly
that you can't deregulate your way to improve infrastructure.
When I entered the railroad 45 years ago, one of the first
things I was told is that every safety law, regulation, and
operating rule was written after some major accident. In my
experience, that has proven true. The only reason we have
automatic couplers, power brake systems, signals, and train
control is because Congress enacted laws, and this very
Congress right here enacted laws to require that the railroads
implement those safety appliances.
Every such effort was fought tooth and nail by the
industry, which employed the very same arguments they make
today: ``We strongly reject the notion that regulatory review
should be predicated upon a simple mathematic cost-benefit
analysis.'' Such a narrow view reduces lives and limbs of rail
workers and members of the public to merely the cost of doing
business.
I have worked with the chairman of this committee for many
years, and many congressional members on this committee. I know
that you all have great intentions, and want to get things
done. So let's work together, let's get the transportation
system into the 21st century. Let's put thousands of people
back to work. Let's increase the gas tax for infrastructure
investment. And let's build the transportation infrastructure
that is better and safer than our forefathers created. Thank
you very much.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Tolman, and thank you to each of
our witnesses for your opening statements.
The first question I have--obviously, we have had concerns
about the implementation of a variety of different pieces of
legislation. But specifically, the FAST Act and the PIPES Act,
I would like to hear from each of you on how you think that
implementation process is going, whether or not it is--we are
behind schedule, ahead of schedule, whether they are following
the true intent of law.
Ms. Darr, I would start with you. Just open, frank opinions
on----
Ms. Darr. Yes. We are OK. We are OK with it. We think that
things are going apace. We don't want to make any suggestions
or comments at this time.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Nober?
Mr. Nober. We would say that there are a number of
different parts of it that would affect us. The STB has
completed their implementation of the FAST Act. I think we
would like to see some of the permitting reforms move faster
and be more widely implemented with respect to more modes. And
that cuts across different industries.
And obviously, the FRA is taking on a number of the
different FAST Act provisions, and we think it is trending in
the right direction there.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Rankin?
Mr. Rankin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Generally speaking,
the Interested Parties are pleased with the way the FAST Act is
being implemented. I did mention both in my written and oral
testimony that we believe some improvements can be made,
specifically with the special permits and approval process.
This is crucial for us in the long run and, frankly, crucial
for many, many members of industry.
We do believe improvements can be made. But, generally
speaking, things are moving forward well.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Rorick?
Mr. Rorick. With regard to the PIPES Act, we were a little
disappointed--quite disappointed that it has been moving as
slowly as it has. There is still a number of the 2011 mandates
with PHMSA that are still outstanding that we feel should move
forward.
The FAST Act is doing better. I think there are still a
number of pieces in the FAST Act, like title 41, that need to
be worked out, specifically. But we have a more positive
opinion of the way the FAST Act is being implemented.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Santa?
Mr. Santa. We are much more familiar with the PIPES Act. As
I mentioned in my testimony and oral statement, we think that
the process that PHMSA has used has been somewhat flawed, and I
think is one of the reasons why we have seen so little
progress, in terms of the promulgation of the rules to
implement those mandates.
As Mr. Rorick noted in his testimony, we think that it
takes an overly prescriptive approach that is not consistent
with a lot of the performance-based initiatives that PHMSA has
used, for example, on integrity management. Nonetheless, we do
support promulgation of those rules to implement the mandates
that came out of the Congress.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Tolman?
Mr. Tolman. One of the issues that we are concerned about
is inward-facing cameras. We don't believe that that adds
anything to safety in the industry. We have been--the
Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers has been around for over
150 years, and we don't see that adding anything, any safety.
In fact, fatigue being the number-one issue, this only
increases fatigue through stress of having a camera on you 24/
7.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. And I would also ask each of you
what you think the most effective approach to regulation is,
performance-based regulations or prescriptive-based
regulations. And when are each of those more appropriate than
others?
Ms. Darr?
Ms. Darr. I think, you know, when I speak on behalf of my
industry, I think of small businesses, and I think of
prescriptions like the one to my right. And, you know, you
think about railroads that have as few as eight employees. And
when the Government starts to get very prescriptive, and the
result is 26 manuals like this for 8 people that wear many hats
to digest and go forward and implement and to be held
accountable to, performance-based is best.
I think the people on the ground know their industry, they
know the tasks, and they feel a commitment already to safety.
They want everybody to get home safe at night, and so they are
going to do the right thing, and they know what the right thing
to do is.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Nober?
Mr. Nober. Well, at BNSF and in the rail industry I think
we strongly believe that, ultimately, performance-based
regulations mirror the way that we operate our companies, which
is assuring a safe outcome.
You know, a good example of that would be, for example, the
PTC statute that Congress passed. While we disagree with the
statute, it ultimately was a performance measure, right? It
said you can't operate a train without a working PTC system.
And how we meet it ought really to have been left to the
industry to figure out.
Now I will say that performance-based measures can be
challenging to come up with what the right performance measures
are. I will say that there are places where standards can be
helpful, particularly on things like equipment, like the tank
car rule, for example, where a Federal standard actually is
helpful, particularly when you are looking at different
commodities and interstate transportation.
But, by and large, we think, for safety performance
overall, that performance-based regulations should be the way
that we measure things.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Mr. Rankin?
Mr. Rankin. Congressman Denham, back in 1990 the Department
of Transportation adopted a rulemaking, HM-181, which was, in
fact, performance-oriented in nature. And, indeed, performance
standards are the way we feel things ought to be addressed
generally, across the board. There are certainly some
prescriptive requirements that are required. But, generally
speaking, performance standards are the way to go, specifically
in my area of expertise, packaging, for example. All testing is
performance-based.
So, we certainly believe that is the way to go, and the IPs
have supported that over the years.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Rorick?
Mr. Rorick. As Mr. Rankin indicated, there is a time for
prescriptive-based regulations. However, generally, as an
industry, we believe performance-based regulations are much
more effective, particularly with regards to safety. They are
more comprehensive, they are more flexible. Prescriptive-based
regulations tend to be very inflexible, and oftentimes they
create, effectively, what is a ceiling, where companies try to
meet that ceiling, meet the regulation, and then stop. Whereas,
performance-based regulations create a floor where companies
meet the floor, then develop programs that go above and beyond
that.
The other thing that we see is, as new technologies come
out, prescriptive-based standards tend to restrict, as Mr.
Santa indicated, and you are stuck using older technologies,
whereas performance-based, you are constantly reviewing your
programs and then adding new technologies into new techniques,
wherever they are available.
So--and then the last thing I will mention about
performance-based standards, too, as I mentioned in my
testimony, that it accounts for the flexibility to meet the
needs of a unique facility, unique company. So it doesn't
assume that a one-size-fits-all--and you can make sure that you
are looking at the appropriate risk factors that you need to
address, and not spreading yourself looking at things that are
low-risk and low-probability issues.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Santa?
Mr. Santa. We also support performance-based as the
approach. I think that the integrity management rules are a
good example of that, and adopt very much an approach that
encourages a sophisticated approach to risk management.
We also encourage regulations based on the standards that
come out of the accredited standards development processes.
These are very transparent processes. They include academics,
industry, regulators, and what comes out of them, we think,
provides the basis for getting through the rulemaking process
in a very efficient manner.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Tolman?
Mr. Tolman. I guess, from our perspective, it depends on
the rule. Notice and comment period in rulemaking is very
helpful. In all cases, the bottom line is to make sure it is--
we are working on safety-enhancing across the board.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Capuano?
Mr. Capuano. I am going to let Mr. DeFazio ask questions
first.
Mr. Denham. Mr. DeFazio?
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As might have been
noted, I am particularly concerned about lithium batteries on
aircraft. This is the photo that I spoke of, where the pilots,
you know, attempted to make an emergency landing, but were
overcome by smoke. And that is the result. Luckily, they didn't
crash into a heavily populated area and kill hundreds of people
on the ground.
As the manufacturers have said, these planes are incapable
of withstanding fire, and there are no current suppression
systems that work in the hold of an aircraft. Now, that
particular aircraft was a 747 cargo.
So, Mr. Rankin, I am puzzled. I would say Administrator
Dominguez at PHMSA was probably the first good Administrator in
my recent experience, and it seemed to me she was trying to
clean up a really incredibly dysfunctional agency, and actually
implement and put forward rules from things that Congress
ordered 6 years ago. That was big progress down at PHMSA.
But in your testimony you think we should take this
dysfunctional agency that currently doesn't have a head, and we
should put them on the ICAO board, which relates to aircraft
and hazardous materials transport on aircraft, as opposed to
the FAA, who are experts in aviation and aware of the fact
that, when you are flying at 40,000 feet and a fire that cannot
be repressed is a really bad thing.
So, why do you think that PHMSA can do a better job than
the FAA?
Mr. Rankin. I appreciate the question and I appreciate your
concerns, Congressman DeFazio.
The statement we made in our testimony and which, of
course, we stand by, is that PHMSA should take the lead in this
matter, and also should have the seat at ICAO. The reasons for
this are several.
First, PHMSA is the recognized competent authority or lead
agency for hazardous materials transportation, globally. So, in
any respect, when any foreign government is interested in a
movement into or out of the United States that deals with
hazardous materials of any kind, PHMSA is the agency to which
they go for expertise. And of course, as you know, an
individual from PHMSA, Mr. Duane Pfund, currently chairs the
U.N. Subcommittee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous
Goods, and is recognized as one of the leading authorities in
hazmat transportation, globally.
Secondly, the air movements of hazardous materials are,
generally speaking, multimodal in nature. Such movements
usually involve transport to an airport, loading on a plane,
transport by air, unloading----
Mr. DeFazio. OK. I have only got 2 minutes left, but, OK,
you have given a couple of reasons. That is good. But I have
got to say I still disagree, and I am hopeful that in the next
FAA reauthorization we can correct this discrepancy. When we
have something going in the hold of an airplane designated as
hazardous we shouldn't give a dysfunctional bureaucracy the
authority to be our lead at the International Civil Aviation
Organization, about which they know nothing on these matters.
So, in any case, thanks, but we do disagree on that.
One other question. Do you support, or does your
association support the promulgation of the rule that would
just make us internationally consistent with ICAO? Because
elsewhere in your testimony you are talking about the need for
international consistency.
Mr. Rankin. In my capacity here today representing the
Interested Parties, the organization has not taken a specific
position on this.
Mr. DeFazio. OK.
Mr. Rankin. I would be happy to determine that with the
group----
Mr. DeFazio. OK.
Mr. Rankin [continuing]. And get back to you in written
form.

[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. DeFazio. OK, thank you.
Mr. Nober, your railroad has invested a tremendous amount
of money in PTC, despite the fact that you had concerns about
implementing nationwide PTC.
You know, a number of the other freight railroads have
invested substantially, but they are not as far along as you
are. Our commuter railroads, particularly New Jersey Transit
and others, have been absolutely nonresponsive. They are
pushing hard for a rollback. Would your railroad support a
rollback saying, ``Oh, just forget about it, we are not going
to go operational, you don't need PTC''?
Mr. Nober. Well, at BNSF, we are planning on having all of
our physical assets in the ground and our system up and running
by the end of 2018. We are taking advantage of some of the
provisions in the FAST Act that you all passed to allow us to
have testing and operation go on, and work out bugs beyond
that.
So, at our railroad, we are planning on meeting the
deadline and going forward. And, obviously, we are at the point
in our implementation where bugs are almost on a one-off basis,
right? Every month, we look at a very rigorous process for each
train start. And then, if PTC worked, did it work properly the
whole way through? If it failed, where in the sequence of
events did it fail, and then sometimes ferreting out where in
the system of systems the bug was.
So, I can speak for us that we believe in going forward. I
know that the passenger railroads and others have had resource
issues, and, you know, I can offer for ourselves that we will
meet the deadline, and we are prepared to go forward.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. So you feel confident, despite the ongoing
programming and other issues, that it will be a functional
system, ultimately?
Mr. Nober. We believe so. But there are still some big
challenges to go.
For example, we are just now beginning interoperability.
And we and UP, for example, have exchanged some locomotives,
and are just beginning that process.
So if you take just within BNSF the various systems that
have to go together, if now we have to do the same kind of
process with another railroad, it is going to be a very manual
and labor-intensive process to work out all these bugs. We
believe that we will, we believe that it will work properly.
But again, if we are at 85 percent effective, or somewhere
to that effect now, where we are in BNSF, that still means we
run 1,500 trains a day. So 15 percent of those is a significant
number of trains that are having issues. And so those are a lot
of--in the colloquial, the scientific term--bugs to work out.
But we will get there.
Mr. DeFazio. OK.
Mr. Nober. I am confident that we will.
Mr. DeFazio. All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. DeFazio.
Mr. Duncan?
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for the great job you do chairing this subcommittee.
You know, I know that with only 4 percent of the world's
population, we buy 22 percent of the world's goods. And I read
recently that 58 percent of the people in this world have to
get by on $4 or less a day. The standard of living that we have
in this country is phenomenal, and I have long been convinced
that the average person doesn't really realize how important
our freight rail system is to that standard of living, getting
goods and services--getting goods to market to--much more
quickly and efficiently and, therefore, cheaper than they would
otherwise be.
And, you know, I am in my 29th year in Congress. I have
served on four different committees, I have chaired many
hearings, participated in hundreds of hearings. Almost all of
those hearings have been to attack some agency or industry or
problem.
So, when we have something that somebody has done really
well, or some really good news, I think we should point that
out. And I read in the--in our briefing memo it says since 1980
the rate of freight train accidents and incidents per million
train miles has fallen 88.2 percent. Railroad employee on-duty
fatalities, injuries, and illnesses have declined 91.7 percent.
The freight railroads attribute their safety improvements
in part to the Staggers Rail Act of 1980, which partially
deregulated the industry and restored the industry to financial
health. Since Staggers was enacted, the freight railroads have
invested $600 billion in their systems. I think that needs to
be commended.
I noticed in Mr. Nober's testimony he said that, by all the
measures, recent years have been the safest in rail history. I
think that--I think we need to point out something like that
when it occurs.
I do have a couple of questions. Mr. Nober, I understand
you are here because BNSF has been a leader in regard to some
of the safety requirements, particularly on PTC. And Mr.
DeFazio said he understood you had spent a tremendous amount on
that. How much has BNSF invested or spent on PTC since we
started with it?
Mr. Nober. Well, we will expect, by the time we are
finished putting all the assets in the ground, that our
investment will be close to $2 billion.
Mr. Duncan. $2 billion?
Mr. Nober. $2 billion dollars. So----
Mr. Duncan. And that is--and that, you said, is going to be
by the end of 2018?
Mr. Nober. We should have the system up and operating. And
as I perhaps didn't emphasize clearly enough to--Congressman
DeFazio is now gone--that, you know, we will meet the deadline,
and we oppose extending it.
Mr. Duncan. Ms. Darr, is there a significant difference
between the safety record of the short line railroads in
comparison to the big guys?
Ms. Darr. Thank you, Congressman. Last year was the safest
year in short line railroad safety history. So I think that we
are on a very positive trend, and I think it is a result of a
number of the changes that our member railroads have made over
the years, and their commitment to safety.
In addition, the--I want to mention the Short Line Safety
Institute, that we appreciate the support of Congress in
helping to fund that. And that is focused on going out and
assessing every one of our member railroads when, you know, we
can get to each one of them, and looking at the way that they
have ingrained a safety culture in their workforce, and making
sure that it is at a strong and sustainable level throughout
the industry. So I think you will continue to see that trend
upward.
Mr. Nober. And, Congressman Duncan, if I could just add one
thing.
Mr. Duncan. Yes.
Mr. Nober. I mean it is obviously the policies set forth by
this committee and the Congress 35 years ago to begin to allow
deregulation that have allowed companies like BNSF to have the
financial health to invest that kind of money, those kinds of
assets, in safety systems that we are able to do. And so it is
all part of an overall holistic approach to the rail industry,
where we are able to earn adequate revenues. And, through
deregulation, we are able to invest in the reliability and the
safety systems that have allowed us to have best ever safety
results.
Mr. Duncan. Well, that is an important point--important to
point out, that deregulation, contrary to what some people say,
doesn't always mean that something is going to be less safe. In
your industry it became even more safe.
Ms. Darr, what about this training rule that we passed 9
years ago? Has that had an effect? What effect has that had on
the short lines?
Ms. Darr. It has--we actually were so concerned about the
rule after we started the initial implementation and tested it
out that we, for the first time in our history, sued the
Department of Transportation for overly burdensome rules.
So it has been a major focus of so many of our members. We
have been trying to work with the Department to put off
implementation of those rules, to make sure that the industry
is prepared. We are in settlement talks with the Department of
Transportation and trying to narrow down the focus of the rule.
But it has taken a significant number of man-hours of our
association and all of our members to try to get this tiger
back in the cage. And it really, unfortunately, has diverted
from a number of other safety priorities in the process.
So, it was a very unfortunate ruling for our industry.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Duncan.
Ms. Esty?
Ms. Esty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank all of
you for being here with us today.
My district is served by class I, short line, and passenger
rail service in Connecticut. Connecticut is, by no means, one
of the most active States for freight rail, but the industry
provides well-paying jobs for my constituents, and I place a
great deal of value on the economic opportunity it provides.
And, in fact, we have a lot of communities who want to seek
expansion of rail service in my district.
But ensuring the safety of crewmembers, of communities, and
passengers is tremendously important. And that is why we are
here today. There have been a number of both high-profile and
smaller crashes in the Northeast in the last few years, a
number of which have taken place in my district, including two
freight rail incidents in the last year in New Milford and
Brookfield, Connecticut, involving short line. And, obviously,
the high-profile incident recently--multiple--at Penn Station.
So we still have a ways to go.
I wanted to drill down a little bit on--more on the
difference between performance standards and prescriptive,
because I am hearing a great deal of discussion here about
deregulation has led to these reductions. Yet, at the same
time, Mr. Nober, you are talking about the importance of PTC
and the importance of technology. If we have multiple
technologies in, say, something like PTC, the interoperability,
you are going to require some prescriptive efforts, or
otherwise it is not going to be able to talk to each other.
So, I would like--maybe Mr. Nober, you can start with how
can we best have innovation and safety, and recognize sometimes
we are going to have to make specific decisions? Because
without that we are not going to get the safety that the public
needs and demands.
Mr. Nober. Well, Congresswoman, I thank you for your
question, and appreciate your concerns. And, as you said, there
is a place for--in an industry like rail, with
interoperability, with interchange, where cars go throughout
the system, standards can be set that are uniform across the
system, that can be a great help for a network like ours.
On the other hand, we do have a number of individual safety
mandates that go to railroads, and I listed several of them in
my testimony, everything from how you originate a train, to how
you inspect track, to how you look at each individual car, to
how you investigate wheels, that are done a prescriptive way:
``You will look at how reflective the tape has to be on the
side of cars,'' or that are done based on time: ``You will
inspect this each and every time.'' And railroading is quite
diverse.
You have passenger rails, like you said, in the Northeast.
In the West, where we operate, we can have trains that are
8,000 or 10,000 feet long going through very unpopulated areas,
which would stand in stark contrast to a heavily populated
area, like Connecticut. And the safety rules that should apply
to those ought to be able to take into account the different
environments in which they are operating.
So, when we talk about performance regs, it is to try to
come up with a safety outcome that we are looking for--for
example, in track or in inspections--that looks at how often--
how well maintained are the cars, how often are they having
problems, how often are derailments happening, as opposed to
``You will inspect them every so often, regardless of what the
needs are.''
And so, I do think that it is hard to do. There is no
question about that. It is more difficult to measure and
regulate on a performance basis than it is to regulate based on
what we would call command and control, but activity-based,
right? Because if you are a regulator--and, you know, I have
run an administrative agency, it is much easier for them to
say, ``We are going to ensure that you do X,'' and if you do X,
then they can say, ``Hey, we have done our job.''
Ms. Esty. Although I think part of it is you have all
talked about how there has been improvement in safety with this
combination of the regime we have right now, which is some
performance-based and prescriptive. So you can understand
concern on the part of Members of Congress who have lines
running through their district of moving away from a system
that has, in fact, been improving safety.
So that is--you are asking us to ``trust us,'' trust us--
some of us recently were on a trip to India, a place where
there is a lot of issues with rail safety. Many other parts of
the world the market clearly does not work to provide safety.
And you can understand why we have concerns with the ``Just
trust us'' attitude, ``We have a good culture,'' because you
look around the world, that is not what happens if the market
alone determines. And, obviously, that improvement in safety
record has been a combination of those two, and I think it is
unwise to suggest that it really--that it could be without
prescriptive, as well.
Mr. Nober. Well, we would like to say at BNSF that we are
very--we think the freight rail system in the United States,
which is principally deregulated--not completely--is the safest
and the best in the world. And when we look at the way we
operate our system, safety and reliability are the two most
important things we have. Because if we want to grow, if we
want to draw freight from the highway and bring it on to rail,
which should be a policy goal that all of us should share, then
we have to be able to provide reliable and safe service for our
customers. And the way we do that is through ensuring equipment
integrity, it is through ensuring track integrity, and it is
through ensuring that, you know, our people are able to go home
safely every day.
There is probably no place on our railroad that we inspect
at merely the FRA minimum. Now, the way we inspect it might be
different, but we probably go beyond that in virtually every
mile of our system. And in our heavily traveled, most, you
know, core, dense routes, we go multiples beyond it. We do that
because the importance of having one of our transcontinental
mainlines operating and be able to provide the service that it
provides is of paramount importance to us.
So, just 2 weeks ago, we had an incident. It didn't involve
our railroad. We had a grain elevator catch fire near Hereford,
Texas, on our transcontinental mainline. And the fire and the
resultant danger from the chance of explosion left that line
out for about 20 hours. And we had over 100 trains delayed that
were stopped because of that, because it was unsafe to go past
it.
Obviously, safety is first. We would never put any of our
crew or our people in harm's way. But the consequence of an
outage like that is tremendous for us, as well.
Ms. Esty. Well, thank you, and I see my time has expired.
But I would like to follow up with some further questions on
some of these issues. Thank you very much.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Ms. Esty.
Mr. Farenthold?
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, Chairman Denham. And I worry
about Washington bureaucrats coming up with regulations from
the top down, and like to see stuff actually come from the
bottom up, or see industry and the public more involved.
Mr. Santa, in your testimony you talk a little bit about
the Gas Pipeline Advisory Committee. Could you tell me a little
bit more about how that works, and their involvement in the
regulatory process?
Mr. Santa. Yes, sir, Mr. Farenthold. The GPAC, or Gas
Pipeline Advisory Committee, is created by statute. It is a
Federal advisory committee. It has equal representation from
industry, the public, and regulators from both the State and
Federal level. The purpose of it is to provide input to PHMSA
in connection with its rules and its processes. In some ways it
effectively functions as a peer review group for what PHMSA
proposes.
PHMSA is utilizing the GPAC to review the pending gas
pipeline and gathering rule. We only wish that PHMSA had
involved GPAC earlier in that process at the formative stages
of coming up with that rule. And I think that probably would
have produced a better rule. As a matter of fact, the GPAC was
utilized in that manner in the development of the integrity
management rule back in the early 2000s, and I think it
produced a good result.
Mr. Farenthold. All right, thank you.
Mr. Nober, you were talking about how you used new
technologies for inspecting your track. I have actually seen
some of those technologies demonstrated. And I hear this from a
variety of folks in a variety of industries, that the
regulations that are in place at the Federal level are not
keeping up with technology.
So, in addition to your enhanced technological screening
method with cameras and vibration sensors and things like that,
you are still stuck with old regulations. Do you have any
thoughts on how we could develop a process, when technology
evolves, that we can get rid of or modify some of the existing
regulations to take better advantage of the technology to
create a safer environment at a lower cost?
Mr. Nober. Well, Congressman, that is an excellent
question. I would say the first step is to change the mindset
of the regulators to be able to accept that technology can
improve safety, and it is not in lieu of or a substitute for a
safer method of doing things.
A good example would be track inspection. The FRA mandate
for track inspection would be a visual inspection, so people in
a high rail, riding and looking at it. And that certainly
catches a number of kinds of defects, and is an important part
of inspecting track, and we do that more than the FRA minimum
in most parts of our system.
But beyond that, we have developed, first, geometry cars
that have sensors that are able to look at and evaluate the
inside of rail, and sense--are there any internal defects that
could grow into the kind of problem, given the weight and the
density and the mass of rail traffic that is on it, or broader
defects that could create derailments?
Now, we have geometry cars that are able to do that. And we
have now a manned geometry car. And people are in the geometry
car. And if they spot a defect, they have to stop and mark it
and send somebody out immediately to be able to go and remedy
it. And again, that is a laudable goal.
But we also have developed unmanned geometry cars. And the
benefit of those is that they can go on the back of any train.
And so, therefore, using an unmanned geometry car, we can
inspect the rail much more often. But implementing those has
been difficult, because the existing regs would require that we
stop and get out and mark it, and immediately remedy any
defect.
Mr. Farenthold. It can be adequately marked with a GPS.
Mr. Nober. And so we are still working through the GPS. It
is not 100 percent settled yet. But we think more inspection
will create a safer rail, and that we will then dispatch our
maintenance of way people to go out and fix the problems that
are found, because we are able to inspect things more.
So, rather than be a substitute for people, we think it
will enhance safety. But the regulatory framework has to evolve
to be able to allow and enhance that. And again, all of these
are slightly different, they all have benefits, they all have
downsides. We call it the swiss cheese approach. But if you
layer all of these different safety systems together, overall
you will catch more defects----
Mr. Farenthold. All right, thank you. And I have one more
question for Ms. Darr.
Now, Mr. Tolman is talking a lot about safety and fatigue
and the necessity for a two-man crew. Is that different in the
short line industry than it would be with the class I? And how
would you see that affecting your industry, a two-man-crew
rule?
Ms. Darr. Thank you for the question, Congressman. It is an
excellent question. And I would say that it has a much more
serious impact on short lines, because of the small staff. So
when you are taking two men, you know, to operate a locomotive,
then you are taking, conceivably, one of them away from some
other critical operation of the railroad.
So we are very concerned about this, and we do find it
ironic that, at the same time that DOT issued a regulation
calling for two-man crew, they were also conducting a study, I
believe, with Duke University to look at whether or not crew
size even had an impact on rail safety to begin with. So it
seems to us to be a classic example of putting the cart before
the horse, and it was confusing, at best.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. Well, I see my time has expired.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Nober. If I could just add that----
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Farenthold----
Mr. Nober [continuing]. In addition, that----
Mr. Denham [continuing]. Mr. Capuano?
Mr. Nober [continuing]. DOT was funding autonomous truck
technology, as well, to have no drivers in it.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Capuano?
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
the panel for being here and for your testimony.
But like a lot of these hearings, the truth is that not
much of what you said I would disagree with. I am for
effective, robust, clear, least-intrusive, safe, and reasonable
regulations, and nothing more. But, then again, nothing less.
So I am glad nobody said all regulations are bad. You are
right. We need some regulations. Where they should be? Fine.
Ms. Darr, a regulation that thick, you should have called
me. I don't even know what is in there. I am hoping it is not
just one big print.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Capuano. I mean that is not what we want. And, look, I
am not afraid of regulations, but I am not in favor of over-
regulation. And I agree that some regulators, to cover their
own Administrator's back, they over-regulated. I couldn't agree
more. But those are details. And, you know, most of us are here
to work out the details.
And I think, as was pointed out, what we came up with with
PTC was a pretty good compromise. It was like we want it. We
gave the industry a period of time to do it, no one did it, and
we kind of then required them to do it, but we did it in a way
that says, ``You guys figure it out, but you got to get it
done.'' And it seems to be good.
I am really happy to hear that people are reasonably
satisfied with the FAST Act. And actually, the comments about
the PIPES Act, without details, I haven't been terribly
thrilled with the implementation of the PIPES Act. And you want
to criticize PHMSA? You go right ahead, because you got Peter
DeFazio right after you, and me right after him. They have been
a problem for a long time. I agree with what Peter said. We did
have one good Administrator for a little while, she is gone,
and we will see what happens.
So, all that being said, thus far I don't see a whole lot
of controversy here. And, though I love seeing you guys, I am
wondering what we are doing here. But that is OK.
But because these kinds of testimony tend to be generic,
apple pie, and puppy dogs, you know, obviously, my ears are
always attuned to what is floating around, and I have been
hearing things like--that some bills coming out of certain
areas--I really like the one that wants us to do advanced
notices of proposed rulemakings. Advanced notices of proposed
rulemakings? That seems a little redundant, to me. Why don't we
have preadvanced notice of possibly, maybe, someday regulation
that I might want to think about 10 years from now?
I mean, come on, that is ridiculous. It is just a way to
kill whatever you don't like. I mean if the systematic problem
is OMB, line up behind me. OMB has been a problem from day one.
The process stinks. And I would be happy to kick them in the
butt to get moving on it. What they do is nuts.
I got to be honest with you, 1982, I think it was, we had a
train derailment in my home city, and that train derailment
released chlorine gas. And nobody died, but a lot of people got
sick, and a big evacuation. The fire department didn't know how
to fight it, because there hadn't been any training then. They
put the wrong stuff on it, and it caused problems.
Now I just presumed that every train carrying hazardous
material would have emergency breathing apparatus on it, to be
perfectly honest. And I found out not only is it not true, but
the industry is fighting that. What are you, crazy? That is
nuts.
Now, you might want to argue exactly which breathing
apparatus--and I am not the guy to answer that question--but I
can tell you there are 1,000 guys I can find in my district who
will tell you exactly which one you should have that is the
safest. You have it once, you don't have to touch it again for
a long time. It is not that big of an expense. Why would
anybody fight having emergency breathing apparatus on a train
that is carrying hazardous, deadly material? It makes no sense.
And, to be perfectly honest, I am a little surprised to hear
those kinds of things floating around.
But, in general, I like it. The whole thing about
performance-based rulemaking. Fine, sounds good. Again,
motherhood, apple pie. We are all for performance-based, and I
am all for it. I think the PTC thing is an example of that. But
I am also glad to hear that some of you said that there is
occasion for prescriptive regulation.
And I think Mr. Tolman is right. I have only been on this
committee for, I don't know, 15 years or so. Every single
regulation that I have seen has come after not one, but a
series of disasters. I have not yet seen a regulation that was
done before a disaster happened. And, yes, when you do that,
sometimes things get a little overboard, and we have to
readjust. I am for that.
But I guess I don't really understand what the difference
of performance-based regulation is. What is so big about it?
Mr. Tolman, can you tell me exactly? Why should I care
whether it is performance-based or prescriptive, or alphabet
soup?
Mr. Tolman. You know, Congressman, thank you. In my mind, I
don't think it makes any difference, as long as we are
advancing safety issues, truthfully.
You know, you mentioned emergency escape breathing
apparatus. You know, if it wasn't for this committee, we
wouldn't even be discussing. In 2005 we had a major accident, a
Norfolk Southern, where a switch was left open in dark
territory. And dark territory, in my mind, shouldn't even exist
in the industry.
Never mind that, the family--Chris Seeling was a 28-year-
old locomotive engineer who was operating the train. It was a--
switch was left open, they went in and struck a chlorine tank
at 2 o'clock in the morning. The conductor knew enough--he was
trained enough, talking about part 243, the training program--
he was trained enough that he went upwind. The engineer went
downwind. He was not trained. They both walked into the
emergency ward together, and Chris Seeling, 28 years old,
succumbed to chlorine inhalation. So did nine other people
that--in the factory right next door to that chlorine tank car
passed, as well.
Two hundred yards away, two hundred yards away, there was
an elementary school. Thank the dear God that this happened at
2 o'clock in the morning, and not 2 o'clock in the afternoon.
Because none of this would be discussing emergency escape
breathing apparatus.
The interesting thing that--you know, I have been doing
this for a long time. I have investigated some major accidents
throughout the United States. Rips your heart out to see one
person or one injury. The carnage, when you go there--I did so
many accidents that I felt like I was getting PTSD. I mean,
honestly, I had to step away, and I don't do them any more.
But the passion for me is we need to prevent every single
one of them, whether it is an investment in--the railroads, I
applaud them. PTC, they are spending billions of dollars. Why
are they doing that? In 1968 the NTSB told the railroad
industry they need to implement some form of PTC, some form of
train separation technology. It took 49 years, and we are still
discussing it.
If it wasn't for Congress, we wouldn't be moving in this
direction. I have been an advocate to the railroad industry all
my life. Let's work together. Let's work on these safety
issues. Don't come to Congress. We can get them done together.
We don't need to sit here and discuss all our safety issues
when we know damn right well we should be doing them together.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you. My time is well over time. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Capuano.
Mr. Rokita?
Mr. Rokita. Oh, thank the chairman for organizing us today.
I had a couple of questions, didn't know I was up next. Excuse
me, let me find them here.
Mr. Nober, I am interested in your testimony here, I am
going to quote from it right away and get your reaction to it,
because I think those are some questions that were asked of
you. You said in your testimony that signal systems, grade
crossing equipment, railcars, brakes, and locomotives have now
microprocessor technology applications that monitor and report
actual asset health.
Regulations, nonetheless, still require visual inspections
of these systems. And, while there is a role for visual
inspections, regulations need to recognize the enhanced safety
value of automated inspections and technical diagnostics, and
build in appropriate operational flexibility. Can you further
explain that?
Mr. Nober. Sure. Our locomotives these days are mini data
centers. They have any number of sophisticated data systems on
them. And, in fact, one of the challenges we have is always
finding a place to install new systems, like the PTC computers
that go in there.
And what we do is we have wayside detectors that will see
the impact of wheels. We have something called wheel impact
load detectors that will basically test if a wheel is out of
round at all. We have wayside detectors that will sense if
there is any heat coming out of the bearings, so if the
bearings have any issues. And so, all of these are automated
ways of seeing if we have any of our operating systems out of
order.
Mr. Rokita. Yes.
Mr. Nober. But we still have regulations that require us to
visually inspect a locomotive every day, so we have five
locomotives, and somebody has to go out and walk around them.
We have to visually inspect trains after a certain number of
miles. And in large land-area geography like we are, that can
just take additional time to inspect an 8,000- or 10,000-foot
train that we think adds very little value to what all of these
redundant data systems are adding.
So we are not saying that you should never have an
inspection at the beginning of a train. But we are saying that
some of these en route or intermediate inspections that were
done back when we had the daily locomotive inspection, which
was required back in the steam days, on today's modern
locomotives may not necessarily be the same and the right kind
of test to do.
The brake inspections, I included an article from the
Chicago Tribune from 35 years ago----
Mr. Rokita. Yes, 1982.
Mr. Nober [continuing]. To show how difficult it can be to
change longstanding sort of historical inspection requirements.
And so, looking at what is the capability of modern
equipment, what kinds of information is it giving, and what is
the best way to evaluate that overall web of data, and then
adjusting inspection requirements to meet that, we think is the
best way to go forward.
Mr. Rokita. I mean is there a mechanism--I have to get
moving, because I only have 2 minutes left----
Mr. Nober. OK.
Mr. Rokita. Is there a mechanism where you can produce an
alternate method of compliance, similar to what we might do in
aviation, and say, ``Look, we are going to do this, because we
invested in all these sensors, so we are going to get rid of
the intermediate inspections, visual inspections, throughout
the day''?
Mr. Nober. FRA has a waiver process, where we can go in and
say, ``Can you waive this requirement in this instance?''
And we have worked with the FRA, and been able to do that.
We think the waiver process is slow.
Mr. Rokita. Yes. How much does it cost to do a waiver
process?
Mr. Nober. It can depend. Sometimes they can ask for a lot
of data, sometimes they can ask for relatively little. It is
the time. It can take 9 months or more to get a waiver done.
Mr. Rokita. All right, OK, thank you. Regarding non-
Administrative Procedure Act guidance and Executive orders,
such as informal actions by a regulator, what are your concerns
with that?
Mr. Nober. Well, first of all, if there is a formal
rulemaking, where there is notice and comment--and the ranking
member referred to that earlier--you can have a chance to put
information in, you can refute the assumptions of the industry,
you can put more information in that can then be used to
evaluate and ultimately challenge.
If you have a guidance or an emergency order or a safety
advisory, those are ones where the agency may consult the
industry on it, or they may not. And, as a practical matter,
for a company like BNSF, those are binding, because we--if we
ever have an incident where the Federal Government has said,
``Well, we think the proper inspection requirement, or the
proper''----
Mr. Rokita. So we are in an environment now, like in many
agencies, where guidance, although it is supposed to have no
legal effect, actually has legal effect.
Mr. Nober. Yes, and----
Mr. Rokita. It has procedural effect.
Mr. Nober. It has procedural, and because of tort
liability----
Mr. Rokita. Yes.
Mr. Nober [continuing]. If we go against the Government----
Mr. Rokita. Do you have ideas to bifurcate that back to the
way it was originally intended?
Mr. Nober. Oh, absolutely, we----
Mr. Rokita. OK. Could you give them to me, privately?
Mr. Nober. Absolutely.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you. And I have 5 seconds left for Mr.
Rankin.
Mr. Rankin, when talking about making sure that PHMSA is
properly regulating the transport of hazardous materials, what
do you define as hazardous materials? Is it only products
categorized as regulated by the U.N., or what about group 3,
group 2, group 1?
Mr. Rankin. Forty-nine CFR provides the guidance here. The
United Nations is a model regulation. So, while they are
effectively exactly the same, because the United States tends
to adopt the U.N. model regulations into our own to ensure that
international transport is unimpeded, we look to 49 CFR, and
that can include classifications, and those classifications
include packing groups 1, 2, and 3, for example.
So, not every hazardous material is listed. For example,
acetone may be named, but if another type of material meets a
criteria--flammability--it would be classed--class 9 in this
case. So it is a very broad area, and each new material that
comes on to the market has to be properly classified before it
can be put into----
Mr. Rokita. Is this good or bad?
Mr. Rankin. This is very good.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Rokita.
Mr. Lipinski?
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The State of
Illinois has 36 short line railroads, 2,600 miles of short line
track, and it is 37 percent of the entire rail network in the
State of Illinois. So many on this subcommittee from both sides
of the aisle are cosponsors of a bill to make section 45(g),
the Short Line Railroad Tax Credit, permanent. In fact, there
are 158 cosponsors on the bill the last time that I checked.
The bill incentivizes additional investment in the critical
short line freight railroad infrastructure. And so I wanted to
ask Ms. Darr the impact that the short line tax credit has on
railroad safety.
Ms. Darr. Thank you very much, Congressman Lipinski, and I
want to just say that I know the--your constituents in Illinois
appreciate your support of the small freight railroads in your
State back home.
And 45(g) is enormously critical to short line railroads
and, in particular, the safety of short line railroads. I think
you know that the number-one cause of derailments in the
railroad industry is broken track. And so, 45(g) allows for the
rehabilitation of abandoned track that has been, you know, not
maintained or poorly maintained, so we are able to bring that
up to standard through 45(g).
The first time that 45(g) was put into effect was 2005. It
was passed in 2004, but in 2005 it started to pay back to the
railroad industry and allow us to invest. And since then we
have seen $4 billion worth of investment in rehabbing track. So
that is, you know, 12 or 13 years, roughly. So it has certainly
had a major impact. This year I believe we are up to 158
cosponsors in the House in an effort to try to make 45(g)
permanent, and we are very hopeful that, through support of the
BRACE Act [Building Rail Access for Customers and the Economy
Act], this year we will be able to do that.
Mr. Lipinski. Hopefully we will get that done this year.
Mr. Nober, I wanted to talk about the eManifest. I
introduced a bill last Congress directing DOT to complete a
MAP-21 mandate to develop voluntary standards for the use of
electronic shipping papers, which we commonly call eManifest.
The goal is to provide real-time information on the content of
railcars in the event of an accident to better inform first
responders, because--much easier to get that electronically
than to have to go and get the paper manifest out of the
locomotive.
The AskRail app, I was on hand in June of 2015 for the
launch of that at the BNSF facility in my district.
I wanted to ask about the--first of all, how far along BNSF
is and what you know about other railroads, in terms of having
an eManifest available for first responders. And second, do you
think that this should negate the requirement for hard copies
of an eManifest to be carried in the locomotive, or will it
still be necessary to have that hard copy, if this is fully
implemented?
Mr. Nober. Well, Congressman, again, we thank you for your
help and leadership in that area. But, as you mentioned, BNSF
did roll out our app for first responders. And it is available
to first responders and State fusion centers. So we believe it
is widely available now for our manifests, where it is needed.
I think the AAR has an app, as well. And I believe the
other railroads all have them, although I can't swear to that.
I know of some of them, but we can make sure we nail that down.
But I believe all of the major class I railroads have an app.
Certainly the four largest do.
In terms of electronic delivery of documents, we think that
is an area where there is a lot of room for further changing
some of the regulatory--Ms. Darr was pointing to a manual. We
think having manuals be made electronic, electronic--mandatory
directives coming in electronically, all of that could be more
accurate and more timely in an electronic manner than it will
be through requiring paper records.
So we think that that is an area, looking forward toward
modernization and adopting technological solutions, that entire
area of tracking and documents and manifests that are now paper
have a lot of opportunity to be made electronic, and we would
like to see this further go in that direction.
Mr. Lipinski. Well, I think we should continue to work
towards greater safety in the use of the electronic
availability of this type of information. So, Mr. Chairman, I
think it is something good for this subcommittee to work on,
going forward.
And, with that, I will yield back.
Mr. Faso [presiding]. Thank you. Mr. Lewis?
Mr. Lewis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to go back a
little bit over these special permits on Federal hazardous
materials transportation right now. And I will start my
questions with Mr. Nober, and then anybody else can answer, as
well.
But as you know, the DOT can issue these variances, these
special permits for hazardous materials regulations and the
like, and--if this is consistent with the public interest. You
have to keep applying before it is codified into law or
regulation. So I am just wondering that, while not all of these
individual special permits for new technology and the like are
appropriate for incorporating into a regulation, we are
starting to get some duplication here and some added expense.
As I recall--and it was before I got here, but the MAP Act,
MAP-21, directed PHMSA to review these special permits and
determine which ones could be actually converted into a
regulation, so you wouldn't have to keep applying every time
there is a new technology that had already applied for a
special permit in the past.
So, you know, would this help? Would the special permits or
waivers, by making them permanent in regulation--obviously,
would it streamline things, lower the cost? But would it also
make certain that we had a consistent safety scheme, with
regard to the transportation of hazardous materials?
Mr. Nober. Well, Congressman, I would say, in general, we
are for making individual waivers that have proven their worth
on a temporary basis to be made permanent.
Now, on shipping hazardous materials on the railroad,
packaging is really in the hands of our customers, so I
probably will defer to the representatives of our customers who
are here. And then, obviously, we have, for certain kinds of
hazardous materials, key trains and for carrying TIH and PIH,
various operational requirements. And so we will have
requirements for, say, things like tank cars.
But I think the waivers you are referring to, I believe,
are about packaging for individual matters, as opposed to the
transportation routing. So I will defer to my colleagues.
Mr. Lewis. Yes, go ahead.
Mr. Rankin. Thank you for the question. The--I believe you
are referring to a reference in MAP-21, when Congress directed
PHMSA to conduct a general review of existing special permits
that had been in effect for 10 years or longer, which they did.
In fact, PHMSA issued a rulemaking incorporating some of them,
I think about----
Mr. Lewis. About 100 of them.
Mr. Rankin. About 100, correct, into the hazardous
materials regulations. But the review was only done once. And
what we have suggested in our testimony is that this process
becomes a regular annual activity. It is our view that special
permits can live for--not forever, but certainly for a long,
long time, and they are constantly reviewed and renewed every,
well, 2 and then 4 years afterwards, generally.
We would suggest that after about 6 years of implementation
for special permits, that PHMSA mandatorily take a look at
these for incorporation into the hazardous materials
regulations. If they would do that on an annualized basis, it
would reduce the amount of work they have to do in the renewal
process, and, secondly, we think it is much more efficient and
realistic. And it certainly does not negatively affect safety.
It is quite positive, in fact, in its impact on safety.
Mr. Lewis. In fact, there was--yes, I think they found 96
could actually be adopted, but over 1,000 could not be adopted.
So no one is suggesting that, if you have got a new technology
that hasn't been reviewed, that you can let an extant
regulation handle that. So there would still be a role for
special permits.
Mr. Rankin. There still will always be a role for special
permits, just because new technologies emerge all the time, new
packagings emerge all the time. If the special permit is still
in existence, the agency has, de facto, made a representation
that the activity is a safe practice.
We are just suggesting that it be reviewed and, hopefully,
more of them incorporated----
Mr. Lewis. And we are talking about special permits that
are applied to the same technologies in general, over and over
again.
Mr. Rankin. That is correct, yes. To the same process
technology packaging. But in this case, let's just say
packaging. If you are reviewing a packaging or new technology
every 4 years, at some point you should put that into the
hazardous material regulation. That is the----
Mr. Lewis. Quickly, anyone else?
[No response.]
Mr. Lewis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Faso. Mr. Smucker? Oh, I am sorry, Mr. Payne?
Mr. Payne. Thank you. I really think that Mr. Capuano
really captured the sentiments of a lot of us.
And I would just like to ask, Mr. Tolman, in your testimony
you highlighted just a few of the rail accidents that have
happened over the last decade. We all know that the rail
industry is very safe. And I see this as a good result of good
balance struck between the railroads, labor, and Government.
In the last few years there have been several fatigue-
related accidents on commuter rail lines in the New York-New
Jersey region. Can you speak more about the Government's role
in protecting train engineers and rail riders?
Mr. Tolman. Sure, thank you. You know, in those two
accidents, both individuals were diagnosed with sleep apnea.
In the railroad industry, when you first start up, you
know, you are 18, 20 years old. You are an astronaut, you are
in the best shape of your life.
Mr. Payne. Right.
Mr. Tolman. And the railroad industry is extremely
difficult and enduring regimen. You go to work 24/7, you are on
call 24/7, except in passenger service. But that is where you
start out. You typically would start out in the freight
industry, which you are on call. You have no idea when you are
going to get--go to work next.
So, therefore, then you get called in the middle of the
night. You haven't--and what are you going to eat? Where do you
eat? What do you do?
There are so many little issues that you deal with, whether
it is whole body vibration because of excessive lateral motion
or horizontal motion, you go--your body goes through major
changes. And you know, unfortunately, the--as you come in an
astronaut, now they want a person that is there 10, 15, 20
years, they want him to still be that astronaut, and that is
impossible, with the schedule you keep, the distance you are
traveling.
I mean, my God, when I mentioned the super pools, can you
imagine trying to have the knowledge of 1,500 miles? That is
every physical characteristic along the right-of-way. When
there is fog or a snow storm in front of you, it is extremely--
it is so imperative to know exactly where you are at every
single moment, so that no incident or accident happens.
Listen, we are professionals in the industry. We are the
best professionals in the industry, across the board. From the
signal maintainers to the maintenance of way workers, we are
doing our best under extreme conditions. And you can't always
be that astronaut. We are heartbroken that any type of incident
ever happens in our career. And I will tell you. Every time we
hear an incident, our heart aches, because you--something
happened there. And what happened, God only knows, and we
usually find out later.
I don't know if I answered your question.
Mr. Payne. No, that was----
Mr. Tolman. There is a lot----
Mr. Payne. Absolutely.
Mr. Tolman. There is a lot to it.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Mr. Tolman. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Payne. Let's see, Ms. Darr and Mr. Nober, the
railroads, you know, are much safer than they were 40 years
ago. The data proves that. No doubt this is due, in part, to
the deregulation of the industry. But tragic accidents over the
years have prompted Congress and the FRA to reassess industry
practices.
While I am receptive to the arguments that regulations can
sometimes be burdensome, I also know that regulations have
saved lives. Despite what you might consider the present
burdensome regulatory environment, many railroads, including
BNSF, are as prosperous as they have ever been in decades. The
railroads are prosperous, the railroads are safe. Why should we
rock the boat?
Ms. Darr. Thank you, Congressman. I would just say,
``Exactly.''
Mr. Nober. Well, Congressman, I would probably give a
little longer answer, so if you will forgive that, and that is
that, over time, we have been prosperous. And, as you have
seen, our safety record has never been better. But, as we look
to the future, it is important that we remain prosperous and we
remain competitive with the other modes. And in order to remain
prosperous and remain competitive, to be able to invest in our
systems, invest in technology, and to grow, we need to be
efficient, and we need to adopt the best available
technologies, and we need to have regulation evolve with
technology.
You see it in the trucking industry, where you can't read
any media without seeing about the idea of autonomous cars and
autonomous trucks. And at BNSF we are not talking about
autonomous trains, but we are talking about some flexibility to
look at automating particular manual safety functions, that has
both the safety benefit and an efficiency benefit. And so that
will free up the existing people we have to be finders, and
from finders to fixers, and let the automated technologies that
are better at finding continue to find. So it is certainly a
balance.
And I just would like to mention one thing. Mr. Tolman was
referring to super pools, which is, obviously, about BNSF. We
are the railroad that has implemented those. And you know, I
would say that we think, sort of bringing this all together,
that technology is helping--we agree that fatigue is a problem.
And technology is helping these jobs improve to let these folks
do a better job, and to reduce fatigue.
And we may have to agree to disagree with Mr. Tolman about
the impact of some of these things but, you know, we believe
that all these implications are making things safer and
enabling rest.
Mr. Payne. And----
Mr. Nober. But again, I mean, I have the greatest respect
for my colleague, and you know, we may have a difference of
opinion on that.
Mr. Payne. Thank you. And, Ms. Darr, I didn't--your answer
was so quick, I didn't catch it. What was it?
Ms. Darr. I said exactly, and that was to agree with you.
And it is also to demonstrate that short lines are also often
short-worded.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Payne. Very clever. Thank you.
Mr. Faso. Mr. Babin, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Babin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. Wow,
sorry. I would like to direct a couple of questions to Mr.
Santa and Mr. Rorick.
Can you briefly discuss the consequences of delayed
rulemakings on the regulated community and your members? And
what are the costs and inefficiencies produced by delay?
Mr. Santa?
Mr. Santa. Yes, Mr. Babin. Thank you for the question.
INGAA and its members are committed to a voluntary program
of improving pipeline safety after the San Bruno tragedy. And a
lot of those commitments parallel what is being addressed by
PHMSA in the proposed rule. And while we are committed to that,
I think there is apprehension on the part of some of our member
companies to make the investment and incur the cost to do, for
example, certain types of pipeline testing, where there is the
risk that, when PHMSA comes back with its rule, it says,
``Well, that is not quite up to the standard of the new rule.
Therefore, you need to do it over.''
And this is more than just cost. It is disruption of
service, it is the risk of perhaps not recovering those costs
in the rates of the pipeline. So I think that that is one of
the inefficiencies and costs that results from this delay.
Dr. Babin. Thank you.
Mr. Rorick?
Mr. Rorick. I think Mr. Santa captured it well. One of the
things that our industry depends on--and a lot of industries
depend on--is just consistency. And when--as I indicated in my
testimony, these companies plan out 10, 20 years in advance
multibillion-dollar projects. The expectation is that when they
are investing in these projects, they are going to know what
they need to do when they actually build the projects, that may
take multiple years.
So, contrary to what many people may think, we are not an
industry that is opposed to regulation. And, in fact, we
support it, as Mr. Santa and I both attested. We supported the
development of the liquid pipeline safety rule and the natural
gas pipeline safety rule. We did that because we need that
consistency. That delay creates uncertainty, and it makes it
difficult to move forward with investments.
Dr. Babin. Yes. OK, thank you. And then one more, if I
could direct it to you same two gentlemen, can you please
discuss the benefits from robust stakeholder engagement at the
outset of a rulemaking? What stakeholder and Government
collaboration, if any, precedes commencement of a rulemaking,
and does industry and other stakeholders expend any effort
developing a consensus on safety standards before the
commencement of a rulemaking?
Mr. Santa. I think there are two good examples where
collaboration has paid big benefits. One of them is, as I noted
earlier, in the lead-up to the integrity management rule that
was adopted by PHMSA in 2004 there was pretty extensive
stakeholder engagement, both through the Gas Pipeline Advisory
Committee and through other means. And I think that resulted in
a very, very good rule.
The other one is, even though we have been critical of
PHMSA and their process on the underground gas storage interim
final rule, in fact I think that is a success story. Because
what is happening there is that rule is predicated on the two
recommended practices that were adopted in the API standards
development process.
Those came out of--on behalf of INGAA, those pipeline
safety commitments, voluntary commitments we made that, years
before the rule came up, we were working through that standards
development process. That has involved regulators, it has
involved academia, other interested parties. Very transparent.
And I think that provided the platform for PHMSA to move quite
quickly to proposing a rule in an area where, quite frankly, it
had no regulation prior to that.
Dr. Babin. OK, thank you. And Mr. Rorick?
Mr. Rorick. And maybe just to add a little bit onto the
standard-setting process, as a standard-setting organization we
are accredited by ANSI, which means that there are strict
guidelines that we have to follow. As part of that, as Mr.
Santa indicated, it is an open process.
So, if you are an expert in the field, whether from
academia, the public, Government, industry, you are allowed to
participate in the development of that standard. And that
collaboration is crucial because what you are doing is you are
taking the experts in the field and developing something,
oftentimes in advance of the regulation because we don't want
to wait for the regulation to develop.
Mr. Santa talked about the two recommended practices for
underground storage. We recently developed another one on
developing pipeline safety management systems. And this is a
standard that companies can use to make sure that, in all of
their practices that they are implementing, whether it is for
emergency response or underground storage or whatever, that
there is a system where you are constantly reviewing what you
are doing, to make sure you can improve it. And it is an ever-
growing process.
It is a similar system that is used by the nuclear
industry, by the airline industry, as well. PHMSA was an
integral part, as well as NTSB, in the creation of that
standard, and we have got a very good product moving forward
that we both--both regulator and industry--can agree upon.
Dr. Babin. OK, and I think my time has expired. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Faso. Thank you.
Mr. DeSaulnier?
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to make my
comments as somebody who represents an area in northern
California that, measured by per capita or geography, has the
highest areas of hazardous materials. We have five refineries
in--between the county I represent and the neighboring one
across the water in Suisun Bay. And, having been on regulatory
boards at the local, regional, and State level, I think one of
the things I get from this meeting is both an opportunity to
celebrate the progress we have made, but also a cautionary tale
that we get--continue to get it right.
So, first, Mr. Tolman, you mentioned human factors. And in
so many industries the importance of human factors in safeties
of culture--as I have experienced it in chemical refining
plants, hospitals--we are learning so much more. I know in the
national laboratories in northern California, they do a lot of
studying on human factors in different fields. And one of the
key things is making sure that the rank and file people have
some input.
So could you talk about that input? And maybe, Mr. Nober,
you could follow up. Particularly when it comes to new
technologies. So we want to acknowledge that new technology can
make it safer, but we also want to work when it comes to human
factors, and not just drive costs down with an excuse that it
is going to make it safer, but actually have a full
understanding that it is going to make it safer, and it
benefits the workers, as well.
Mr. Tolman. Yes. First of all, Mr. Nober had mentioned that
there is technology out there that allows the carriers now to
address fatigue in the industry. Well, it really doesn't
address fatigue. There is no technology that addresses fatigue.
Knowing when a person comes and goes to work is how you address
fatigue. It is a commonsense issue.
You know, and the railroad industry moves more and more
hazardous material throughout our Nation. And we usually don't
get a regulation until they start moving a serious thing, or
serious accident happens. And you know, in the near future--and
currently there is some nuclear waste moving across the United
States. And at the present time there is no regulation that
protects the employees from any nuclear waste. And there is a
very simple device, I think we are all familiar with it, it is
a device that would measure any nuclear waste. I mean that is
the common sense that we need to have in the industry if we are
going to start moving these things.
You know, the emergency escape breathing apparatus, I mean,
that is another practical safety issue. I mean, sure, we didn't
have an accident in 10 years, but, you know, God forbid that
that happened, you know, at 2 o'clock in the afternoon, instead
of 2 o'clock in the morning. But never mind. I mean you can't
forget the nine people that were in that factory. That
destroyed that factory, it destroyed their lives.
I mean you constantly--technology is great, but it doesn't
ever replace human interface, period.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you. I am going to let you respond,
Mr. Nober, but I want to make another point and you can respond
to this, as well, because my time is limited. And then Mr.
Rorick and Mr. Rankin.
So, short-term versus long-term investment and prescriptive
versus performance-based. Eighteen years ago, in my local
Government, when I was a county supervisor, we had two
explosions, killed five of my constituents. A competing
refinery lobbyist called me and said, ``We do all long-term
investment. Our competitors do not. They are getting a higher
return after-tax profit in publicly traded companies. If you,
as a regulator, don't bring them up to a higher standard, then
we are going to have to come down to theirs.''
That second incident was the largest in the history of the
State, and resulted in a very large private right of action.
So, when we did a full facility audit, what came back was
the auditor said it was the corporate culture that led to these
deaths. So the struggle between long-term investment, short-
term investment being successful in the marketplace, but also
doing what is clearly the best thing in long-term investment--
so that is my question, particularly Mr. Rorick and Mr. Nober.
And if you could follow up----
Mr. Nober. I would. First, I would just like to clarify
that, and maybe I misspoke earlier--that we think that
technology can help reduce exposure for employees and improve
safety. And obviously, things like the long pool that we
think--and perhaps disagree with Mr. Tolman--that can reduce
fatigue. But fatigue is hard, because there are minimum
requirements. But what people do in their off time, it is not
something that we can control. And so it is something that has
to happen holistically.
Now, you asked about how we bring a culture of safety. At
BNSF--because, obviously, the human and human exposure and
human choices are the single most important thing to us. And we
have a philosophy and a program called Approaching Others. And
what we do is we train everybody in our railroad, from the CEO
on down, on how to ensure and feel enabled to approach others
if you see somebody take an unsafe act, or bring themselves or
put themselves in a situation where they are exposed to danger,
to feel that you are empowered to go and talk to them and say,
``Hey, you know, there is a safer way to do that.''
And, you know, we really are proud of our Approaching
Others--it has been going on for years--ensuring that people
don't put themselves in harm's way is job one of improving
safety. And technology can help reduce exposure by not having
people put themselves in compromising positions.
And I will just say that, over time, in terms of your
investment question, you know, we are a believer that a safe
operation is the best and the most efficient and the most
profitable operation. And so, our long-term improvements in
safety are where we go--I can't imagine our company ever
saying, ``Hey, if you don't reduce safety standards or bring
them up, we are going to have to reduce ours.'' We are about
keeping our network, which is our business, operating
efficiently and safely, and getting our people home safely
every night. And I think Mr. Tolman and I agree on that.
Mr. Tolman. Congressman, if I may, just to--and I don't
mean to go back and forth, but I just want to comment on the--
of course you--we can't control people's off time. But the
railroad industry can control scheduled work, calling times,
mandatory attendance policies. Those are the things you can
control. Window-calling times, et cetera.
I mean there are a lot of things, and these are the things
that the rail labor and management should be sitting down,
working together, and not pretending that fatigue doesn't exist
in the industry. There are some--BNSF has had some great pilot
programs, but we are beyond pilot programs. Enough pilot
programs. We know by now that certain things address--can
address fatigue in the industry. Let's get them working. Let's
focus on them. These--this is what safety is about.
Mr. Faso. The gentleman's time is expired. If you have--Mr.
Rorick, if you have additional comment to add, please do and we
will add it to the record.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania?
Mr. Smucker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to follow up, Mr. Nober, to respond to prior
questions in regards to the competitiveness of the rail
industry compared to other modes. And I think you are correct
that we will see changes in other modes that may--has potential
to change that equation. And so new technology that will enable
you to drive out efficiencies and have a more efficient
operation, I think, will be important, going forward. At the
same time, it appears those technologies can actually increase
the safety.
So I just wanted to go back to your written testimony,
where you note that BNSF intends to leverage PTC to develop the
next generation of train operation. It is known as moving
block. And so I would like to just hear a little more about
that. Can you just give us some sense of how much moving block
would have potential to increase your capacity in your company?
Mr. Nober. Well, I will first do my best to explain it. And
hopefully that--and then there is a lot of debate about how
much of a capacity improvement.
But right now our line of road, if you will, our capacity,
is constrained by many factors, but one of which is how far
apart trains have to be to operate safely. And, as you know, we
have blocks. They kind of segment the track into 4-mile
segments, and only one train can be in a 4-mile segment at a
time.
PTC, the opportunity we see with PTC, is that it will have
a GPS, real-time knowledge of every train on the system, where
it is at all times. And it is not just knowing where the trains
are, but the key is we have an infinite number of combinations
of trains. Some are longer, some are loads, some are empties.
And the weight of a train, the mass, the speed, the terrain all
affect how long it takes to stop.
And PTC is a system that has to learn that, right? That is
the complexity of it. You have to know if it is a loaded,
8,000-foot coal train versus an empty set of intermodal going
back and you are going up the Rocky Mountains versus, you know,
in the Mississippi River Valley. What does it take to stop
them? PTC solves that, technologically.
And so, what that will allow us to do is, by a moving
block, have a real-time ability to know how close together two
trains can be to be able to stop and operate safely. And that
will allow us to be more efficient on our existing tracks. And
what we need is for help from the regulators to help us begin
to--what we call next generation PTC, to be able to leverage
that technology to be more efficient in the long run.
And, you know, we think that is a great opportunity. It is
not going to be easy. It is going to take some time. But that
is the benefit of PTC technology down the road.
Mr. Smucker. So can you expand on that? You say you will
need help from Congress, as the regulators. What can we do to
remove any disincentives that are in place to allow you to
bring this new equipment into service?
Mr. Nober. Well, I would say, at the beginning it is going
to be--you know, the FRA can be slow, in terms of looking at
new technology. A few years back we started experimenting with
LNG locomotives, and just wanting to look to develop that. And
it was, admittedly, a slow process.
Now, times and market changes have really kind of altered
the equation on that some, but it was a new, promising
technology that we wanted to look at. And being able to see
some benefits to that, to be able to compensate for the amount
of capital cost we would have to do when it would be an
improvement, that was something that probably would have taken
some nudging of the FRA.
And for moving block, that would be a change in the way the
regulators look at the traditional notions of safety, and their
mindset would have to be willing to look at--through the waiver
process and through a cooperative technological advancement
process, to be able to let us experiment and test new
technology, and be able to move faster and encourage the
development of that.
Mr. Smucker. And do you believe that this is industrywide?
So, for instance, have other railroads like CSX--are they
looking to adopt this technology, as well?
Mr. Nober. I don't know that the other railroads--again, it
would depend a little bit on their geography and their system
and the types of traffic that they have. So I don't know if
other railroads would see the opportunity in moving block that
we necessarily would.
Mr. Smucker. All right, thank you.
Mr. Nober. But I don't know that they wouldn't.
Mr. Smucker. All right, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Faso. The gentleman from Texas.
Mr. Weber. They saved the best for last. Mr. Rorick, does
PHMSA ever come out on pipeline construction, not just in the
permitting or in the--I guess the permitting phase. Do they
come out and actually witness a pipeline going in?
Mr. Rorick. They are--they will come out periodically and
check as the construction is taking place, to ensure that they
are meeting the plans. When a pipeline is permitted, the plans
have to be submitted to PHMSA. PHMSA then can give feedback to
the pipeline operator with any suggested changes. They will
work that out between the operator and PHMSA.
And then, during the construction process, PHMSA can, in
fact, come out, check the facility, and then, certainly during
operations, they will come out and inspect the facility, as
well.
Mr. Weber. If there is an accident, a spill of some kind,
do they come out? Do the same people come out and see what
happened after the fact?
Mr. Rorick. They--well, there is--the--PHMSA will then
investigate the release, and then take that information back,
and then compare that to----
Mr. Weber. But is it the same people? Do you get the sense
that, you know, they are really paying attention, and they are
wanting to be involved, start to finish?
Mr. Rorick. I can't speak as to whether it is the same
people, but they definitely are paying attention, because they
share the same objective we do, which is to reduce the spill.
So----
Mr. Weber. OK. Same way for the Federal Railroad
Administration.
I guess, Ms. Darr, I will start with you. I understand that
you all have a facility that tests locomotives and accidents
and stuff like that. Is--do I remember that correctly? Or
somebody does. It may have been Mr. Nober.
Mr. Nober. Yes, we have--it is called the TTCI, and it is a
research center that is in Pueblo, Colorado, that is a
cooperative railroad-FRA facility where we have test tracks,
and we test all sorts of things there.
Mr. Weber. So they get to witness the accident before and
after, and see how the regulations may or may not have affected
or played a part?
Mr. Nober. We are able to conduct real-time research, and
even do crashes, test crashes.
Mr. Weber. OK. Do they ever get involved in going to some
of the factories for locomotive design, or do they just simply
see all this after the fact?
Mr. Nober. I don't know if the FRA is involved in
locomotive design.
Mr. Weber. OK. So once they have seen an accident, and seen
a locomotive come apart, so to speak, I am just curious if they
try to follow that through on the front end.
There are manufacturing facilities that build cars----
Mr. Nober. They do.
Mr. Weber. They do?
Mr. Nober. They do----
Mr. Weber. I am glad to know that there is--Trinity
Industries in Texas, Navasota, Texas, that manufactures tank
cars, for example.
Mr. Nober. Right. And GE and Caterpillar manufacture
locomotives.
Mr. Weber. I had a meeting with them just the other day.
Does the FRA regulators--do they ever go to the manufacturing
facilities and watch when a car is being built, and see what
the regulations do to that process?
Mr. Nober. Absolutely.
Mr. Weber. You are getting the nod from the learned few
behind you.
Mr. Nober. Yes, I am. Actually, I am cooperating with them.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Weber. When you talk about these emergency escape
breathing apparatuses, I am not familiar with that accident
that occurred with the chlorine. I am very familiar with what
chlorine does. Was the emergency breathing apparatuses--was
that just for the engineers? What was the subject there? Or was
it to have more available for people off the track?
Mr. Nober. No, it was to have it in the cab of locomotives.
Mr. Weber. Have it in the cab of locomotives.
Mr. Tolman. Mr. Congressman, if I can mention----
Mr. Weber. Sure.
Mr. Tolman [continuing]. A little bit about that, in the
Rail Safety Improvement Act passed in 2008, that was a mandate
in the act. Today we have a guideline. We don't have--they
haven't acted on the law just yet.
Mr. Weber. OK.
Mr. Tolman. And it has happened. There isn't any emergency
escape breathing apparatus, although BNSF does it in some of
the tunnels. But however, it is not regulated or mandated in
any way, shape, or form.
Mr. Weber. I got you. So you could also say that about
other hazardous chemicals that you--the trains carry, whether
it is oil or gasoline or ammonia or anhydrous ammonia. The
trains carry a lot of hazardous materials. Is that accurate?
Mr. Nober. Correct. Overall, it is a small--I mean there
are different categories of it. There is what you are referring
to, anhydrous and chlorine are what we call poisonous, or toxic
by inhalation.
Mr. Weber. Yes.
Mr. Nober. And so that is for BNSF, a very small percentage
of what we carry. But things that are classified as hazardous
is larger.
Mr. Weber. Yes. Trains aren't--carriers aren't mandated to
carry fire-fighting equipment. You would have a different foam
to fight an oil or a gasoline or a diesel, or some kind of
chemical, right?
Mr. Nober. We preposition fire-fighting equipment
throughout our system to be able to move it when we have an
incident.
Mr. Weber. Is that true about all the rail lines?
Mr. Nober. I don't know if every class I railroad does
that, but I believe they all do, to some extent. But we do,
particularly in our crude network and our key train network.
Mr. Weber. OK. Well, that is very interesting. Good to
know. Thank you. I am going to yield back, because the hour is
late.
Mr. Faso. Are there further questions from any members of
the committee?
Seeing none, I would like to thank each of the witnesses
for your testimony today. Your contribution to today's
discussion has been very informative and helpful.
I ask unanimous consent that the record of today's hearing
remain open until such time as our witnesses have provided
answers to any questions that may have been submitted to them
in writing, and unanimous consent that the record remain open
for 15 days for additional comments and information submitted
by members or witnesses to be included in the record of today's
hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
If no other members have anything to add, the committee
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
