- BUILDING A 21ST-CENTURY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR AMERICA: CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INTERCITY PASSENGER RAIL SERVICE

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUILDING A 21ST-CENTURY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR AMERICA: CHALLENGES AND
OPPORTUNITIES FOR INTERCITY PASSENGER RAIL SERVICE

=======================================================================

(115-19)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RAILROADS, PIPELINES,
AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 22, 2017

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-937 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
Vice Chair                         Columbia
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        JERROLD NADLER, New York
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  RICK LARSEN, Washington
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
JEFF DENHAM, California              ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            Georgia
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
JOHN KATKO, New York                 ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut,
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   Vice Ranking Member
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana             LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia           CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         JARED HUFFMAN, California
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  JULIA BROWNLEY, California
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
DOUG LaMALFA, California             DONALD M. PAYNE, Jr., New Jersey
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas            ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
PAUL MITCHELL, Michigan              MARK DeSAULNIER, California
JOHN J. FASO, New York
A. DREW FERGUSON IV, Georgia
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
JASON LEWIS, Minnesota

(ii)

Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous Materials

JEFF DENHAM, California, Chairman

JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 DONALD M. PAYNE, Jr., New Jersey
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           JERROLD NADLER, New York
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JOHN GARAMENDI, California
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
JOHN KATKO, New York                 ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas            MARK DeSAULNIER, California
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
PAUL MITCHELL, Michigan              PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon (Ex
JOHN J. FASO, New York, Vice Chair   Officio)
JASON LEWIS, Minnesota
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    vi

WITNESSES

Paul Nissenbaum, Associate Administrator, Office of Railroad
Policy and Development, Federal Railroad Administration:

Testimony....................................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................    60
Responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Jeff Denham of California...........................    73
Hon. Michael E. Capuano of Massachusetts.................    76
Supplementary information to hearing remarks.................    80
Charles W. ``Wick'' Moorman IV, President and Chief Executive
Officer, Amtrak:

Testimony....................................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................    88
Responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Jeff Denham of California...........................    97
Hon. Michael E. Capuano of Massachusetts.................   101
John D. Porcari, Interim Executive Director, Gateway Program
Development Corporation:

Testimony....................................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................   105
P. Michael Reininger, Executive Director, Florida East Coast
Industries, LLC:

Testimony....................................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................   110
Responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Jeff Denham of California...........................   120
Hon. Michael E. Capuano of Massachusetts.................   121
Dan Richard, Chairman of the Board, California High-Speed Rail
Authority:

Testimony....................................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................   124
Responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Jeff Denham of California...........................   136
Hon. Michael E. Capuano of Massachusetts.................   139
Supplementary information to hearing remarks.................   141

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Hon. Eddie Bernice Johnson of Texas..............................     3

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Letter from constituent submitted by Hon. Elizabeth H. Esty of
Connecticut....................................................    29
Testimony of Keli'i Akina, Ph.D., President/CEO, The Grassroot
Institute of Hawaii............................................   148

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

BUILDING A 21ST-CENTURY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR AMERICA: CHALLENGES AND
OPPORTUNITIES FOR INTERCITY PASSENGER RAIL SERVICE

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 22, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous
Materials,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m. in
room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Denham
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Denham. The committee will come to order. Before we--
can we turn this down, just a little bit?
Before we begin, I would ask unanimous consent that
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee members not on the
subcommittee be permitted to sit with the subcommittee at
today's hearing and ask questions.
Without objection, so ordered.
Good morning and welcome to today's hearing to consider the
challenges and opportunities for intercity passenger rail
service.
At the outset, I want to thank Mr. Capuano. He and I have
worked very closely on Amtrak for reauthorization for the last
5 years, as well as the FAST Act. We have continued to push
reforms that help us to unleash capital across the country and
establish a good state of repair with Amtrak and other areas
along the program.
I am also pleased to see the progress that has been made on
the implementation of PRIIA, the Passenger Rail Investment and
Improvement Act of 2008. A consistent methodology to allocate
operating and capital costs associated with Amtrak corridor
services has been implemented, and a methodology to allocate
costs among all the users of the Northeast Corridor is in the
process of being implemented. As a result of these changes,
this year Amtrak will receive $286.6 million from 18 States and
approximately $119 million from commuter authorities.
But in one respect our approach to intercity passenger rail
service has been scattershot. Over $10 billion was appropriated
by the ARRA, American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, during the
fiscal year of 2010 to fund conventional and high-speed
passenger rail projects.
But rather than investing these funds strategically to
achieve specific outcomes, the previous administration
distributed the funds widely, making about 150 grants to 34
States, the District of Columbia, and Amtrak. The result is
the--most of the improvement made across the country has been
incremental, at best. And further, about $1 billion of the $8
billion in ARRA funds has not been spent and will be turned
back to the Treasury in September.
Particularly concerning to me is that nearly $4 billion of
the funding was dedicated to California high-speed rail, which
has seen skyrocketing costs at the same time the scope of the
project has diminished.
What was sold to the voters as a $33 billion project that
would connect all of California's major cities by 2020 is now a
$64 billion project without connections to Sacramento and San
Diego, with an optimistic completion date of 2029, and blended
service over commuter rail at both ends of the line. The
Initial Operating Section alone, extending from San Jose to a
north point somewhere north of Bakersfield, will cost over $20
billion.
Other members of the subcommittee may also have concerns
about the projects selected to receive ARRA funding. Given the
limited Federal dollars available for intercity passenger rail
projects, it is imperative that projects be better prioritized
to accomplish specific national goals.
This hearing is also about understanding new technologies
that will transform our passenger rail network. As an example,
a number of members of this committee have experienced high-
speed trains in Europe and Asia and alternative technologies
such as maglev.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today
and look forward to a lively discussion.
Mr. Denham. I now recognize the ranking member, Mr.
Capuano, for his opening statement.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As usual, I will be
brief.
I want to thank the panel for being here, I look forward to
your testimony. As always, we learn from the things we do right
and the things we do wrong. And I am looking forward to having
a lively and thoughtful and informative discussion today.
And, with that, Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to
include the gentlewoman from Texas--Ms. Johnson's written
statement in the hearing record.
Mr. Denham. Without objection.

[Ms. Johnson of Texas's prepared statement follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Denham. Mr. DeFazio?
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for this
hearing today. It is yet another in a series of building a
21st-century infrastructure for America. But unfortunately,
thus far we are making no progress. In fact, the President has
proposed to take us backwards.
They had a much-touted infrastructure week 2 weeks ago,
which came out with a mish-mash of devolution privatization
proposals, and no real substantive move toward a needed Federal
investment in a number of modes.
They also pointed at environmental regulation as being the
only problem that is before us. Actually, 90 percent of
projects in surface go forward with what is called a
categorical exclusion. So no environmental analysis necessary.
Five percent go through a minimal process environmental
analysis, and 5 percent, the largest projects that impact
millions of people, go through a NEPA analysis.
But that is not what is holding the States, the regions, or
these projects back. In fact, the Department of the Treasury
came out with a report that says a lack of public funding is,
by far, the most common factor hindering the completion of
transportation and water infrastructure projects.
So we got a lot of pretend going on. All we have to do is
streamline. Well, we streamlined in the Mica bill, and then we
streamlined in the FAST Act. Most of that streamlining has not
yet been implemented. And once that is implemented, these
nonexistent problems will be even more nonexistent. They also
announced a dashboard, but of course the Obama administration
had a dashboard, so that wasn't big progress, either.
And then the President's budget, $95 billion in cuts to
highways, transit, and safety over 10 years; $20 billion in
cuts to transit, New Start, over 10 years; $1 billion to the
Army Corps of Engineers; and even $250 million in the FAA for
the coming year.
He also proposed to cut all 15 Amtrak long-distance routes.
He also wants to cut Essential Air Service. So I think a lot of
people living in smaller cities throughout the heartland of
America are going to be a little surprised to wake up one day,
find out they have no air service, they have no train service,
and--but they can get on the newly tolled, privatized
interstate system, and move themselves around as best they can.
That is sort of where we are at today. So I really wish we
could get down to the brass tacks of talking about building a
21st-century infrastructure for this country.
I have introduced three bipartisan bills. One would,
shockingly, spend the taxes collected for the Harbor
Maintenance Trust Fund on harbor maintenance. Whoa, that is
shocking in Washington, DC. It was pulled out of the water
resources development bill last year at the behest of the
Speaker, at the request of Mr. Price, because the Budget
Committee wants to pretend, by diverting that money from its
intended purpose, that they are reducing the deficit: $9
billion sitting in the Treasury--maybe, or evaporated into
ether.
Number two, lift the cap on passenger facility charges. I
have introduced that with our colleague, Mr. Massie.
And, number there, a Penny for Progress: index the gas tax.
Could never go up more than 1.5 cents a gallon a year. Borrow
$500 billion over 13 years, and really get some things done.
There are three proposals totaling $560 billion of real
investment. And all we have seen from the White House is
privatization, and oh, they have one other great idea. They
would bribe the States to sell their interstate. So if you
propose to sell your interstate to a private vendor, then they
will give you Federal gas tax dollars to do that. They will pay
you 10 or 15 percent commission for selling the public
infrastructure to private interests.
You know, this is becoming absurd. So I hope today we can
begin to talk about the real needs of Amtrak, and where we are
really going to find the investment money that Amtrak needs for
the Northeast Corridor and the national system.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. DeFazio. Now I would like to
welcome our panel of witnesses: Mr. Paul Nissenbaum, who is the
Associate Administrator for Railroad Policy and Development at
FRA [Federal Railroad Administration]; Mr. Charles ``Wick''
Moorman, the president and chief executive officer of Amtrak.
I would now like to pause to allow Mr. Webster for a brief
introduction.
Mr. Webster. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Wick Moorman and I have
three things in common: we both went to Georgia Tech, we are
both engineers, and we were fraternity brothers. And he began
there as a co-op student working with Southern Railway, and he
never left rails. He stayed the whole time. He moved his way up
in Southern, and it became Norfolk Southern. He was president
and CEO, chairman, and then he retired.
And I am not sure what struck him, but he decided to change
from freight to get into passenger service. And I will tell you
there couldn't be a better person, a more knowledgeable person.
He even taught me what the distance between the rails are on
standard rail, and why that is. It may have been an old wives'
tale, I don't know.
But anyway, I will say this: Wick Moorman is a railroader
of all railroaders, and he understands the business, and I
think he is going to do a fine job as president and CEO at
Amtrak.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Webster.
Also on the panel today is Mr. John Porcari, interim
executive director of Gateway Program Development Corporation,
and former Deputy Secretary of U.S. DOT; Mr. Mike Reininger,
who serves as the executive director of Florida East Coast
Industries; and Mr. Dan Richard, chair of the California High-
Speed Rail Authority.
I would ask Members--Mr. Nissenbaum is a career employee,
there is no Administrator, we are still waiting for staffing up
of FRA, but he came as our--at our request, and may not be able
to answer questions specific to the President's new plan.
But nevertheless, I asked him to be here to answer some of
the FRA questions as they pertain to a number of our rail
projects.
If there are other specific questions, I think we can send
them in writing to the FRA afterwards. I ask unanimous consent
that our witnesses' full statements be included in the record.
Without objection, so ordered.
Since your written testimony has been made part of the
record, the committee requests that you limit your summary to 5
minutes.
We now recognize Mr. Nissenbaum for your opening statement.

TESTIMONY OF PAUL NISSENBAUM, ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE
OF RAILROAD POLICY AND DEVELOPMENT, FEDERAL RAILROAD
ADMINISTRATION; CHARLES W. ``WICK'' MOORMAN IV, PRESIDENT AND
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, AMTRAK; JOHN D. PORCARI, INTERIM
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, GATEWAY PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION; P.
MICHAEL REININGER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, FLORIDA EAST COAST
INDUSTRIES, LLC; AND DAN RICHARD, CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD,
CALIFORNIA HIGH-SPEED RAIL AUTHORITY

Mr. Nissenbaum. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning,
Ranking Member DeFazio, Ranking Member Capuano, and members of
the subcommittee. My name is Paul Nissenbaum; I am the FRA's
Associate Administrator for the Office of Railroad Policy and
Development, which oversees the planning and delivery of
passenger and freight rail development programs, including
oversight of Amtrak.
I have had the privilege of serving under three
administrations as a career member of the Senior Executive
Service. And, as such, it is an honor to be here before you
today to discuss the challenges and opportunities for intercity
passenger rail.
I have submitted my full statement to the committee, and
ask that it be made part of the hearing record.
FRA would like to recognize the committee's commitment to
rail embodied in the FAST Act. The FAST Act represents a
historic milestone in that, for the first time, intercity
passenger rail has been included in a comprehensive, multimodal
surface transportation authorization. The FAST Act builds on
policies and programs this committee established back in 2008
in PRIIA, which shifted much of the responsibility for
passenger rail development to the States.
Notably, PRIIA established new cost-sharing frameworks
between Amtrak and the States, and authorized competitive
passenger rail grant programs directed to the States, including
the High-Speed Intercity Passenger Rail, or HSIPR, program.
Since January 2010, the HSIPR program has supported nearly
150 projects in 35 States and the District of Columbia. About
85 percent of those investments are concentrated in 6 corridors
around the country. These projects are improving the rider
experience by increasing reliability, adding new capacity,
reducing travel times, and making stations and equipment more
efficient and accessible.
Many of these projects have benefitted the broader rail
network, including freight rail services, by increasing
capacity, reducing congestion, and improving fluidity and
safety.
In addition to critical infrastructure projects, the HSIPR
program supported State planning, project development, and
environmental work. The products that result from these efforts
will lay the foundation for future construction projects and
service improvements, establishing a strong pipeline of
potential rail capital projects that are ready for funding and
financing solutions.
To help mitigate program implementation challenges and
ensure proper stewardship of taxpayer dollars, FRA has
established a risk-based oversight program for all of the
agencies' grant programs, including HSIPR. This oversight
approach comprises three major components: grant compliance,
technical assistance to grantees, and project implementation
oversight, which involves managing project scope, schedule, and
budget.
In the recently passed 2017 Appropriations Act, Congress
provided funds for the competitive rail grant programs
authorized in the FAST Act. FRA is currently working to develop
the Notices of Funding Opportunity for these grant programs so
that sponsors of eligible projects can leverage investment to
help advance passenger and freight projects.
The Department of Transportation also provides credit
opportunities, including TIFIA [Transportation Infrastructure
Finance and Innovation Act], RRIF [Railroad Rehabilitation and
Improvement Financing], and Private Activity Bonds that project
sponsors can pursue. These programs are managed by the
Department's Build America Bureau, which works closely with FRA
to help project sponsors navigate and accelerate Federal
permitting and procedural requirements in order to get projects
ready for funding or financing as quickly and efficiently as
possible.
To that end, FRA is working on a number of project delivery
reforms to reduce duplication of environmental reviews and
enhance interagency coordination. FRA has also been working
with Amtrak to make changes to its account structure, and
planning and reporting requirements. These reforms, which were
developed under the leadership of this committee and included
in the FAST Act, will significantly improve Amtrak's
transparency and the delivery of its services.
I would like to close by thanking the committee for
recognizing how integral rail is to a competitive U.S.
multimodal transportation system. Making investments in rail
that are market-appropriate will ensure that we meet the
demands of America's growing economy in a safe, reliable, and
efficient manner, while maximizing public benefits across all
modes.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to
testify, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Moorman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moorman. Chairman Denham, Ranking Members Capuano and
DeFazio, members of the subcommittee, and fellow witnesses,
good morning. Thank you. A special thanks to Representative
Webster for that gracious introduction. I can tell you that
many of our former fraternity brothers are very surprised that
either of us amounted to anything.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Moorman. It is my privilege to be here today--or at
least me; sorry, Dan--on behalf of Amtrak to discuss our role
in America's multimodal transportation system.
On many fronts, Amtrak is taking important steps to ensure
that our business reaches the next level of success. Building
on several years of record-setting ridership, last year we
welcomed aboard a record 31.3 million passengers, and every day
more than 300 of our trains carry almost 86,000 riders across
the country. We serve more than 500 destinations in 46 States
and the District of Columbia, over more than 21,000 miles of
route, and we are the Nation's only high-speed, intercity
passenger rail provider, operating at speeds to 150 miles per
hour. More than half of our trains have a top speed of over 100
miles per hour.
Building on my career in the private sector, I have led a
reorganization of Amtrak over this past year to instill a more
corporate culture through the company. We are focused on a more
streamlined structure, with enhanced project delivery
capabilities. We are nearing our 50th anniversary. And as we
approach that milestone, I can tell you we remain relentlessly
focused on safety and efficiency.
Already we cover an industry-leading 94 percent of our
operating expenses, and we spend $1.7 billion annually on
domestic goods and services. We simplified our chain of
command, we have clarified responsibilities and
accountabilities, and that will enable us to be more bottom-
line-driven and customer-centric. That is my objective with our
employees, our customers, and with you, our investors.
These changes will allow us to do more, to do what we do
better, and to be more responsive to our Federal, State, and
local partners. The services we provide across our network
perform a vital role in the country's transportation network.
Whether it is long-distance trains connecting otherwise
isolated communities across the country, or State-supported
trains that have seen 90 percent growth in the last 18 years,
or the Northeast Corridor, where Amtrak and its commuter
partners helped provide 820,000 passenger trips a day, Amtrak
enables the economic vitality of America from rural towns to
our largest cities.
Any network as complex as ours will always face challenges,
from weather disruptions and old equipment to limited capacity
and rising customer expectations. We at Amtrak are tackling
these head on, and applying new project delivery capabilities
to the very difficult tasks associated with renewing our aging
assets, strengthening our infrastructure, and much-needed
upgrading of capacity.
We would not be good stewards of the assets entrusted to us
if we were not planning to rebuild and expand them as needed
for the future. I am sure many of you are aware of the
infrastructure renewal at New York Penn Station program that we
are about to begin this summer. It will accelerate years of
overdue infrastructure renewal to deliver essential increases
in reliability.
And the necessity of this effort speaks to the stresses
which the station's infrastructure is subject to. Penn Station
today operates without a sufficient capacity margin to
guarantee reliable delivery of service. And while we will make
genuine progress this summer, huge needs remain from our 1934
vintage electric traction system to work in our 1910-era
tunnels.
Beyond addressing the immediate needs, there are also
serious capacity requirements pursued through the Gateway
Program Development Corporation, which my fellow witness and
acting executive director John Porcari will describe. We are
working with New Jersey Transit and the Port Authority of New
York and New Jersey to address both capacity and resiliency
through the Gateway Program. It will replace aging and failure-
prone structures such as the Portal and Sawtooth Bridges, and
increase track, tunnel, bridge, and station capacity between
Newark and Penn Station.
We are also pursuing partnerships to enhance our stations.
We are engaging master developers to work with us to maximize
commercial value of stations like Washington, Philadelphia, New
York, and Baltimore, and we have just announced our selection
of a master developer in Chicago. These are public-private
partnerships that will improve the stations for our riders and
the communities we serve.
We are also working with Alstom and the French railway,
SNCF, on a new Acela fleet to be built here in the United
States with more capacity, better amenities, and a smoother
ride, and we are about to refurbish our Amfleet cars, which
serve as the backbone of our regional service.
These are essential initiatives, if we are going to lay the
foundation for the next 50 years. We know how much our
passengers rely on us now, and we clearly see the demand for
new routes and increased service levels being expressed by so
many communities. Investments now will allow Amtrak to ensure
that all of our business lines are ready to expand and meet
these growing demands.
With your help, Amtrak is poised to build on our strengths
and rebuild our infrastructure. We are poised to renew our
commitment to serve the people across America, and I firmly
believe that the time for those infrastructure investments has
come in this country. They are no longer nice to have; they
have now reached the point of must-have.
We are committed to improving the way we run our business,
to modernizing our customers' experience. We are investing in
our assets. And I want to thank all of you for your leadership
that resulted in inclusion of Amtrak in the FAST Act, and ask
you to build on that foundation and invest at the levels you
set in our authorization in these important essential steps to
foster a renaissance in American passenger rail transportation.
Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Porcari?
Mr. Porcari. Good morning, Chairman Denham, Ranking Member
DeFazio, Ranking Member Capuano, and members of this
subcommittee. My name is John Porcari, and I am the interim
executive director of the Gateway Program Development
Corporation.
The Gateway Corporation is the Federal-State entity created
to carry out one of the most important and urgent
infrastructure projects in the United States: the Gateway
Project. The 450-mile Northeast Corridor is the busiest rail
corridor in the country. And the busiest section of this
corridor is the part around New York City.
Heading out of Manhattan to the northeast, toward Boston,
there are four tracks, which gives the system redundancy to
allow maintenance to be performed and to respond to incidents.
Unfortunately, in the other direction, where trains travel
under the Hudson River to New Jersey and eventually to
Washington, this is not the case. There are just two tracks.
Any issues here, even minor ones, cause major problems for the
corridor. There is no alternative route.
The Gateway Program of projects is designed to address this
deficiency. The section from Penn Station in New York to
Newark, New Jersey, is the most densely used piece of track in
the United States, and one of the most densely used in the
world. It can host nearly 1,200 train movements per day.
Unfortunately, it is also very old and in need of urgent repair
and expansion.
The existing tunnels under the Hudson River were completed
in 1910, while the Titanic was still under construction, and
while the Wright brothers were transitioning from their Model A
to their Model B airplane. The tunnels' age is reason enough
for them to be comprehensively refurbished. But compounding
that is, during Hurricane Sandy in 2012, they flooded,
worsening their already precarious situation.
In addition to the two-track tunnel, this section of track
contains the Portal Bridge over the Hackensack River in New
Jersey, the busiest train bridge in the Western Hemisphere.
This two-track swing bridge also dates from 1910. And because
of its low clearance over the water, it must be opened to allow
boats to pass.
What we are calling phase 1A of the Gateway Program is the
replacement of this aging bridge. The design, all environmental
reviews, and permitting are completed, and we are just awaiting
the last piece of funding. Preconstruction work on this new
bridge site, such as building an access road and retaining
walls, will be underway this summer. Amtrak has committed its
funding for the new bridge, and the local partners, New Jersey
Transit and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, have
committed theirs.
With everything else in place, we are awaiting word from
the U.S. Department of Transportation on whether the project
will be awarded a Federal Transit Administration Capital
Investment Grant for core capacity that we applied for last
fall. Award of these funds will be the last piece of the
puzzle, and then construction will be able to start on the
bridge.
Let me emphasize that the technical assistance and
coordination by the Department of Transportation has been
extraordinary, and this first component of the Gateway project
would not be ready for construction without DOT's assistance.
We are simultaneously moving forward with phase 1B, which
is construction of a new two-track tunnel under the Hudson
River. The plan is to quickly build these two new tracks under
the Hudson and, once they are open, to close each of the
existing 106-year-old tunnels, in turn, for repairs. Closing
one of these tunnels for repairs without the new tunnel in
place would reduce throughput of trains during rush hour by 75
percent, due to the need to run trains in both directions on
the remaining track.
When the entire Gateway Program is completed, including
subsequent phases, there will be a fully functional, four-track
railroad, all the way from Newark, New Jersey, to New York Penn
Station, and enough track and platform capacity in Penn Station
and New York to accommodate decades of future travel growth.
Work is currently underway to finish the environmental
impact statement [EIS] for the tunnel phase of the work. I am
pleased to say that we are on an aggressive 24-month schedule
for completion of the EIS, which is less than half the time
that was typical for projects of this kind just a few years
ago. With the help of U.S. DOT, we will release a draft EIS
this month for the tunnel, and a final EIS Record of Decision
and a Corps of Engineers section 404 permit simultaneously by
March 2018.
In addition to giving us an urgently needed transportation
project that eliminates a single point of failure for 10
percent of America's gross domestic product, this project
serves as an example of how environmental reviews for even
complex, expensive projects can be expedited without any
compromise to environmental outcomes.
In the coming weeks we will be holding an industry forum to
solicit input from private-sector experts about how they
believe the tunnel project can be most efficiently delivered.
We are looking to tap into the best thinking from the private
sector about how to get the tunnel project built quickly and
cost effectively. This will be followed by a request for
information process. We are actively evaluating design, build,
and public-private partnerships, for example, for the tunnel.
Despite the strong cooperation that is already in place
between the national, State, and local stakeholders, it is not
realistic to think that an infrastructure project of this
magnitude can succeed without an appropriate Federal financial
commitment. A project of national significance like Gateway
requires this combined Federal, State, and local commitment.
As we all know, America has huge infrastructure needs. And
it is heartening to see that this subcommittee recognizes that
rail is an important part of the equation. Just as our parents
and grandparents--and in the case of the existing 106-year-old
Gateway Bridge and Tunnel, our great-grandparents--designed,
built, and paid for the transportation infrastructure that is,
literally, the foundation of our current economy in much more
difficult circumstances than we are experiencing today, we have
to do the same for the benefit of our children and generations
to come.
I would submit there is no more urgent infrastructure
project in the country than Gateway.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to testify,
and I look forward to answering any questions.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Reininger?
Mr. Reininger. Chairman Denham, Ranking Member Capuano, and
members of this subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to
participate in this hearing, and to share a private-industry
perspective on the opportunity to introduce intercity passenger
rail as a new transportation solution needed in many cities
across the country.
My name is Mike Reininger, and I am the executive director
of Florida East Coast Industries [FECI]. We are an
infrastructure and real estate development company based in
Miami, where we are represented by your committee colleague and
our distinguished congresswoman, Frederica Wilson. Further
along our corridor, we are also represented by distinguished
Members Dan Webster, Lois Frankel, and Brian Mast.
FECI is the parent company of All Aboard Florida, which was
established in 2012 to pursue passenger rail opportunities on a
private, for-profit basis. FECI traces its roots to the late
1890s and the company founded by Henry Flagler, who first
introduced the integrated rail network which gave rise to
Florida's rapid growth. After some 120 years of continuous
operations, that railroad remains a profitable private
enterprise.
Leveraging this legacy and historic assets, we have
invested about $2 billion of private capital over the last 5
years. And in about 90 days we will launch Brightline. This new
express intercity passenger train will service the downtown
cores in Miami, Fort Lauderdale, and West Palm Beach as the
first phase of a vision to fully connect the southeast and
central Florida markets.
Today, 400 million trips are taken annually in this market,
relying on roads and airways that are among the most congested
in the Nation. These trips, which we see as too long to drive
and too short to fly, represent the opportunity for the next
generation of American train travel. Brightline will carry our
customers in a new fleet of innovative, 100 percent Buy America
trains to three new stations across 70 miles of modernized
railroad that includes Positive Train Control.
In addition, we are building over 1.5 million square feet
of mixed-use development in and around our transit hubs, and
these facilities will begin welcoming new occupants, concurrent
with the start of Brightline trains.
Our business thesis is quite simple. We believe that
markets comprised of city pairs that are 250 to 350 miles apart
present opportunities for trains to provide a more efficient,
comfortable, and reliable alternative to cars and planes. The
addition of integrated real estate development aligns two
economic engines that directly support one another and creates
a unified business platform that has more than one way to pay
the bills.
Our experiences have sharpened our perspective on several
key factors where enhanced interaction between Government and
industry will contribute to faster results, encourage private
capital investment earmarked for infrastructure, and contribute
new capacity into our transportation networks.
Broadly speaking, the most notable areas for improvement
that will help pioneering efforts such as ours, are a
streamlining of complicated regulatory processes and
enhancements to the debt markets that must accompany equity
investments to produce new projects.
The NEPA process remains a disincentive to the private
sector. And while there is ample equity, such as ours, ready to
invest in transportation, the lack of precedent for new
systems, coupled with uncertain permitting, have limited the
availability of the appropriate debt needed to complete the
capital equation. Both issues can benefit from retooling of
already-existing structures.
Our own experiences with expanding our business into its
second phase, an incremental investment of $2 billion, clearly
demonstrates these points. Our project underwent a
comprehensive 2.5-year-long NEPA study, resulting in the
publishing of a final EIS. Yet 4.5 years after it began, the
process has still not resulted in the outcomes that will
facilitate needed permits. Rationalization of this reality will
save enormous time and money, and produce much better results.
Programs such as Private Activity Bonds, RRIF, or TIFIA
loans are underutilized for greenfield developments, as they
suffer from opaque and complex rules that discourage their use.
Yet we are encouraged that these existing programs could be
easily revised to remove ambiguity and provide exactly the kind
of efficient debt needed to incent investment and create
progress.
As the demand for services such as Brightline continue to
emerge, the opportunity to catalyze the direction of private
capital against the infrastructure challenge can be effected
through needed reforms that will align the interests and
strengths of Government and industry toward common goals. As we
work toward the launch of our business and the expansion of our
system, we welcome the opportunity to contribute to enhanced
solutions to these issues.
Thank you for the opportunity to share these thoughts with
you today, and I will welcome questions.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Richard?
Mr. Richard. Good morning, Chairman Denham, Ranking Member
DeFazio, Ranking Member Capuano. My name is Dan Richard, I am
the chair of the governing board of the California High-Speed
Rail Authority. And it is a privilege to appear before this
committee today.
My written testimony gives a comprehensive view of both the
status and the future of the California high-speed rail
program. In the few short minutes here I would like to
emphasize three points.
First, as we sit here today, construction of America's
first true high-speed rail system is underway in California.
The 119-mile spinal section of the project, with $3 billion of
contracts already underway, has put 1,200 workers at 14 sites
to work building this project. And this has all resulted from
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, and I wanted to
report to you that that act is performing as it was designed,
and we thank the Congress of the United States and the
administration for this support.
As a result of this, right now, 630 private-sector firms
are working on the project. Of that, 373 small businesses--and
I know, Mr. Chairman, of special interest to you, 45 businesses
that are owned and operated by disabled American veterans are
working on the high-speed rail project in California today. And
it is not just the businesses that are owned. Veterans like a
32-year-old former Marine, Fernando Madrigal, is now earning
$22 an hour as a third-year apprentice electrician, having
served our country in Iraq and Afghanistan. This is what ARRA
was intended to do, and it is performing as you wanted it to.
I also want this committee and the Congress to know that,
in this construction activity, every ounce of steel, every
ounce of concrete that is being used right now, is being
produced in America, domestically. And we will continue to
respect the Buy America provisions that were installed by the
Congress, as we move forward.
In addition to the direct work having dramatic--direct
effects on unemployment in one of the most challenging--
economically challenging regions in California, we have seen,
for example, that the unemployment rate in Fresno County, which
ranks as, in fact, the poorest county in California, with a
25.2-percent poverty rate, the unemployment rate in Fresno
County has fallen below 10 percent for only the fourth time in
the last 25 years. And that is attributable to the investments
that are being made by high-speed rail.
And there are indirect benefits, as well. Part of this
construction will remove 55 at-grade crossings, dangerous at-
grade crossings, up and down the Central Valley of California,
and replace them with grade separations. And we are expanding
freight capacity by moving to a new parallel passenger rail
system. And this is very important.
So, the high-speed rail program is under construction, it
is having dramatic effects immediately in California in an area
that has suffered historic underinvestment in our State.
The second point that I want to make is that our next step
is to connect the Central Valley of California with the Silicon
Valley of California, and that will be a 250-mile stretch from
north of Bakersfield, up through Fresno, and into San Jose and,
ultimately, San Francisco. The import of this cannot be
overstated.
Right now, in the Silicon Valley, which is the engine of
California's economy and, to a great extent, the engine of
America's economy, the housing crisis has reached epic
proportions. The average cost of a home in the San Jose area,
the average cost, is more than $1 million. So the challenge for
our high-technology industry to attract and retain talent in
this area with those housing costs is enormous.
Today, instead of taking a Google bus from San Francisco,
which takes an hour, we now see the prospect of high-speed rail
service connecting San Jose to Merced and Fresno, with 40- and
50-minute trips, and the technology leaders in Silicon Valley
are extremely excited about this prospect of bringing a jobs-
housing balance to a region that has not had that.
And just last week, Google announced the creation of a
20,000-person campus right at the Diridon Station, which will
be the densest transportation hub in the West, with high-speed
rail, BART, Amtrak, Caltrain, and so forth, all serving that
region.
Finally, I want to make the point that, at this point in
our program, we are beginning the transition to
commercialization. The California high-speed rail program will
be a privately operated system. The Government's role is to
reduce risk at the outset, and then provide the rights to the
private sector to operate on the infrastructure.
And last week, Members, we issued an RFP for a private-
sector early operator to come in and infuse commercial thinking
into the design and development of the system. Five
international bid teams have all qualified for that, and we
expect to receive robust competition.
So we are underway with construction of this system. We see
the next step leading to either further connections between our
economic regions, and we are moving towards the
commercialization phase of high-speed rail in California. I
think these are exciting developments for our State and our
Nation.
I thank you for the opportunity to appear here today, and
look forward to your questions.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, and I thank each of our witnesses
for joining us today. We will have at least two rounds of
questions. I know that there are a number of questions this
entire panel wants to hear about: infrastructure and investment
across the country, as well as the progress of each of these
projects, as well as the oversight. I will start this morning
off.
Mr. Richard, first of all, thank you. You have appeared
many times in front of this committee. We do have a lot of
questions, as this is the first high-speed rail investment in
the country. We want to make sure that we do it right. We also
want to make sure that what was proposed to taxpayers is
adhered to. And so that has raised a number of questions as we
move forward on investment.
I want to follow up on some of our previous hearings. First
of all--and before I start, let me also thank you. I have taken
you up on your request at the invitation of Congressman Costa
to actually go on site, take a look at some of the jobs, take a
look at some of the investment, as well as report back to this
committee on that. So I want to thank you for your openness and
invitation on that, and look forward to, over the next couple
months, taking you up on that offer.
First of all, on page 13 of your 2016 business plan, it
states--and I quote--``Since the inception of planning for
high-speed rail in California it has been assumed that the
program would be funded with Federal funds, State funds, and
private-sector investment, each at approximately one-third.''
Are you still confident we are at one-third, one-third, and
one-third?
Mr. Richard. Well, first of all, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for your remarks. And I guess I would have to say honestly that
I don't think there is any question about the State's share of
this, reaching roughly one-third of the cost. Our analyses show
that the potential revenues that would generate private-sector
investment would equal about one-third of the cost.
As we sit here today, Mr. Chairman, I think the question
for us is the Federal participation. Right now, of the $64
billion, the Federal commitment is about $3.5 billion,
representing a 5-percent share of Federal support for this
project. And I would submit to you that that is far lower than
historically has been the case.
California has committed both bond money, State cap and
trade money. Those programs are moving forward. We see $20
billion of private-sector investment. That is about one-third.
And I would hope, Mr. Chairman, that, as this Congress and the
administration sees the private sector and the State
contributions to this, that we could have a different
conversation about the Federal support than we have had in the
past few years.
Mr. Denham. So----
Mr. Richard. So my confidence level depends on that.
Mr. Denham. And so far, the amount of expenditures that you
have had so far has been primarily Federal dollars.
Mr. Richard. Yes, sir. And, Mr. Chairman, we appreciate the
fact that the Department of Transportation, through the tapered
match approach, has allowed us to get going on this program
when there was in the past some litigation and other
challenges. We are on the threshold of completing the
expenditure of the ARRA money.
Further Federal money for us, under the fiscal year 2010
grant, will have to wait, under the terms of the agreement,
until California reaches its match. We have started to do that.
And we see that moving forward appropriately.
Mr. Denham. And our previous hearing--from memory--our
previous hearing last year, you had stated that you would not
need any more Federal dollars under the initial construction
segment. Is that still correct?
Mr. Richard. That is still correct, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. But you are still counting on the Federal
Government to come up with roughly $20 billion of the $64
billion needed for phase 1?
Mr. Richard. I would say the right verb there is we are
hoping for it. I don't know that we are counting on it, as we
sit here today.
And the import of that will simply be that if the Federal
Government does not provide additional support, it will
certainly slow the development of the program. I think it is
important to note that we have designed our program to be
delivered in segments. Each segment will have utility. And as
we complete each segment, the risk goes down.
So, my hope is that the Federal Government would look at
areas where there are gaps to fill in or other things like
that, and I think we can have that conversation at that point.
Mr. Denham. The California High-Speed Rail Peer Review
Group concluded last year that even using a--California High-
Speed Authority's--using your own assumptions, phase 1 still
faces an $18.9 billion funding shortfall. Can you briefly
describe in the short amount of time we have left what revenue
sources are you counting on to fill that gap?
Mr. Richard. Well, again, I think the biggest part of that
is I think they assumed that there was not necessarily going to
be additional Federal support at this point. So Federal dollars
could be a source of that.
Mr. Chairman, we are just also starting to look at a number
of ancillary revenue opportunities. In Japan, the Japanese
experience is they get about 32 percent of their revenues from
real estate development around the stations. We are just
beginning to look at that kind of issue, leasing our right-of-
way for fiber optic and other things.
So I think we can provide this committee with a more
detailed assessment of that. We don't have our arms fully
around that, but we do kind of have in sight what directions we
would go in to fill those gaps in the future.
Mr. Denham. I am about out of time here, but what I hear
you saying is asset recycling might be something that you are
looking at for California high-speed rail. And that might help
you to fill some of that gap.
Mr. Richard. Mr. Chairman, I was taught not to step in to a
bar fight.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Richard. I would rather not, if I----
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Capuano, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Capuano. Mr. DeFazio----
Mr. Denham. Mr. DeFazio, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Capuano. Thank you for your
respect.
For Mr. Nissenbaum, you know, we basically made rail
projects eligible for streamlining that we previously adopted
for highway projects. Has that been implemented yet?
Mr. Nissenbaum. So we are in the process of working with
Federal Highway Administration and Federal Transit
Administration to join their NEPA regulations, per the FAST
Act. And that is in process, and we expect that out soon.
Mr. DeFazio. Will that require a rulemaking on your part?
Mr. Nissenbaum. It does. It requires us to join in with the
rule that the Federal Highway Administration and Federal
Transit Administration are updating right now.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. So you will be part and parcel of that
rulemaking, but of course, you can't do any rulemaking right
now.
Mr. Nissenbaum. Well----
Mr. DeFazio. You are not allowed to do----
Mr. Nissenbaum. Yes, rules are under the regulatory review
committee right now.
Mr. DeFazio. Right.
Mr. Nissenbaum. But we expect rules like that will be
moving forward.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. Now, here is a case where we are going to
have a rulemaking that will expedite projects so I think almost
everyone would agree that is beneficial, although some people
will be concerned that there won't be adequate environmental
protections, perhaps. I don't think that is the case.
But you are going to have to find two other rules to
repeal, right? I mean if you become part of the highway rule,
and the new rule is that you have to repeal two rules to adopt
a rule, even if that rule is beneficial and is streamlining,
what two rules are you going to do away with?
Mr. Nissenbaum. So what I can tell you is that there is
support within the Administration to advance environmental
streamlining. That is--this is consistent with that principle.
And at this point, we see no reason why we can't move forward,
full steam ahead, on that.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. To President Moorman, the President has
proposed for you to focus on core assets, or something like
that, and they want to get rid of all your long-distance
routes. And, as I said in my opening remarks, that would leave
many communities throughout the heartland of America without
either air service or rail service.
Is that going to save you money if we cut all those routes?
And will it have an impact beyond those--the heartland of
America?
Mr. Moorman. That is an excellent question, in that while I
think there is a conversation that you can have about the
efficacy and the need of just the long-distance network and the
routes that we serve, the true impact is more severe in that
when you look at how Amtrak does its accounting, and look at
the long-distance network itself, the long-distance fares,
which are roughly $500 million a year, cover the fuel costs,
cover the crew costs, and cover the base operation of the
network. Where the losses are incurred really is in the
allocated cost, the cost of the reservation system for the
entire network, for the Law Department, all of the SG&A.
And if, in fact, the funding for the long-distance network
was withdrawn abruptly and we were ordered to stop it, we would
lose all of the revenue. We would have significant labor
protection, because we, like all railroads, have labor
protection in our agreements, and we would continue to incur
most of our labor costs, which would be $300 million to $400
million, and then all of the allocated costs that now go with
the long-distance network, we would cut some, but the rest
would just then go to the States, back to the State-supported
business and the corridor.
The net result of an abrupt change like that would--we
would essentially stop investing in the Northeast Corridor. We
would not have the cash.
Mr. DeFazio. OK, that is helpful. Mr. Porcari, your
project, I was just talking to my colleague, Mr. Payne, here
about--what is the name of that bridge?
Mr. Payne. The Portal Bridge.
Mr. DeFazio. The Portal Bridge. And he witnessed it opening
and closing, but it doesn't quite line up, so the guy gets out
a sledge hammer and--you know, are we near the point of failure
on this bridge?
Mr. Porcari. It is an excellent question. Yes. The good
news is it functions very well for a 106-year-old bridge. But
the bad news is it is 106 years old. And there have been,
operationally, repeated incidents where it doesn't open and
close successfully, which stops the entire Northeast Corridor.
That is in addition to the capacity issues.
One of the design features of the new bridge that we are
ready for construction on is it is high enough over the
Hackensack River that it does not have to open or close. It
will be a fixed-span bridge.
Yes, it is true that blunt instruments have to be used at
times to make it operate. And it is ironic that we are having a
hearing on building 21st-century infrastructure, and it starts
with, in my estimation, taking some early 20th-century
infrastructure and trying to rehabilitate it and replace it.
Mr. DeFazio. OK, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Duncan?
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Moorman, in your testimony you say we--you are now
covering 94 percent of our investment. And I would like to have
you explain that just a little bit more.
And you said also it is a record. And I would like to know.
How does that compare to--what would that figure have been,
say, 10 years ago or a few years ago?
Mr. Moorman. We do cover 94 percent of our operating costs.
And as I said, if you look across the globe, that is an
admirable number. I can only speculate about 10 years ago I
would tell you I know it would be substantially less.
And Amtrak has done a lot of things to improve that. The
revenues on the Northeast Corridor, with the introduction of
Acela, were a big component of that. And I won't sit here today
and tell you that we will get to 100 percent next year or the
year after, but I think we will continue to drive that down.
Mr. Duncan. The staff tells us that you had a loss on
operations last year of $800 million. Do you see that going
down, or is that--the look on your face, you seem to think that
may not be accurate.
Mr. Moorman. I am not sure, Congressman, where that number
came from. If you look at our reporting, the operating loss for
the company last year was $230 million.
Mr. Duncan. $230 million.
Mr. Moorman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Duncan. OK. All right, Mr. Reininger, people all over
the country are moving from the high-tax States to the low-tax
States. And an example of that, New York had 41 congressmen in
the 1970s. Now they have got 27. And I was told last week they
are going to go to 25 maybe in the next census.
Nothing against New York, but it is because--this has been
very beneficial to my State. The Nashville area is exploding in
population, and the Knoxville area, which I represent, is
having very fast growth just right behind Nashville. Your
minimum estimate on distance is 250 miles to 350 miles.
Downtown Knoxville to downtown Nashville is 185 miles.
Do you think that a route between Knoxville and Nashville
could be profitable, considering the tremendous population
growth that both cities are having?
Mr. Reininger. Thank you for that question, Mr. Duncan. It
could be. I would tell you that the things that would have to
be understood pretty clearly to know whether it could feasibly
work on its own would be probably three things.
Number one would be the magnitude of capital investment
that would be necessary in order to put the system into
operation, and that would be dependent on perhaps the ability
to leverage other existing assets that may be contributory to
that answer.
Number two is the absolute size of the marketplace that you
have, including the diversity of the passengers that you would
be fulfilling. Are they all business travelers, or are there
other market segments that could supplement sort of that
overall market equation?
And then, importantly, it will be the nature of the
service, relative to the alternatives. Will traveling by train
be a quicker and more reliable service than the alternative,
which was--probably be predominantly driving in that particular
case? And, if it is, then history has shown us across the world
that there is an opportunity for a successful passenger train
implementation in those kinds of markets.
Mr. Duncan. All right. All right, thank you.
Mr. Richard, once again the staff tells me that the
original estimate on the cost of your project was approximately
$22 billion to $25 billion and that now we are already at $64
billion, $65 billion. Is this going to be one of those projects
where we see just unbelievable cost overruns by the time it--
the completion date, I understand, is 2029.
What are you doing to make sure that we just don't see an
explosion in the cost of this project?
Mr. Richard. Congressman, I--this is a really critical
question, and my answer to this is that when we came in--when I
was appointed, we came in in 2011, we looked at the cost. And
those earlier estimates were probably based on 2006 year dollar
estimates, whatever. But it was clearly higher. And we are the
ones who came in and told the public, it is going to be more
than you have been told in the past. And notwithstanding that,
our legislature decided to move forward.
But as I have reflected on this--and I think this is a
critical point--the cost growth that we have seen now is not
the result of construction costs going out of control. In fact,
there has really been very little of that. Our construction
bids have come in hundreds of millions of dollars below the
engineer's estimates.
The cost growth in the program is the difference between
what people estimated when they were looking at a map and had a
magic marker and were drawing it and when you actually get out
there and find that, you know, you are really going to have to
move this food processing facility, you are really going to
have to underground in this area, you are really going to have
to protect this ag land over here, you are going to have to
protect this waterway over here. So the cost growth has all
been the difference between somebody's initial plan and going
out and looking on the ground.
If you will, I would say it is the social cost being
brought in to the cost of the program. As we have gotten into
construction, we have very tight standards, and we are
maintaining our construction budget. So your question is really
essential, as a representative of the taxpayers. We are not
seeing that kind of cost growth. What we are seeing is that the
initial estimates really didn't account for what it takes to
build this on the ground and protect communities and ag land.
But I think we have now absorbed those costs.
And, in fact, we are doing extensive and aggressive value
engineering. Two years ago the cost estimate was $68 billion.
We brought it down to $64 billion. We are continuing to look at
ways that we can drive costs down, because we know we will have
construction cost pressures.
Mr. Duncan. All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Payne, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would like to
thank the witnesses for being here.
And just to piggyback on what the ranking member was
talking about in terms of the Portal Bridge, I had the
opportunity to go out to the Portal Bridge and visit that piece
of infrastructure. And we are talking about a bridge that was
designed in the 1800s and constructed around 1910. And this
bridge, if it goes down, stops traffic between Massachusetts
and Florida. This one bridge.
I mean the only thing--and if I am not mistaken, Mr.
Porcari, all the other funding is in place except for the
Federal part of that. Is that correct?
Mr. Porcari. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Payne. And so, this is something that, from my
understanding, is shovel-ready with the input of the Federal
Government's dollars that we could start on this project,
create the four lanes that are necessary, and to make sure that
this vital piece of infrastructure does not hamper the entire
northeast coast. Am I correct?
Mr. Porcari. That is correct. It is not only shovel-ready,
it is shovel-worthy. I like to describe it as the single point
of failure for 10 percent of America's GDP, because that is
really what that bridge is.
As I mentioned in my testimony, we will be doing early
construction activities, preconstruction work, this summer on
the site, building an access road, retaining walls, and the
like. We are ready to go, and it is 100 percent permitted,
designed, and ready for bid.
Mr. Payne. OK. And Mr. Chairman, I hope that we could
really bring attention to how vital this single bridge is. I
mean they actually have to--it swivels, and when it goes back
it never--9 times out of 10 it does not go back into position.
They have to contact someone, a technician, to come up there--
actually, sometimes, with a sledge hammer, and knock the track
back into place. And this is a bridge between Florida and
Massachusetts that, if it is down, everything is stifled, it is
cut off. And I think that the only thing that is holding it up
is our input.
So I hope we can take a look at that, just so you can
understand, and the committee can understand how vital this
really is. So let's see.
And Mr. Moorman, as a regular Amtrak rider myself, and a
believer in the potential of intercity rail--and I really
appreciate the unique and critical role Amtrak plays in my
region and for the entire country. I also understand that
Congress' inability or unwillingness to come up with the
reliable funding stream for Amtrak since its inception has
contributed to your company's shortcomings in updating
infrastructure. And you know, we want to focus on that aging
infrastructure.
Earlier this spring, there were a couple of derailments at
New York Penn Station. As a matter of fact, I was on the
platform in Newark for one of those derailments, waiting to
come to Washington. You know, thankfully, no one was seriously
injured. The more significant derailment delays for a week, and
has--you know, it has led to Amtrak's accelerated
infrastructure renewal plan.
You mentioned in your testimony while it is correct that
Amtrak passengers will suffer the greatest impact of this plan,
proportionately, I also know that New Jersey Transit customers
will be impacted with--will far outpace Amtrak's. So how did
Amtrak's infrastructure at Penn Station get to this point? And
how do we ensure that the infrastructure failures don't
continue to hamstring commuters?
Mr. Moorman. That is an excellent question. I would tell
you that I think Amtrak got to this point over a period of
years, particularly in the 1990s and the 2000s, when it was not
funded adequately. And, as a result, we did not do the renewal
work that should have been done, not only in Penn Station, but
in a lot of the corridor.
We started that renewal process a few years ago, when our
funding levels improved. But we were trying to do it,
essentially, on the weekends because there has been a great
understandable unwillingness to do work that disrupts the
weekday traveler.
But the second derailment, the more disruptive one that you
talked about, occurred. And, quite frankly, I went down and
started looking around in the station. It is a terrifically
difficult place to work. There are trains 24 hours a day. It is
a maze of track work. But based on the conditions I saw, and
other people who have expertise and I trust saw, we came to the
conclusion that trying to kind of piecemeal this on weekends
for the next few years would create more situations where we
would have disruptive events, unplanned events, and we needed
to go ahead and take aggressive action to renew the
infrastructure. And that is what we are doing this summer.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Payne.
Mr. Webster, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Webster. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a question.
Mr. Reininger, you are plowing new ground, at least for the
current timeframe. I was wondering, as you plow this ground,
what is your biggest frustration with the Federal Government?
Mr. Reininger. So the--as the stewards of private capital
investment, we have to remain diligent with respect to the
efficient use of that capital. And that really runs through the
value of time. As processes are undertaken, the longer those
processes take, the more challenge that that puts on the
economics of the end game operation of the private-sector
business.
And so, what that does, in effect, is it robs available
funds that could be used for capital investment into actual
hard assets and operating businesses, and utilizes them for
other purposes.
And so, if I were to isolate one thing, I would say it
would be a more private-sector-like appreciation for the value
of time.
Mr. Webster. So is it impact studies, things like that,
that are----
Mr. Reininger. Certainly, you know, the processes that I
described earlier, such as our experience with the NEPA process
would be a part of it. By their very nature, projects like
ours, like any infrastructure project, are multijurisdictional,
right? They, by definition, go through more than one
jurisdiction. And at multiple levels: at the Federal level, at
the State level, and at the local level. And because of a lack
of cohesion around those processes, it has the result of
protracting processes and extending timeframes and causing
complications that result in a lack of efficiency with the use
of the capital.
Mr. Webster. Wick, you had mentioned that in this little
[displaying a document]--there is a white page on--a couple of
pages on the Northeast Corridor. And in there it implies that
the environmental review process is consecutive. Does that mean
it sort of goes from one to the next one to the next one and
the next one, as opposed to doing it concurrent?
And if so, is there any fix to that? Because it looks like
it could. This is just one project, the doubling of the
Washington Union Station's capacity. Do those studies--is there
anything we can do to make them run concurrent, or in parallel?
Mr. Moorman. I think that they have been consecutive more
because that is where our planning processes have been. We, you
know, like every other industry, have a certain capability, in
terms of our planning processes and our planning mechanisms.
And so, in order to run all of the studies concurrently, we
would have to be planning all of these projects concurrently.
I don't see that as a particular impediment. I think that
certainly the whole issue around environmental regulation and
other regulations is something we need to address, and
something I asked internally for us to look at, in terms of
suggesting the ways--be it working with Paul in the FRA or
whomever, to streamline without giving up the essential aspects
of regulation. But I think that there have been some very
positives in that.
One of the things that I do want to recognize about NEPA,
which was mentioned earlier, is that we would have expected the
NEPA process for the Hudson River tunnels to have taken about 4
years. It took about 2. And, in fact, we will be ready to go,
as John said, early next year.
But the thing I would assure you--and I think it goes to
the other testimony--that we are also very focused right now at
Amtrak in terms of looking at where we can ask the Federal
Government to help us do things more quickly. And I am hopeful
that we are going to get a very positive response.
Mr. Webster. So time is money, just as it is with All
Aboard?
Mr. Moorman. Yes, sir. Time is money. And the one thing I
will tell you and the whole committee is that our intent at
Amtrak is to look at the money that we are given, just like a
private company looks at their money, to guard it and to spend
it wisely.
Mr. Webster. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Nadler, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Porcari, as you pointed out in your testimony, the
Hudson River tunnels were completed in 1910, while the Titanic
was under construction. They have lasted better than the
Titanic, I must say. Amtrak's infrastructure along the
Northeast Corridor is not just old, but it has suffered decades
of underinvestment.
Congress has, for many years, refused to provide adequate
funding to bring the system into a state of good repair, let
alone to upgrade it. We should have built new tunnels and
expanded capacity in the Northeast Corridor long ago, but the
damage to the existing tunnels caused by Hurricane Sandy has
brought a real new urgency to the situation.
The Gateway Project, which includes the construction of a
new tunnel under the Hudson, is widely recognized as one of the
highest priority transportation projects in the country. But it
will take more than lipservice to get it done. We need a
willingness to spend real Federal funds.
Mr. Porcari and Mr. Moorman, which Federal programs are you
depending on to fund the Gateway Project?
Mr. Porcari. Excellent question. So the--as I mentioned,
the local funding is in place for the first piece of it, the
Portal North Bridge. The Federal funding we have requested for
that is what is called the core capacity program within the
Federal Transit Administration, because you are literally
adding to the core capacity of an existing system.
For the tunnel portion of the project, it would be
similarly structured, with a local commitment. And the Federal
commitment would likely be the core capacity program, as well.
I should point out that, for the tunnel, regardless of the
delivery methodology--in other words, whether it is design-bid-
build, design-build, public-private partnership--so it could
well include private investment as part of it--in any event, a
substantial Federal investment component is required.
In my experience nationwide, there is no project of
national significance that doesn't require a Federal funding
investment.
Mr. Nadler. You want to add to that, or----
Mr. Moorman. I would point out, just to build on John's
last point, that I am a great believer in private investment,
and the----
Mr. Nadler. I am sorry?
Mr. Moorman. I am a great believer in private investment
and the efficiency of the private sector and delivering
projects. But when you look at something like Gateway, we will
do everything we can to structure a private investment
component of that.
But at the end of the day, that is a limited mechanism. And
it is--just requires significant Federal investment and
significant State investment to get the job done.
Mr. Nadler. Yes. Now, the President's budget proposes to
cut funding for Amtrak by almost 50 percent, which also
includes cutting the Northeast Corridor by $93 million, or 28
percent. The President's budget also recommends phasing down
FDA Capital Investment Grants, New Starts, and core capacity
grants, and DOT announced that it does not intend to sign any
new full-funding grant agreements under the program.
Again, if Congress were to enact the President's budget
request, or if FTA were to refuse to sign FFGA--full funding
grant agreements for new projects, what would that mean for the
Gateway Project?
Mr. Porcari. To be clear, Mr. Nadler, for both the Portal
Bridge and the tunnel, those projects cannot go forward without
a Federal commitment.
Mr. Nadler. So the President's budget would foreclose these
projects?
Mr. Porcari. Yes, it would.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
Mr. Nissenbaum, if the administration proposes to cut all
of these important transportation programs, how does the
administration expect to fund the Gateway Project?
Mr. Nissenbaum. So, as you know, Congressman, the Gateway
Program is made up of a series of projects, independent
projects, starting with Portal Bridge, the Hudson tunnels, and
there are others----
Mr. Nadler. Well, there are two basic ones, the Portal
Bridge and Hudson tunnels. Everything else is smaller.
Mr. Nissenbaum. Right. And our responsibility is to advance
those projects through the development process, so we are
overseeing the engineering and the environmental process. And
as John has mentioned, the Portal Bridge has completed the
environmental process, and that is ready. The Hudson tunnels,
we are in the middle of----
Mr. Nadler. But you are not answering my question. As Mr.
Porcari said, if there are no new FFGAs, if the core funding--
core capacity grants are phased down, there is no possibility
of the Gateway Project, the Portal Bridge, and the Gateway--and
the tunnels going ahead.
So again, if the administration proposes to cut these
important transportation programs, how does the administration
expect to fund the Gateway Project? Or do you think--I mean is
it one or the other? Either the--there has to be a way the
administration is thinking of funding the project, or thinks
that we can let the Northeast Corridor fall apart. Which is it?
Mr. Nissenbaum. So what I can speak to is our role at FRA
in the process, and----
Mr. Nadler. Excuse me. I am not interested in the process.
How, in the--how does the administration envision, in light of
its budget proposals, that this admittedly key core project for
the country will be funded?
Mr. Nissenbaum. And again, in my position, what I can speak
to is we take each project as they come to us. When funding is
provided and when it is available, we evaluate those projects,
we do the environmental work associated with them.
Mr. Nadler. That is very nice, but how do you envision the
fund--the projects going forward, given the project--I mean I
assume the administration, in making its budget proposal,
thinks of these things.
Given the administration's budget proposal, how can these--
how can this project go forward? Is there any way it can go
forward? I am not interested in the environmental assessment.
How can it be funded, if the administration proposal and the
budget goes forward? Or does the administration think it
shouldn't be funded?
Mr. Nissenbaum. So, at the risk of being redundant--I
apologize, Congressman--again, my role in this process is to
evaluate what is in front of us.
Mr. Nadler. Well, let me say my time is running out. Let me
just ask then. If the administration--if you will go back to
the administration and get for this committee a reply, if
Congress were to agree with the administration's budget
proposals, how the administration envisions this--the Gateway
Project being funded.
And, if it can't answer that question, does it think the
Gateway Project is not crucial to the country? It has got to
either think it isn't crucial, and so why bother funding it, or
it is crucial, in which case it has to have in mind a way of
funding it. One or the other. So which is it? And please
specify.
So I am asking that you get us an answer for that question.
Mr. Nissenbaum. I would be happy to bring that back to the
Department and get you a response.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Nadler.
Mr. Mitchell, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mitchell. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Moorman, can you help me with a couple of questions?
The FAST Act required that Amtrak implement a new account
structure and separate accounts for the Northeast Corridor and
the national network. That was originally required by the end
of--December 4, 2016. Like many things I have found here in
Congress, that doesn't happen, apparently.
That accounting structure was not submitted, was not
submitted by the end of June, when promised--or by June 2nd. We
seem to have a problem of getting what is a pretty simple
structure. I come from private business. An accounting
structure is not that hard to modify and put in place. When can
we expect to receive that from Amtrak?
Mr. Moorman. We----
Mr. Mitchell. What is the problem?
Mr. Moorman. Well, we have submitted the first draft of
that accounting structure. But I can talk to you about what the
issues have been. And, as you know, I arrived here in
September----
Mr. Mitchell. Yes, sir.
Mr. Moorman [continuing]. And immediately was immersed in
this. One of the complications, in fact, is that it is a fairly
complex set of changes to the accounting structure, and just
driving them out of the Amtrak accounting systems was not
particularly easy to do, because it required a lot of
understanding and manipulation of accounts to divide them into
the appropriate buckets.
The second was, quite frankly, that in January of this year
we reorganized at Amtrak to, I think, accomplish some very
meaningful things. And that delayed the process.
But we are--we understand the importance of it. That work
is being done. I have seen the drafts of the accounting
structure.
There is another piece of this, which is the 5-year
business plans, which I think were a great part of the FAST
Act, and we will be submitting them shortly, as well.
Mr. Mitchell. Well, I appreciate the feedback. It is--how
do you--I mean we have gone along this path for a while now,
trying to identify where you are able to cover costs and where
not. It is--$230 million is currently your operating loss last
year. And we need to get that on schedule. We need to get--how
do you determine how your--I mean I ran a business, and we had
accounting down to the project level in order to identify what
was working and what wasn't.
Mr. Moorman. Right.
Mr. Mitchell. So you have a draft--where has that draft
been submitted?
Mr. Nissenbaum. Yes, the draft is coming in at the end of
this month on the 5-year plans, and they are currently--Amtrak
is currently reporting on the new business line structure in
their monthly reports.
Mr. Mitchell. I thought we were supposed to receive that,
and certainly we would like to see that structure when you do
have that, Mr. Chair.
The--way back in 2005 the inspector general recommended
reducing or eliminating the sleeper service because of the
ongoing losses in that. They estimated that the savings could
be $158 million a year. It hasn't been done. What other
alternatives are you considering that will achieve similar
savings?
Mr. Moorman. Well, I think that is a great question, and it
goes back to this whole discussion about running Amtrak as a
business. When you look at our sleeper service, there are a lot
of times of the year where there is a lot of demand. It is
full. And I think that Amtrak can do a significantly better job
in its revenue analysis and its pricing systems in order to
price for the demand appropriately.
And I would tell you that I think we can cut those losses
substantially, just by doing a smarter, better job of
understanding the market and pricing, and that is the path that
we are going down.
Mr. Mitchell. I appreciate it.
If we can, Mr. Richard, for a second, if we could talk for
as much time as I have available about the high-speed rail
project. Again, I come from 35 years in private business.
Nothing at a scale of this. Quite impressive. The original
estimate was $25 billion. We are now at north of $60 billion.
Even if you adjust for inflation, that is quite an achievement,
in terms of cost.
You describe the reasons for the cost changes or overruns
as being social costs because the plan didn't quite adjust for
having to protect certain areas, go underground, all those
kinds of things. I have to tell you if I went to my board of
directors and said, well, we originally planned X, but we
didn't plan for whatever in building out this project, do you
know what the response would have been?
Mr. Richard. Congressman, having spent a decade working for
one of America's largest corporations as a senior officer, yes,
I do.
Mr. Mitchell. Mr. Richard, what would happen if you were a
CEO of a company and you came in and said, ``We are off by''--
--
Mr. Richard. Well, they would do what our State did, which
was they would bring in new leadership. And so I was part of
that new leadership. We are the ones who looked at those
numbers. We are the ones who told the public what the new
numbers were going to be. We were honest with the public about
that. We were honest with our legislature about that.
Mr. Mitchell. Let me stop you, because I have limited time,
and I appreciate it.
Mr. Chair, do I have time for one more question, Mr.
Denham?
Mr. Denham. Brief.
Mr. Mitchell. Thank you, sir.
Maybe you could submit it for the record, I guess. The
question I now have is the State depended upon financing a big
part of their contributions through the cap and trade program,
which--the peer review group has raised some serious questions
about the viability of that, and its ability to support the
funding, either bonds or direct funding for this program.
I would like to get in detail a response from the group as
to how they are addressing that concern, which doesn't seem to
be allayed at this point in time, as we continue to look at
this as some form of investment. We need some response of how
your group is addressing that, because it seems to be a
significant flaw in the State's funding mechanism.
And I will yield back, in deference to time, but----
Mr. Richard. We will be happy to, and I would like to be
able to discuss that. But we will be happy to----
Mr. Mitchell. Thank you, sir, and I yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Ms. Esty, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Esty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
coming today and helping enlighten us. I represent Connecticut,
and I have constituents who ride these rails every day. And I
have particular concerns about the Northeast Corridor and what
some of these funding proposals would do to people I represent,
who rely on this to get to and from work.
So, Mr. Nissenbaum, the Northeast Corridor Future has
proposed an alternative route, a coastal route. And it seems to
be preferring that. There has been a great deal of public
opposition, as I am sure you are aware. And I am wondering if
there are any environmental concerns about the number of
waterways that would have to be crossed, and what that might
do.
I am wondering if there has been any reconsideration of
that route, given the strong amount of public opposition.
Mr. Nissenbaum. So yes, we have spent quite a bit of time
in Connecticut, and heard from lots of your constituents. And
that has been very valuable in the process, and it is part of
the environmental process to do that, to have the public
hearings, to have the public meetings, to get input.
And so, we are in the process of considering all of those
comments, and putting together a Record of Decision on the
Northeast Corridor Future, and would expect that out soon.
Ms. Esty. And you expect that soon?
Mr. Nissenbaum. Yes.
Ms. Esty. Because I am getting that question asked of--and
I want to be very clear on record I think it is really
important to leave the door open for Connecticut to be part--at
the table to consider an inland route, which would not have
the--I think the same level of opposition, and could get us to
much higher rates of speed than is ever going to be possible,
given the geographical location, geology, and just--frankly,
there is not enough footprint along the coast to ever make use
of the speeds that new rail are able to get to. We can't do it
on the coast, and people want actual high speed.
I would like to ask--explore a little bit on that same vein
about the opportunity to do P3s. There is a lot of discussion
about public-private partnerships with this administration and
in this committee. And I would like feedback from all of you on
the opportunity, particularly in the Northeast Corridor, where
we know there is high demand for, again, something like an
inland route, a different route from what we are currently
using that would be able to reach the kind of high speeds that
we see, say, in Japan, in China, in Europe, in other developed
countries around the world.
Mr. Nissenbaum. Sure, I would be happy to start, and I am
sure other panelists would have something to say about that.
The Northeast Corridor Future is really a vision for the
Northeast Corridor over the next 35 years. And it is kind of a
prerequisite to get whatever kinds of investment into the
corridor that we need. So it lays out the vision, and then it
is agnostic as to what the funding source ends up being, but
our expectation is that it will be multiple funding sources
from a variety of entities, including the private sector, to
actually deliver the program.
Ms. Esty. If I could, are there examples of where private
financing has helped alleviate funding for Amtrak? Can you give
us any examples where that has actually happened, as opposed to
being talked about?
Mr. Nissenbaum. So what I can tell you is there are a
number of examples around the country--in fact, you have one
sitting here on the panel--of where the private sector has
already put resources on the table. And we are actively working
with those partners around the country. And there are certainly
examples internationally, as well, where the private sector has
made important contributions to project development.
Ms. Esty. Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit for the
record a letter I received from one of my constituents, who is
very concerned about proposals to cut intercity rail, and made
clear that, although he does not share my political persuasion,
he shares my passion for intercity rail, rides the rails all
the time, and is deeply concerned about these funding cuts that
are being proposed.

[The letter follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Esty. And I would like to follow up with those,
because, again, we know the only part of the system that is
making money is the Northeast Corridor. However, if we cut off
the intercity rail, what feeds into that, what impact do we
think that is going to have, including on the Northeast
Corridor, for pieces that independently perhaps aren't making
money, but funnel into the Northeast Corridor and then are
needed to help maintain that system and keep it operating?
Mr. Nissenbaum. So I think what you are referring to is
that there are a number of branch lines that feed the corridor,
as well as in other regions around the country, there are
services which are generally known as State-supported services.
And part of the original PRIIA of 2008--and then reiterated in
the FAST Act--is that continuing relationship with the States
to advance those services and to develop them. And I think what
you did see in the budget proposal that came out this year was
a commitment to focus on the Northeast Corridor and the State-
supported corridors, including those branch lines.
Ms. Esty. And, Mr. Moorman, any thoughts on that?
Mr. Moorman. Well, I will go back to one of the things that
I mentioned earlier, which is the fact that--and this is true
of any network-based company--there are a lot of allocations
for cost.
On Amtrak, the Northeast Corridor generates positive
revenue, substantial amounts of positive revenue. Some amount
of that would be lost, in fact, if some of our other services
went away, because the allocation portion would then fall back
on the corridor, which would diminish, if not eliminate its
profitability, or its cash generation, if you will.
So Amtrak exists as a system, right, a collection of
businesses that are symbiotic in some ways. And the money flows
the same way. So when you have a serious impact on any
particular part of the business, it automatically flows to the
others.
Ms. Esty. Thank you very much, and I yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Mast, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me the time.
I appreciate that.
I would like to start with you, Mr. Reininger. I appreciate
your testimony today. I just wanted to start very simply. Is
All Aboard Florida or Brightline, whatever we want to call it,
is that publicly funded, or will it be publicly funded?
Mr. Reininger. It is not publicly funded at all, no. It is
completely an investment of private-sector capital.
Mr. Mast. So in 2013, when it applied for about a $1
billion Railroad Rehabilitation and Improvement Financing loan,
would that have been considered publicly funded?
Mr. Reininger. That would have been a loan from the Federal
Government.
Mr. Mast. What about 2014, when it applied for a $1.75
billion public access bond, cost to taxpayers of up to $600
million, would that have been considered----
Mr. Reininger. Private Activity Bonds are 100 percent
capital. It comes from the private sector. It doesn't have any
involvement from any funds that are distributed from the
Federal Government.
Mr. Mast. A district court judge said up to $600 million
could have been on the taxpayers.
What about at the State level, 2014----
Mr. Reininger. To be clear, if I could, about that----
Mr. Mast. Please do so.
Mr. Reininger. In that particular case, what he said is
there might have been a deference of some amount of tax revenue
that would have come from the interest paid on those bonds.
That is not the same thing as an investment by the Federal
Government.
Mr. Mast. Thank you for the clarity.
In 2014, at the State level, $214 million for the facility
at the Orlando Airport, do you consider that----
Mr. Reininger. As a part of the expansion of the Greater
Orlando International Airport there was an investment made by
the Florida Department of Transportation into the expansion of
a multimodal facility in which we will be a tenant, and we will
pay market rent for the utilization of the facilities that
would be provided for us.
In fact, our rent, in part, goes to pay back the loan that
the airport authority has received in order to build that
facility. So that--so neither were those funds Federal funds,
nor were they directed directly at our project.
Mr. Mast. Very good. Is Florida East Coast Rail, is that
separate from All Aboard Florida or Brightline?
Mr. Reininger. It is. Florida East Coast Railway is a
separately owned and operated company that operates freight in
a shared use arrangement on the corridor.
Mr. Mast. Now, local county governments, they are billed
for maintenance and safety equipment associated with Florida
East Coast Rail?
Mr. Reininger. There are longstanding agreements for the
utilization of the crossings that exist in several of the
municipalities. There is something very unique about our
particular railroad. And that is that railroad corridor really
predates the existence of any of the development on the east
coast of Florida.
As a matter of fact, most of the places along the east
coast of Florida that have these grade crossings are as a
result of the backbone of the infrastructure that was laid down
in the late 1890s by Henry Flagler, which gave rise to the
creation of those very communities. The unusual aspect of that
is that when the municipalities up and down the corridor sought
to get permission to cross the existing rail corridor, they had
to go to the private company and get that permission. In return
for that permission----
Mr. Mast. Florida East Coast Rail, correct?
Mr. Reininger. In return for that permission----
Mr. Mast. Florida East Coast Rail?
Mr. Reininger. It is both the--the rail right of way is
shared ownership between two independent companies, Florida
East Coast Industries and Florida East Coast Railway.
Mr. Mast. Perfect. Now, in that are you counting on
counties like Martin County, St. Lucie County, Indian River
County to pay for maintenance associated with the All Aboard
Florida high-speed rail project, as well?
Mr. Reininger. The ongoing maintenance that would be
associated with grade crossings in those particular counties we
would expect that would be continued as it has been under
longstanding contractual agreement with those communities. But
I have to point out----
Mr. Mast. Is the contract----
Mr. Reininger [continuing]. That as a part of the----
Mr. Mast [continuing]. Florida East Coast or with All
Aboard Florida? You said those are two separate companies.
Mr. Reininger. They are two separate companies, that is
right.
Mr. Mast. So is the contract with Florida East Coast or
with All Aboard Florida?
Mr. Reininger. They are with Florida East Coast Industries.
Mr. Mast. So are there counties that don't have a
contractual agreement with the All Aboard Florida project?
Mr. Reininger. I am not sure.
Mr. Mast. OK. I would like to move to something else.
Mr. Porcari, I appreciate your testimony, as well. Phase 1,
you noted, of your Gateway Project is fixing aging bridges. Is
it important to fix those for safety?
Mr. Porcari. It is. While both the bridge and tunnel are
safe at 106 years of age, it is clear that the tunnel in
particular, given that it flooded during Sandy, has to be
rehabilitated in the next 10 years.
Mr. Mast. Is it important to not obstruct maritime traffic?
Mr. Porcari. It is very important to not obstruct maritime
traffic. The state of the art now is to build a bridge that
doesn't--isn't required to be open and closed periodically,
which would be the design of the new bridge.
Mr. Mast. So, Mr. Reininger, my question is to you. Will
you be replacing the railroad bridges in my district that
prevent all maritime traffic for 45-minute cycles?
Mr. Porcari. We will made--in your district, as we did in
the previous--in our first phase, there are--there happen to be
two movable bridges within that district. With the similar
situation that we have in Broward County, we will be making a
significant investment in the complete reconstruction and
remanufacture of the major component parts of those existing
bridges. They are not of the same vintage ages that some of the
other bridges we have been discussing here today are.
But we will be making significant capital investments in
the entire reconstruction of the mechanical, electrical, and
structural systems that are associated with those bridges. And
in one instance we will also be completely restructuring the
span itself.
Mr. Mast. My time has expired. Thank you for your
testimony.
Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Mast.
Mr. Lipinski, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. I am sorry. Mr. Lipinski, if you will hold,
please. Mr. Garamendi has returned.
Mr. Garamendi, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Some days I
actually get back on time. So I appreciate it, the forbearance.
We did have a markup on strategic arms and nuclear weapons and
all of that. But here we are. And something that is critically
important to California, and I think to the Nation, and that is
the high-speed rail system in California.
Mr. Richard, my apologies for missing your testimony,
although I was able to read it. Just a quick question to you
about the new project going forward.
The President talks about making it in America, a subject
matter that I have been banging away on for the 7 years that I
have been here, and I am delighted to find myself in agreement
with the President on at least one issue, that is that we ought
to make things in America. Could you please tell us about the
new train sets that are coming on, the attitude of the
commission with regard to this very important policy of
enhancing American manufacturing by buying American?
Mr. Richard. First of all, Congressman Garamendi, I want to
recognize your leadership on this issue. You and I have had a
number of conversations on this, and you have emphasized, as I
think many of your colleagues would want you to, the importance
of making sure that these dollars that are ultimately coming
from taxpayers, Federal or State, go to create American jobs.
We envision--unfortunately, today there are no domestic
manufacturers, no American companies that are in the business
of manufacturing high-speed rail trains. We hope that that will
change. And I think, as you have indicated many times, we can
provide a role in creating a whole new manufacturing base in
the United States. And these are very high-technology systems.
And so these are prevalent--very high-paying, high-tech jobs.
Our view is that--well, first of all, we will respect the
Buy America provisions that are in the law. That means that we
have to do everything possible to make sure that the equipment
and the components are manufactured in this country.
As I have committed to you and I commit here today to your
colleagues, we will not seek waivers from those provisions
unless we get to the most extraordinary circumstance that we
have plumbed the depths throughout our economy to create these
components here.
In California right now, Siemens, the German company, has a
manufacturing plant in Sacramento. They are very interested in
manufacturing high-speed trains with American workers. Kawasaki
has a manufacturing plant in Lincoln, Nebraska. They are very
interested in manufacturing trains with American workers. And
any other entity that would come to participate in our program
is going to need to come and show that they are either--
presently have the capacity to build these trains in the United
States, or that they will create the capacity to build it here.
Mr. Garamendi. There are many other elements in this
system: concrete, steel, bridges, et cetera. Could you speak to
that?
Mr. Richard. I am proud to say that today, as we sit here--
and it is our intention that this will continue to be the
case--every ounce of concrete, every ounce of steel is
domestic. The steel girders are being manufactured in Lathrop,
California. The steel rebar is manufactured in southern
California. We continue to use 100 percent domestic content for
the construction materials.
Mr. Garamendi. Did you say Lathrop?
Mr. Richard. I did. I believe you are familiar with that
community, Mr. Chairman.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Garamendi. Lathrop. I think I know that city. And I
know you do, also, Mr. Chairman.
Well, thank you very much. Just a final point of my own. It
was 1988 when California established the High-Speed Rail
Commission. Congressman Costa and I were the authors of that
legislation. So we have been at this a long time.
The Buy America provisions are extraordinarily important
for the continuation of support for this project. American
taxpayer dollars and both California taxpayer dollars as well
are the way in which this is going to be initially financed.
And to maintain that support, the Buy America provisions
maximum--I would love to see 100 percent.
And as I told you, Mr. Richard, we will never build a high-
speed train in America unless the High-Speed Rail Authority in
California simply says, ``It will be American-made,'' in which
case this industry will move to America, and it will be built
in America, and we can then capture both the technology, the
jobs, and the future.
And so I appreciate your position on this. I hope it is
maintained. And, needless to say, I am sure this committee will
watch closely, because Lathrop is an extremely important
community in California. Thank you.
Mr. Richard. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Garamendi.
Just a point of clarification to Mr. Garamendi's question.
California High-Speed Rail Authority did apply for a waiver in
2014 on Buy America provision, did it not?
Mr. Richard. It did. And actually, there was a further one.
And I worked with Mr. Garamendi and reversed that decision to
seek a waiver at that time. And part of, I think, the issue
there was that we were working with Amtrak at one point, and
Amtrak had followed a protocol, some of our staff people
thought that that meant that we could kind of skip over some
steps.
My commitment to Congressman Garamendi and to also the
members of this committee and the Congress is that, in the
future, we will not seek any waiver prior to going out into the
marketplace aggressively, looking for systems and components.
And only after we have plumbed all those depths would we begin
to discuss that.
Mr. Denham. Thank you for the clarification.
Mr. Faso, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Faso. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Moorman and the panel, thank you for your appearance
here today. And I find the testimony very illuminating and
instructive.
Mr. Moorman, I represent an area in the mid-Hudson Valley
of New York State served by the Empire Service, and I have had
occasion to frequently use that service through the years. Can
you--we have not been able to find out from Amtrak as to the
potential service disruptions because of Penn Station
construction project, which is a very necessary project, and
what disruptions may be taking place on the Empire Service. Are
you able to advise me in that this morning, or should we
discuss it subsequent to the hearing?
Mr. Moorman. No, I think I can clarify that. We will
continue to operate all the Empire Service trains during peak.
It is our expectation that those trains will operate into Grand
Central, rather than Penn Station, and that is how we will keep
them out of the work that is going on.
Mr. Faso. So you are expecting all the Empire Service
trains----
Mr. Moorman. We--right. We don't expect to cut any Empire
Service trains, we just are going to keep them out of Penn
during the peak periods, and that--those are the trains that
will operate in and out of Grand Central.
Mr. Faso. So people should anticipate going into Grand
Central for July, August, that time period, and then, after
Labor Day, anticipating going back to Penn?
Mr. Moorman. Yes.
Mr. Faso. OK.
Mr. Moorman. That is correct. And the only people that
should anticipate that will be the trains that are either
arriving or departing in morning or afternoon rush hour.
Mr. Faso. OK. The--you--also in your testimony you
mentioned that you are undertaking a major refresh program for
the 450 Amfleet I cars that are the backbone of the Northeast
Corridor Service. Is that train rehabilitation and upgrade
going to affect the service, or the train sets that are used on
the Empire Service line?
Mr. Moorman. Yes. Those are the so-called Amfleet I cars,
and I believe they are all in Empire Service, as well.
Mr. Faso. OK.
Mr. Moorman. As well as a lot of other State-supported
services and the corridor.
Mr. Faso. That is good news, because I can tell you, as
someone that has used those, that Empire Service many times
through the years, they needed to be refurbished about 15 years
ago.
Mr. Moorman. Given that I think it was last done over 20
years ago, I think your timing is exactly right.
But let me say more broadly that this is part of the whole
thesis, I think, that Amtrak has to have of being--of paying
attention to the customer experience. And the work that we are
doing is not extraordinarily expensive. But it will result in a
completely different customer experience.
Mr. Faso. And one last--now that you mention customer
experience, the fact that you can't buy a cup of coffee on the
Empire Service trains between Albany and New York City, I know
this is an issue between Amtrak and New York State, as well. I
hope that you would go back to the drawing board on this,
because I can tell you it is a very frustrating experience for
many people who utilize that service.
And if there is ever a delay, there is virtually nothing--I
have been on trains on the Empire Service where there was--a
tree falls on the track, or there is some other unintended
disruption, and literally, you have got to get off the train at
a station, if you are close enough to it, and it is very
uncomfortable for those folks, not having any refreshments on
those trains.
So I just wanted to--you don't have to answer that. I think
you know my point----
Mr. Moorman. I wasn't aware of it, but I will work on it.
Mr. Faso. It really--it is important, believe me. If you
can get coffee back--and other things back--on the Empire
Service, we may name a car after you or something like that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Faso. Mr. Porcari, you have perhaps one of the most
integral and important projects in the Nation. Tell me. Is 3P
something that you have looked at, in terms of trying to get
some of the financing, some of the pieces of the financing that
could be necessary to build this project? Because I understand
that we are looking at a project that is $18 billion to $20
billion.
Mr. Porcari. Excellent question, Congressman. The short
answer is yes. So for the first piece of the Gateway Project,
Portal Bridge, which is 100 percent designed and ready to go,
that will be a more traditional design-bid-build. For the phase
1B, the tunnel project, starting with an industry forum this
summer we are actively soliciting private-sector input to
determine the best procurement methodology, which may well be a
public-private partnership. So a project like that could well
lend itself to a public-private partnership, because it is
essentially a capacity allocation under the Hudson River.
With a private-sector partner under that scenario, we would
still, of course, require a Federal Government funding partner.
The ratios might be slightly different, and certainly the
allocation of risk would be different, which is one of the
primary advantages of a public-private partnership.
So we are actively evaluating that and considering that. We
are looking at best practices from around the world. We truly
have an open mind on where to go. What we--the real
determination going forward is how we can most quickly and
efficiently deliver that tunnel project.
Mr. Faso. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, could I just ask one more followup for the
record, if they could submit----
Mr. Denham. Brief, yes.
Mr. Faso. Mr. Porcari, could you advise whether there are
any State or Federal statutory impediments to the Gateway
Project seeking a public-private partnership? And if you could
submit that to us for the record, I would appreciate that.
Mr. Porcari. We will be happy to submit it for the record.
The Gateway Project Development Corporation was created in part
so that it would have the flexibility of doing things like a
public-private partnership, if appropriate.
Mr. Faso. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Faso.
Mr. Lipinski, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chicago Union Station is owned by Amtrak. And recently,
Amtrak selected a master developer for a nearly $1 billion
redevelopment project at Union Station that will bring over 3
million square feet of office, residential, retail, and hotel
space to the historic facility. It will certainly bring a
markedly improved experience for commuters and travelers, be
great for economic development in that area. So it is good to
see that. I was--worked on getting some language in the FAST
Act that helped to make that possible.
Now, in 2013, Amtrak's board of directors called for a more
coordinated approach to unlock the commercial value of Amtrak's
assets and generate additional revenue that could be reinvested
back into the infrastructure, with a particular focus on major
stations such as Chicago Union Station. This was called the
Terminal Development Initiative.
So I wanted to ask Mr. Moorman, can you describe Amtrak's
priorities for these investments? And will they be linked to
the regions where the revenue is generated? Obviously, it is a
big question that I have. The money that Amtrak receives in
this redevelopment, will that be used in the region? Or could
that be moved somewhere else?
Mr. Moorman. As we look at these projects, Chicago being a
great example and our first project--but with more to come on
the Northeast Corridor--it is our hope and expectation that
that will generate significant funds for Amtrak to use in the
operation of its business.
It is certainly our intention to make sure that funds, for
example, from Chicago are used to the maximum extent possible
to do the work that is required, and a lot of it is required in
Chicago Union Station and in our Chicago facilities. We will
have to make sure that we work on the timing because, in some
cases, the funds that come from a particular development may
not match the timing of the investments that we need to make.
But we certainly plan on using those funds to the extent
possible to do the work in the area where they are being
generated.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. And I want to go back to the--to
Buy America. I was happy to hear what Mr. Richard said about
the Buy America and what high-speed rail is--will do on Buy
America. In February I introduced a Buy America Improvement
Act, which seeks to close loopholes, increase transparency, and
promote the use of American-made goods and materials.
The FRA's official policy is that High-Speed Intercity
Passenger Rail equipment can and should be manufactured in the
United States. I want to ask Mr. Nissenbaum what your office is
doing right now in reaching this goal. I want to make sure that
you are doing that, and the waiver process--I have some
concerns about the waiver process, and I want to make sure that
is not being used to sort of undermine our goal of domestic
rail manufacturing industry.
Mr. Nissenbaum. Thank you, Congressman. Not only is it our
policy, it is the law. So we are following it strictly for the
entire HSIPR program, and all of our--all programs that are
funded under the statutory authority granted by this committee.
There is a very rigorous waiver process that is not easy to
go through that requires public notice, requires full vetting
of whether there are domestic suppliers available if someone is
seeking a waiver. And so, while there have been a few waivers
granted over the course of this program, the vast majority of
all the project work has been done through domestic
manufacturing.
Mr. Lipinski. And the previous administration implemented a
policy that imposed Buy America requirements on the RRIF loans.
Does this administration believe this policy should be
continued?
Mr. Nissenbaum. I can't speak to that. What I can say is
that all of the indications we have are--is the strong support
for Buy America policy from our current administration.
Mr. Lipinski. I certainly would encourage that. And the
President certainly talks a lot about Buy America, so I want to
make sure that we are not in any way going backwards. We should
be moving forward on that. And I would appreciate your office's
work on that. Thank you.
Mr. Nissenbaum. Happy to bring that back.
Mr. Faso [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski. Mr. Lewis is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lewis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for joining us today.
Mr. Moorman, the FAST Act, as I understand it, required a
separate P&L statement for the Northeast Corridor, as well as
the network, by December of 2016. That didn't materialize, and
I believe the date was pushed back to June 2nd. That didn't
materialize. Where are we in this process?
Mr. Moorman. We had an earlier conversation from--about
this from a P&L standpoint and an allocation of all of our
spending and revenue. Those accounts have been developed. And I
think the FRA has--which has been a partner with us in
developing them--has them. And I want to say that they have
been delivered.
But what--but I am going to go back and make sure that is
the case, and I won't describe the issues we had in developing
them, but there were several. What has not yet been delivered
are the 5-year business plans for each one of our major
businesses. That will be delivered within the next couple of
weeks, in part delayed because, when I got to Amtrak, we did a
substantial amount of reorganization to more clearly align our
organization with the specific business lines----
Mr. Lewis. OK. Mr. Nissenbaum, do you--would you want to
comment on that, or----
Mr. Nissenbaum. Sure. Congressman, it is a--we think it is
a very important issue, something we have been working on for
quite a while, and we appreciate the committee's leadership in
advancing the account structure and more transparency and
accountability for each of Amtrak's service lines and asset
lines.
It is a large task for Amtrak. They are dealing with some
pretty antiquated accounting systems. Wick has brought in a new
leadership team, including a new CFO, who has demonstrated to
us a real commitment to not only comply with the requirements
of the FAST Act, but to actually deliver and go beyond, in
terms of transparency. So we are looking forward to continuing
to work with Amtrak----
Mr. Lewis. I believe, Mr. Nissenbaum, the FAST Act also
required DOT to accept some competitive bids for some of the
routes. Have you received an application? Or where are we on
that?
Mr. Nissenbaum. Yes. So the FAST Act provided for a pilot
program for up to three long-distance routes to be
competitively bid. We--it requires a rulemaking process. We
issued an NPRM, and we are in the process of finalizing our
final rule. Once that rule goes out, that will start the clock
ticking on getting expressions of interest and then bids in
on----
Mr. Lewis. And when do you expect the timeline for that to
be?
Mr. Nissenbaum. We expect that rule to be out very soon.
Mr. Lewis. What is soon?
Mr. Nissenbaum. I can't say for sure. I can tell you that
it is in the final review process.
Mr. Lewis. OK. Mr. Reininger, I am interested in your
business model on All Aboard Florida, and especially choosing
the Miami-Orlando route.
I mean I think you described the policy, or the business
model as trying to serve those areas that are too long to drive
and too short to fly. I call that high density, where rail is
most successful. Was that a factor in your choice?
Mr. Reininger. With certainty. The size of the absolute
marketplace and the mobility between the individual cities is
central to the equation.
Mr. Lewis. The FRA envisions a high-speed rail network
connecting urban areas up to 500 miles. Now, I am a little
perplexed as to how that is going to work. I believe right now
we serve about 1.2 percent with Amtrak of the rural communities
in the country.
But given the concern of what I call density, or too long
to drive/too short to fly, what is your view of that?
Mr. Reininger. I think the private sector's participation
in this is important, in that you can use private investment
dollars to solve portions of the overall infrastructure
challenge, specifically those that have the dynamics where they
can be profitable.
Importantly, in my earlier remarks I emphasized the need to
incent things to happen that actually create new capacity. The
ability to create new capacity, to absorb future growth, or to
tackle the core of the challenge is sort of an important part
of that. And in these marketplaces like the one that we have
entered into that give rise to a profitable operation is
exactly the kind of position that----
Mr. Lewis. I mean this is the conundrum, isn't it? I mean
in 2005 the DOT said, well, on some of these long-distance
routes for Amtrak they could save $75 million to $150 million
if they just eliminated sleeper cars. Well, that is the first
thing I look for when I get on the Empire, is a sleeper car.
Mr. Reininger. Well, clearly, our approach from the
beginning here, we entered into this as a provider of a
transportation service with an emphasis on the word
``service.'' And so, as we developed, we had the advantage of
building our platform from scratch. We didn't have a legacy
that we had to work from, and so we started with the customer.
And we made sure that----
Mr. Lewis. OK.
Mr. Reininger [continuing]. Everything about our physical
plan was addressed to those needs.
Mr. Lewis. Very good. I thank the witnesses, and I yield
back.
Mr. Faso. Mr. DeSaulnier is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To all the
witnesses, thank you.
Thank you for the work you do, Mr. Richard. It is
interesting to be back here, particularly if--under Mr.
Denham's charge for the three of us. And for my colleagues that
have been supportive of high-speed rail in California,
particularly as we have become more urbanized, and it is in an
area that Mr. Richard and I worked on when we were in local
government.
So to--following a little bit on Mr. Lipinski's questions,
but broadening it in your introductory comments--and we have
talked about this before, particularly the model in Japan,
where I think 25 or 30 percent of their operational revenue
comes from land leases, and they broaden the space beyond what
Mr. Lipinski was talking about, as I remember from my trips
over there.
So in--as we urbanize in California at a rate that none of
us expected, in San Francisco the assessed value around the
Transbay Terminal, which cost us $4 billion in the Bay Area,
but we still need to get the Caltrain line, the extra half-
mile, mile from Third Street in there, which will cost $1.25
billion, so we are trying to find the revenue, the assessed
value within a few blocks of the Transbay Terminal is being
urbanized so intensely is $8 billion.
So, in Union Station in Los Angeles, a similar order of
magnitude. San Jose, as you have mentioned. How does the--maybe
the Federal Government play a role as the Japanese Federal
Government does in incentivizing a proper investment that those
private-sector investments want, as well? So all the people at
Union Station who are now investing heavily in downtown Los
Angeles, Fresno is going through the same thing. On the east
coast you already have that.
I was--in terms of intercity investment, we did a trip--
former Chairman Mica and I were on a trip to the Second Avenue
subway in New York, the most valuable real estate in the United
States, and some of that--it would seem that at least the
increase in the assessed value is a good investment back into
the operations, or the capital investment of the
infrastructure.
So could you comment a little further on that, about where
the Federal Government might have a role, based on your
knowledge about other successful high-speed rail and intracity
investments around the world, where they do it differently than
we do it here, in the United States?
Mr. Richard. Congressman DeSaulnier, thank you. The first
thing that comes to mind is I think in the State and local
context, if you and I were back in 1996 thinking about how we
would do this, knowing what we know today----
Mr. DeSaulnier. Yes, we probably wouldn't be here.
Mr. Richard. Well, you would be here. But the--I think that
there was a missing link in California, in terms of creating
the initial authority for us, as the rail authority, to have
control of the area around the station so that we could harvest
some of this uplift that you are talking about.
I am trying to recapture some of that now. I have created a
transit land use committee, and we are trying to find ways to
do that. As you know, our Governor dissolved the redevelopment
authorities. You and I worked on a redevelopment authority
previously.
Your question, though, was to the Federal Government. And I
would like to reflect on that and get back to you. But my
initial thought on that is this: I think it goes to the generic
role of the Federal Government and Government in general if it
wants to unleash the potential of the private sector, which is
to recognize the risk profile at the beginning is very high, in
many cases, for the private sector.
And well--and actually, one other thing. If you look at,
for example, Fresno, where it is just going to be a hub, where
high-speed rail is going to revitalize the downtown, they need
about $800 million of infrastructure improvements: water,
sewer, streets, internet, and so forth, because a private
developer, as you and I saw in Pleasant Hill, cannot come in
and make--and carry those kinds of investments on their balance
sheet.
So I do think that the partnership here is, to the extent
that there is Governmental support for infrastructure, the
private sector then both sees the risk profile come down and
also sees that the infrastructure has been put in place that
allows them to bring private dollars in. And I think that would
be true in transit-oriented development, as well as the broader
infrastructure----
Mr. DeSaulnier. In the few seconds I have left, Mr. Porcari
or any of the other witnesses, do you have--just capturing this
investment--I mean, historically, in the United States we have
let people speculate more than other countries, and benefit
from the infrastructure. And it seems like the Japanese have a
different relationship, in terms of risk. So could we do
something to incentivize that behavior?
And part of that allows for higher density, which a lot of
the people in the community don't want, but then they do when
they understand that this is the investment.
Mr. Porcari. If I may, Congressman, there is a much more
sophisticated view, I think, on both rail projects and transit
projects nationally, in terms of value capture. Thinking more
holistically from the beginning, in your Second Avenue subway
example, of not capturing that----
Mr. DeSaulnier. Right.
Mr. Porcari [continuing]. Value, subsequent phases of that
or other projects from the beginning, thinking about the real
estate value capture as an integral part for both capital and
perhaps operating cost recovery for the projects.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Well, to the degree that any of you have,
in your work--think that there are ways that we can incentivize
this and do it appropriately, so we are not taking away
inappropriately from the private sector, but where there is a
mutual benefit, I think we would be all better served by your
information.
Mr. Porcari. One clear way to do that would be in the
Federal grant-making process, whether it is New Start's core
capacity grants, or others, to recognize that as part of one of
the criteria for a grant application process.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Denham [presiding]. Mr. Richard, one of the focuses of
today's hearing is private investment in intercity passenger
rail service. The Florida and Texas projects, for example, are
funded entirely through the private sector. In California,
where the high-speed rail project has been in development for
an extended period of time, how much funding has been pledged
or invested so far?
Mr. Richard. We have not been at the point of seeking or
receiving private-sector investment so far, Mr. Chairman, at
this point. That is not to say that there is not overwhelming
interest, but it would come in at a different phase in the
project.
Mr. Denham. Well, let me then ask you about the interest.
At our January 15, 2014, oversight hearing on California
high-speed rail, you had indicated that private-sector
investment was imminent. And then, your written statement said,
quote ``In 2011, the Authority issued a Request for Expressions
of Interest (RFEIs) and received more than 1,100 responses.''
Those 1,100 responses, are those in the areas of selling right-
of-way, station development, fiber optics, real estate
development, air rights, all in that type of----
Mr. Richard. I don't remember specifically, but I think
that is right. And then there was another round where we went
out to the private sector, we got, very specifically, about 36
responses to our question about how to finance the next phase
of the project.
But if I might, just two quick points. First of all, we
applaud the success of both Texas and Florida and what they are
doing. Their structures are different than ours. In some cases,
they are operating on existing railway corridors. In some
cases, there is an existing railway.
Also, there was a deliberate decision made by my
predecessors--and I think even your predecessors in the
California Legislature--that this program should try to connect
areas of the State, including the Central Valley, which has
been underinvested. That is different than building a straight
line from San Francisco to Los Angeles.
And what that has meant, since we are also, by law, not
allowed to provide an operating subsidy, what that has meant is
that, for the private sector to come in, either the Government
has to guarantee their first period losses, which we cannot do
by law, or we have to show them that there is sufficient
ridership that they will make that investment on a risk-
adjusted basis. And that is why our view is that the Government
has to pay for the first operating segment. We will then
auction the rights to the private sector to come in and operate
on that segment.
So it is in sequence, and I think we are on path for that
to happen.
Mr. Denham. I have got specific questions on the ridership
side of things, and the private investors as it pertains to
either direct money into the project, or from buying the train
sets themselves.
Mr. Richard. Right.
Mr. Denham. But specifically on the redevelopment of real
estate or selling of right-of-way for whatever purpose, whether
that is development or fiber optics or signage or what have
you, do you have estimates on what all of the different
developments from L.A. to San Francisco and the right-of-way
that is being purchased--estimates on what that value is that
could be generated from just that aspect of the business?
Mr. Richard. I don't have that at this time, Mr. Chairman.
We are just really starting to get into that. So my answer is I
do not have that at this time.
Mr. Denham. But you had 1,100 responses. Those 1,100
responses were pertaining to what?
Mr. Richard. Mr. Chairman, I have to say I don't recall at
this point. I would like to be able to supplement my testimony
with that.
Mr. Denham. OK. We are just looking for ideas and a----
Mr. Richard. I understand.
Mr. Denham [continuing]. Better understanding of how we put
this--these numbers together.
Well let me finish that quote from that hearing.
``Following up on the results of the RFEI, in January 2012, the
Authority met with eight infrastructure investment firms, which
confirmed their interest in investing in the program.'' What
has happened since 2012? It has been 5 years since you made
that statement.
I assume--well, let me ask you. The eight infrastructure
investment firms, was that pertaining to buying the trains
themselves? Was it capital infusion? Was it going into the
infrastructure of rail? And what has happened with those eight
companies?
Mr. Richard. I was in many of those meetings, Mr. Chairman.
It was really about, at that point, looking at the question of
infusion of capital. And actually, it was my idea to say we
need to go out and take snapshots of the market from time to
time, and find out where we are and what we need to do.
Subsequent to that, in 2012, probably the one thing that
sort of disrupted our development was adverse court rulings in
2013 that basically put the project on hold. Those ultimately
were reversed. And, in fact, all the other court rulings have
gone our way since then.
There were questions about the extension of the cap and
trade program, which are being resolved; issues about our
bonds, which are being resolved. And so now, we are back at the
point of talking to the private sector about when and how they
want to come in.
But that is why I want to reemphasize our action last week
to issue an RFP for early operator. This would be operating
companies that would come in to the program now, help us design
the program, be available to start up the program, absorb those
early losses. And we got very strong indications from five
international consortia, all of whom want to compete for that.
I think that is a very good indicator that we are now moving
into a commercial phase, and about to enter into those
conversations with the private sector.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Ms. Wilson, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Thank you for
your patience.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Denham and Ranking Member
Capuano. Thank you to our esteemed witnesses for sharing your
perspectives on challenges and opportunities for intercity
passenger rail service. I especially want to thank and welcome
Mr. Reininger for joining us today on behalf of Florida East
Coast Industries, which is based in my district.
Tourism is the backbone of Florida's economy, so the
viability of every transportation mode matters today,
especially passenger rail. I am pleased that Brightline, the
Nation's first passenger rail service in 100 years to be
privately funded, is headquartered in my district. I cannot
overestimate how important this rail system will be to Miami
and the greater Florida economy. We expect Brightline, which
will launch this summer, to jumpstart our economy with up to
10,000 jobs, and to transport 3 million to 5 million Floridians
and tourists annually.
Amtrak's Miami Station, which serves more than 70,000
Floridians and tourists each year, also is in my district. So I
was quite alarmed by President Trump's proposal to slash nearly
half of Amtrak's funding. The draconian cuts would derail
Amtrak in my home State and in 22 other States.
If this budget is adopted, three Amtrak long-distance
services currently available in Florida--the Auto Train, Silver
Meteor, and Silver Star--could come to a grinding halt. This
would not only deprive nearly 1 million Floridians and tourists
of safe and reliable passenger rail service, it also would
slash hundreds of jobs, exacerbate highway congestion, and harm
Florida's tourism-driven economy.
Once upon a time, Miami was a tiny hamlet of fewer than 300
residents. Then Henry Flagler's railroad came to town and
helped transform the city into a bustling metropolis. Today
Miami is one of the Nation's largest cities, and a leader in
global commerce.
But the proposal would slow its economic growth, and
perhaps even put it in reverse. Amtrak provides an essential
service that enables hard-working Americans to travel from
State to State and coast to coast in an efficient and cost-
effective manner. We should be looking for ways to work across
party lines to improve and expand this national treasure.
As Members of Congress, we have an obligation to our
constituents. We need to support Amtrak and new passenger rail
services like Brightline. I look forward to working with my
colleagues on this subcommittee to derail proposed funding cuts
and support sensible reforms that will help keep the traveling
public, workers, and communities safe and secure.
I have a couple of questions. Mr. Reininger, I applaud
your commitment to the Miami community. Please elaborate on
Brightline's commitment to workforce training and
apprenticeship education. Specifically, who do you plan to
partner with to ensure we develop a workforce that meets the
industry's needs? And how do you plan to do that?
Mr. Reininger. Thank you for the question, Ms. Wilson. As
you know, we have taken to heart several very important
initiatives around the idea of making sure that our workforce
is a reflection of our local communities and all the places
that we are serving them.
In specifics, in the Miami Station area, we made an
important decision to locate our corporate headquarters
adjacent to our station location in downtown Miami, and we have
a preference program in place that, as we are building up our
staff, that we make a preference for hiring those that are the
most local within our neighborhood as we possibly can.
As an extension of that, we have also done a couple of
things where we have partnered with other local business
enterprises and created opportunities for them to open new
businesses within the context of our developments there at the
station. And we have made special provisions for making those
deals with people that share our preference for hiring from the
very sort of localized community.
We have also been in discussions with local educational
institutes like Miami-Dade College, to develop programs that
will support the nature of the training that will be necessary
to produce the workforce that we need to make our business
successful. As I stated earlier, as a transportation service
provider, we have a special emphasis on the word ``service,''
and we have a very hospitality-oriented approach to the product
that we are delivering.
And so, the development of training for people that will be
in what is essentially a hospitality industry for us is central
to our ability to be successful, as we go forward.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you.
Mr. Nissenbaum, the White House budget requests $25 million
for consolidated rail infrastructure and safety improvements,
down from $68 million in 2017. Will this cut impact rail
safety?
Mr. Nissenbaum. So in the fiscal year 2017 Consolidated
Appropriations Act, Congress provided for the $68 million, so
that is the program we will be implementing in fiscal year
2017.
Ms. Wilson. I didn't hear you.
Mr. Nissenbaum. Congress provided in the fiscal year 2017
appropriations the full $68 million for that program, and that
is the program we will be implementing this fiscal year.
Ms. Wilson. OK, thank you.
Mr. Denham. Ms. Wilson?
Ms. Wilson. Mm-hmm?
Mr. Denham. Your time has expired.
Ms. Wilson. I yield back.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Denham. Mr. Richard, the peer review group noted in
reviewing the 2016 business plan that if the--``if the initial
northern Initial Operating Section is completed as planned, the
lack of a connection into Bakersfield''--you are stopping, the
first initial segment----
Mr. Richard. Right.
Mr. Denham [continuing]. Short of Bakersfield. So if it is
not connected with Bakersfield, and you don't have a fully
functional connection from San Jose to the Transbay Terminal in
San Francisco, will that not--those two limit the ridership
numbers and passenger revenue are needed to complete the rest
of the project and encourage private investment?
Mr. Richard. They will limit it, Mr. Chairman. I think that
the key point here is our 2016 business plan showed that the
construction that we are doing in the Central Valley from
wherever the terminus is to San Jose, by itself, would allow us
to build something that would be economically self-sustaining,
which is both the law and the policy in California.
That would be the minimum system that we could build. It
would connect the Central Valley to Silicon Valley. There would
be enough ridership on that system, even between sort of the
Fresno-Merced region and San Jose, to be economically self-
sustaining, to not require an operating subsidy.
Mr. Denham. Have you released those ridership estimates?
Mr. Richard. They were part of the 2016 business plan.
And so--but we also--and the reason we stopped north of
Bakersfield is originally we thought we were going to build our
first segment to Los Angeles. We changed our direction for
reasons I can go into, and so we didn't go any further south,
and we turned to go north and west.
But we also said--as you point out--in the 2016 business
plan that it would make a lot more sense to actually connect in
to Bakersfield, and to enhance the service between San Jose and
San Francisco. Even if we could meet the minimum criteria not
doing that, it would make more sense to do that.
That would require an additional $2.9 billion of
investment, but it would generate $4.7 billion of additional
ridership revenue. So our point was we could have the
conversation with the Congress about whether that is an
appropriate Federal investment, given the almost immediate
return of doubling that investment, and further connecting
those regions.
So we don't need to connect into Bakersfield right now, or
enhance the service to San Francisco, but we think it would be
better if we could do that. Frankly, the first place we were
going to look is here. If that is not satisfactory, we will
start scrounging in the sofa cushions to see how we get there.
Mr. Denham. And the recent FRA grant for Caltrain
electrification, it is my understanding that the folks over in
that area have made it very, very clear that they will never be
high-speed rail, nor do they want to be high-speed rail, and
that the Caltrain track will never be upgraded to be able to
facilitate the California high-speed rail trains on that piece
of track.
So it is my understanding that, as the blended approach, as
you connect with Caltrain eventually, that you would have to
get off of California high-speed rail and on to Caltrain.
Mr. Richard. Mr. Chairman, I am going to have to
respectfully say that I don't think any of that is correct. The
folks--you may be talking about people who, in the community of
Atherton, have tried to bring litigation to stop high-speed
rail from happening on that corridor. But in fact, all of the
transportation leaders in the Bay Area have a very different
view. We have a very different view. And, in fact, by law we
could not provide the $600 million of bond funding contribution
to that unless that corridor will accommodate high-speed rail.
We simply couldn't do it.
The plan is that the electrification will take place now,
which will allow Caltrain to have more efficient service as a
stand-alone thing. But in fact, we save $20 billion by using
the Caltrain tracks. There is no appreciable diminution in
speed between San Jose and San Francisco on that, and there
will have to be some track straightening and some passing
tracks.
But we are in discussions with Caltrain and other
transportation leaders in the Bay Area about precisely how to
do that. We are doing environmental work on that right now. So
that corridor will be upgraded to high-speed service, and we
think that is the most cost-effective way to do it. But I would
be happy to engage with you or your staff about where we are
having differences there in----
Mr. Denham. Thank you. I would like to understand that
better, but it is your intention that the Caltrain system will
accommodate high-speed rail trains at a certain point in time.
Mr. Richard. That is correct. And those engineering studies
have been done, and that is the plan. The California
Legislature appropriated our bond money specifically with that
idea in mind. And so I am happy to engage with you and your
staff on this for----
Mr. Denham. Would this be at a later date, or is this part
of the FRA grant that the--the grant and the Caltrain upgrades
are being put in place with the understanding that California
high-speed rail trains will be on that track.
Mr. Richard. Well, my understanding is that the grant, the
core capacity grants that they got, which comes through a
different part of the Department of Transportation, that grant,
I believe--Mr. Nissenbaum can correct me--came out of the
Federal Transit Administration, not FRA, and it was intended to
be able to support Caltrain electrification as a stand-alone
matter.
But we are now working with Caltrain so that we--and the
reason we are funding this is that it will allow us to step up
to full high-speed service. But I think that the grant from
Federal Transit Administration was independent of that, if I
understand that correctly. And I----
Mr. Denham. Mr. Nissenbaum?
Mr. Nissenbaum. Yes, that is correct, it is through the
Federal Transit Administration, through their Capital
Investment Grant Program.
Mr. Denham. OK, so this has been my concern from the
initial grant request that came up in late January, is that you
are using Prop 1A dollars as your State match, yet there has
not been any clarification that Caltrain will ever be able to
facilitate--well, let me ask you.
Under the grant agreement, will Caltrain be able to
facilitate California high-speed rail?
Mr. Nissenbaum. So, I am going to have to get back to you,
because this is an FTA administered grant, about how they have
written that. From our standpoint, we worked closely with FTA
to ensure that whatever sources of funding are applied to each
grant, is uniquely for those grants, that there is no double-
counting and so forth. So that is our piece of it. But we
will--I can certainly get back to you on how the--how it is
written from FTA.
Mr. Denham. But you understand my concern. If Mr. Richard
is saying Prop 1A is for California high-speed rail, and you
are using California high-speed rail money on a grant match for
an upgrade to Caltrain, I want to make sure that we are not
going to build a new track, an upgraded track, only to have to
turn back around and find other money to upgrade it again,
assuming we are going to have Caltrain--California high-speed
rail on there. If you could clarify that position, we would
look forward to a written response.
Mr. Nissenbaum. I am happy to do that for you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Mr. Richard. And may I just say I agree with you on that,
Mr. Chairman. We certainly are working with Caltrain to make
sure that we don't end up with sequential investments. We want
to do this right the first time.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Richard.
Mrs. Bustos, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Bustos. Thank you, Chairman Denham, and also Ranking
Member Capuano, and also to our panelists for being here today.
This is an important issue for me.
I represent the central and northwestern region of the
State of Illinois, and we have two possible passenger rail
corridors in the district that I serve. The first is service
from Chicago to Rockford, and then on to Galena, and then over
the river into Dubuque, Iowa. The second is Chicago to the Quad
Cities. I live in a town called Moline. The Quad Cities are
Moline and Rock Island in my congressional district.
That project was awarded $177 million in Federal money in
2011, as part of the High-Speed Intercity Passenger Rail
program. The Chicago to Quad Cities route has experienced
delays upon delays due to uncertainty, mostly at the State and
Governmental level. We have got some issues with our State
budget. But it is now moving forward, and we are working very,
very hard to get this over the finish line.
And as you might expect, it is a major economic development
impact on our community: 800 new jobs, helping with tourism,
helping our families get back and forth to Chicago on a--you
know, which is very congested, if you do that by driving.
So, Mr. Nissenbaum, I actually have two questions for you.
The rest of you can relax. I don't have any questions for the
rest of you. You have been at FRA for some time and you are--I
think you are familiar with this project. And the FRA has been
a really big help to our office, so I want to thank you and
your colleagues for that.
I am wondering if, as you sit here, if you can offer your
commitment to continue to working with us on this project, so
we don't continue to face delays, and just really help us get
this over the finish line. Our community sees this as so
important.
Mr. Nissenbaum. Thank you, Congresswoman. Yes, absolutely.
We have worked closely with the State and with the railroads on
that route. They are having some challenges. A portion of it,
we have been able to get those investments in place, the
portion over the BNSF Railroad. It is when we have hit the
short line territory that things have been a little bit more
difficult, but we are working through that with the State, and
you absolutely have our commitment. We are continuing to
partner with the State on it.
Mrs. Bustos. I appreciate that. And that was really part of
my second question. We have got the--so you have got the
Illinois Department of Transportation, and I think you--I don't
need to mention the rail line, but the part that a certain rail
line--that--where they own the track.
So we have got timeline and design upgrades that are needed
on that. I think if we can work through that part of it, we
will be able to move this forward. And I guess that is probably
more specifically the area that we just really hope that we can
work together on, on working that part of it through.
Mr. Nissenbaum. Yes, absolutely. Again, as you know, these
are State grants. And so, you know, we do need the State DOT,
as they have been, to stay focused on it and to try to resolve
those issues. Ultimately, you know, they are responsible for
it, but we have been partnering with them to help them try to
clear some of the obstacles in the way of that grant.
Mrs. Bustos. How are you feeling on our chances?
Mr. Nissenbaum. We remain committed and hopeful on getting
through them.
Mrs. Bustos. I will pass that along to my community.
Mr. Nissenbaum. All right.
Mrs. Bustos. I appreciate that. No, we really do appreciate
your help. The FRA has been very, very good to deal with. So
thank you so much for that, your willingness to commit to that.
That is all I have, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mrs. Bustos.
Mr. Capuano?
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
the panel again. Like I said, I wanted to listen today, and I
heard some interesting stuff.
I want to be real clear. From my perspective, anything I do
as a Member of Congress to deal with Amtrak or any passenger
facility across the country, none of it is going to get me a
single vote. No one is going to vote for me by spending a lot
of money on passenger rail.
Yet we all know that it is an absolute necessity for this
society to be successful and our economy to be successful. So
that is why people like me support this. Politically, I am much
better off cutting a ribbon on a bridge or, you know, opening
up a new subway stop, or whatever it might be. But this is
essential.
And honestly, I don't usually advocate for projects outside
my district or my region. But clearly, the Gateway Project is
absolutely critical to this country, and it has to be done. I
think high-speed rail is an embarrassment, for those of us who
travel internationally, to see how far behind we are on high-
speed rail.
You know, we pride ourselves on being the best and the
brightest and the fastest and the first, and yet we are
probably the last, as far as developed countries go, for high-
speed rail. It is about time that we catch up.
I want to clarify one thing. Several times today comments
were made relative to ARRA, the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act, if I remember. Just for the record, I want to
be real clear. ARRA was the stimulus which people like me, who
voted for it, got the hell beat out of me for voting for it as
some kind of a throwaway project. And yet today we are reaping
the benefits of it, and I haven't met anybody who doesn't like
what we did with it.
Now, we could all argue about exactly where the money
should have gone, but each and every one of you at this table
are representing thousands of people that have been employed
because of it. And I always like to draw that distinction
because we in Government--I think wrongfully so--we took a lot
of grief for the stimulus, and we took credit for ARRA, and
nobody understands that it was the same thing.
Now we are going through that today in the same thing with
health care. You know, people hate Obamacare, but they love
that ACA. It is the same thing. The stimulus was a good bill. I
am glad I voted for it. I wish we could have had more into
infrastructure. That is the mistake we made. But so be it.
I guess I would like to ask--I am going to let you off on
this one, Mr. Nissenbaum, out of respect for your current
position, but I want to ask the rest of the panelists. I assume
you are familiar with the President's proposal relative to
rail, particularly passenger rail. And I would like to ask each
of you. Do you support the President's budget, as proposed to
this Congress, in regards to the money expended relative to
passenger rail? Do you think it is sufficient? Can you do your
jobs efficiently if that budget were to be passed as submitted?
And again, Mr. Nissenbaum, out of due respect I will exempt
you from answering that.
Mr. Moorman, do you have an opinion on the President's
budget, relative to passenger rail?
Mr. Moorman. Mr. Capuano, I will say what I said earlier. I
think that the President's budget, the statement of the budget
is that we should not support the long-distance network, but we
should continue to support the States and the Northeast
Corridor.
And as I have said before, I think the long-distance
network provides valuable services, but that is an argument
that you can have on a philosophical basis. The practical--from
a practical standpoint, the President's budget would
effectively eliminate capital funding for the Northeast
Corridor, and that is a bad thing.
Mr. Capuano. Mr. Moorman, you have a future in the State
Department with that beautiful way to say no, you don't support
it.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Capuano. Mr. Porcari, how do you feel about it?
Mr. Porcari. Thank you, Ranking Member Capuano. The Gateway
is a great illustration of a very specific project where the
President's budget, as proposed, would not permit Federal--the
Federal funding share. So any project that does not yet have a
full funding grant agreement could not qualify for a core
capacity or New Starts grants.
So, starting with the bridge, the Portal North Bridge, and
later with the tunnel, the two most crucial elements of this
very crucial project, would not be eligible for Federal funding
under the President's budget, as proposed.
Mr. Capuano. I got to love this. I guess I am going to have
to speak English for each of you. That was a no, as well.
Mr. Porcari. That is a no, as well.
Mr. Capuano. Mr. Reininger, how do you feel about the
President's budget? I can translate afterwards, don't worry.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Reininger. Am I going to be cutting a ribbon on a
bridge?
I share your point of view, that there is a fundamental
need for significant investment in infrastructure across the
country. I absolutely believe that the role that intercity
passenger rail can contribute to that is an important piece of
the entire equation. We have, for 5 years now, been laser-
focused on a private-sector response to that. And, as much of
the conversation has gone on today, I felt a little bit
exempted from that because we aren't seeking grants, we aren't
seeking subsidies, and we really aren't part of the Federal
funding source resolution to the opportunities that we see for
intercity passenger rail, as we go forward into the--you know,
into the--in the infrastructure challenge, in general.
I will say that I think there are--there is room within the
context of the dialogue that is presently taking place on
infrastructure in general for assistance for projects like
ours, and we support those.
Mr. Capuano. So that is a no, too. Thank you, Mr.
Reininger.
Mr. Richard, do you support the President's budget?
Mr. Richard. Mr. Capuano, I am going to give you a direct
answer, but----
Mr. Capuano. I don't believe that for 1 second.
Mr. Richard. You are going to see that I am, predicated by
this. It will surprise people to know that California, a State
where--we are a car culture, we write songs about our cars in
California--actually has three of the five busiest Amtrak
routes in the United States. Our L.A. to San Diego route is
second only to the Northeast Corridor, which we acknowledge is
the most important rail corridor in the country.
Our State secretary of transportation has sent a letter
opposing the cuts to Amtrak in the President's budget. I don't
think you need to translate for me for that.
Mr. Capuano. I think that is pretty good.
Mr. Richard. And supporting full funding of the FAST Act
budgeted amounts.
Now, I will also say there are other aspects of this
administration's proposals where we are supportive, and we are
working with them on things like effectuating the fast track
elements of regulatory permitting and other things, where we
are having very positive, constructive conversations with the
administration.
But we have specifically opposed the cuts to Amtrak in the
President's budget.
Mr. Capuano. I am presuming the chairman is going to be a
little flexible with me since I have been so nice all day. I
got a few more.
Mr. Porcari, I just want to be clear. On the Gateway
Project, doesn't that include, like, a big project that
Governor Christie shut down years ago?
Mr. Porcari. Yes. The ARC project, which would have--wasn't
exactly the same as the Gateway Project, but would have
provided new capacity under the Hudson River into New York, was
actually under construction when it was terminated. The Gateway
Project is--you can think of as its successor. It is more
comprehensive----
Mr. Capuano. Right.
Mr. Porcari [continuing]. But it is----
Mr. Capuano. And yet the State of New Jersey or the Port
Authority, or whoever it was, has a fair amount of money on the
table for the rest of this project. Is that correct?
Mr. Porcari. Yes. The State of New Jersey, through New
Jersey Transit, is an important part of the local funding
component to this, and----
Mr. Capuano. How--when you come to the Federal Government
and ask for money, how can we be sure that Governor Christie
won't renege again?
Mr. Porcari. The Governors in both the States of New Jersey
and New York have been very strong supporters of this project.
They have----
Mr. Capuano. When did he change his mind?
Mr. Porcari. We believe, because we have a project that is
ready to go, that--by the way, the Portal North Bridge project
will be managed by New Jersey Transit, an instrument of the New
Jersey Government--that that shows the strong support, and
Governor Christie has repeatedly expressed his support for the
Gateway Project----
Mr. Capuano. Well, I am particularly happy he was
enlightened. Again, I will take all the money I can get. We
tried to grab the Florida money when they walked away, and, you
know, if Jeff ever stopped the California project, I would be
grabbing your money, anything I can.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Capuano. But, as I said, I need this Gateway Project to
go through, because it is good for the country. And actually, I
am an American. I am not just a parochial guy. I am a little
bit of both, but, you know, it would be good for us.
I guess the last item I have is for you, Mr. Nissenbaum. I
have been reading, and I have been informed that President
Trump's administration have told all Departments not to answer
any questions submitted to them by ranking members of committee
or subcommittees. I haven't seen this, but that is what I have
been informed is accurate.
And I am just curious. I mean, honestly, up until now, this
committee is about as bipartisan as you get. You know, we have
minor differences, but they are kind of like family
differences. We are--we--that is why we get things like the
FAST Act----
Mr. Denham. That is until I take your $20 billion for
California high-speed rail.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Capuano. That is not a very family thing to do, but----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Capuano. But it is just--it just strikes me that that
is the kind of policy that, absent some reason, would really
drive a divisive wedge in a--maybe other places, but in this
committee would drive a divisive wedge between people that get
along and work together.
And I am just curious. Has your Department been informed by
the White House that you can't answer questions submitted by
the ranking member of this committee?
Mr. Nissenbaum. We have gotten no such direction. We have
been responsive to requests from both----
Mr. Capuano. Up until now, everybody has been great. I
mean, you know, the DOT and all the subagencies have been
great. We have had--to my knowledge, we have had no problem. As
usual, we go back at you three or four times, but that is
normal.
But I just want to be clear. I mean, if that comes down, I
guess we will be having another discussion because, again, I
don't mind having our arguments with my colleagues on this
side, on that side, but up until now we like to build things.
And we all--again, here we are, having a long discussion about
projects that are not going to get any of us votes. But we all
know it is critical for this country. We know it. And we will
do what we have to do, as best we can. There is no reason to
find ways--and I am not talking to you, but there is no reason
for anybody to find ways to drive us apart unnecessarily.
And with that, thank you, and I yield back, and I deeply
appreciate the chairman's wonderful flexibility and his liberal
approach to his timing.
Mr. Denham. Easy on the liberalism.
Mr. Richard, a lot of new discussions about the blended
approach. With Caltrain now--and Metrolink to the south, in
L.A.--so you now have changes on the northern and southern ends
of the high-speed rail line. What will the average train speed
be with the current number of stops that are proposed be
between San Francisco and Los Angeles? Average train speed.
Mr. Richard. I would say--I will have to do the division in
my head, but the system, as you know, Mr. Chairman, has to be
designed so that a nonstop train can go in 2 hours and 40
minutes. And we are still meeting that standard. In fact, the
peer review group thought that we are about 8 minutes ahead of
that.
In a way, the answer to your question is going to depend on
the operator. Again, we are going to turn this over to private-
sector operations. They are going to make decisions about how
many through trains, which trains stop in which areas, and so
forth. Those will be commercially driven. But I would say, in
general, if I had to guess today, it would be about 3 hours
from L.A. to San Francisco with normal stops, but with through
trains at the 2 hours and 40 minutes that the statute calls
for.
Mr. Denham. So there will be some trains that skip a
certain amount of stops to be able to hit the 2.4 hour----
Mr. Richard. The requirement in the law is that the system
be designed so that a nonstop train can go in 2 hours and 40
minutes. Just as the airlines optimize their service, which
things they do nonstop, which ones they go through hubs, the
private-sector operator will come in, and they will look at the
ridership numbers, and they will decide how they want to
provide service to those cities. Some of it will clearly be
nonstop, some of them will stop in San Jose, maybe make limited
stops, some of them will stop in all the cities.
And we will certainly want to make sure that everybody gets
served. And I think the markets are there to serve them. But
the reason that I can't give you a full answer today is
whatever I say would be superceded by the commercial decisions,
probably within some limits, that the commercial private-sector
operator would make about how to optimize the system the best.
Mr. Denham. Well, we have seen a number of models as we
have taken a look at France and Japan and China, and seeing
what projects there are that are high speed that are already
out there. We have also seen Florida and Texas that are
modeling on what is proposed in the future. I would also like
to see that modeling for California to better understand what
areas of the State you could actually hit the 220 miles per
hour. And if you are adding in stops and optimizing the rail
system based on those stops, we would like to see how that
affects the 220 miles an hour.
Mr. Richard. We will be happy to provide that to you. I
would only make this point very quickly, Mr. Chairman, which is
several times you have referenced the legislatively created
peer review group. One of the things--before we agreed to the
blended service, the peer review group not only recommended it,
but indicated that we could run blended service in the end
portions and still meet all the requirements of the Bond Act.
Eighty-five percent of the track we are laying will be
brand new, virgin track, and that will all be susceptible to
the highest speeds that these trains can run on, subject only
to track geometry. It is only in the urban areas where, as you
have traveled around and seen it, the trains don't go 200 miles
an hour anyway. That is why we were able to share track in the
North. And in the South, we are only sharing corridor. We are
building our own track, but adjacent in the corridor, with no
appreciable impact on the speeds.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. And I want to follow up on one final
question, Mr. Richard, from a previous hearing that we had had
last year.
Last July, California High-Speed Rail Authority made a
presentation to the U.S. DOT in which it indicated it would
seek $15 billion in Federal funding and financing support.
Where does this stand, and why was this not discussed in the
2016 business plan?
Mr. Richard. I was not in that particular interaction with
the DOT. My understanding, Mr. Chairman, is that--and I have to
search my memory on this--is that basically it was a
conversation about possible access to RRIF funding and other
sources like that. I don't believe it ever--well, I know,
because it never came to our board--it never rose to the level
of a proposal.
I think that it was a conversation with DOT, but we have
had an excellent partnership with our funding partners there
about, as we moved forward, the ability to, if you will,
securitize our revenue streams with RRIF loans, and so forth. I
don't think it progressed past that at that point. We would
like to come back to that at the appropriate point.
And, Mr. Chairman, if you will permit me, at some stage I
would like to work with you and your staff on our long-term
view about how we are staging this, and what support we might
be looking for at various junctures.
Mr. Denham. I look forward to that continued discussion.
But as chair of the California High-Speed Rail Authority,
certainly you must authorize or at least know of any of your
staff that may be going out and giving a formal presentation,
especially one that would require $15 billion.
Mr. Richard. That would be correct, sir. But I don't think
that this was a formal presentation. But again, I am going to
go back and take a look at it. I did not authorize it, and I
would like to say that I know every single fact that----
Mr. Denham. I would love to go over that with you.
Mr. Richard. OK.
Mr. Denham. It looks, from our standpoint, that we got it
after the fact. It looks like a very formal presentation.
I guess my bigger concern is that, while this happened in
July, we had a hearing in San Francisco, or in the Bay Area, on
August 29th----
Mr. Richard. That is right.
Mr. Denham [continuing]. Where you had indicated there
would not be any Federal funding needed--both from questions
from Republicans and Democrats, that there would not be any
more funding needed under the Initial Operating Section. So you
can understand how we would be concerned to see that, a month
prior, $15 billion is being requested out of DOT.
Mr. Richard. Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, let me just
say I take my obligation to give full and candid testimony very
seriously. And what I said is exactly what I meant. For our
Initial Operating Section, which is about a $20 billion
segment, my belief right now is that it would be--I mean I
would love to take Federal money, but my belief right now is it
will be funded with $8 billion of State bonds, the $3.5 billion
of Federal money we already have from ARRA, the stimulus act,
and the fiscal year 2010 appropriation, from a combination of
cap and trade dollars, and then we have a gap of a couple
billion dollars we have to fill.
But we have a financing plan in mind for that that does not
involve us coming and asking for any additional amount of
Federal money. So my statement to you on August 29th stands,
and I am happy to go back and rectify that with this other
presentation. But my statement to you stands on that. We were
not looking for $15 billion to get the Initial Operating
Section done.
And again, I think it goes to the nature of--as Mr.
Reininger was responding to a different question--a RRIF loan
that is a payback of Federal dollars is certainly not the same
as a Federal grant.
And so--but again, I don't have that presentation in front
of me or in mind, Mr. Chairman. I understand very seriously the
concern you are raising, and I will be happy to follow up with
you and the committee on it.
Mr. Denham. The concern is to make sure that we have an
open and transparent process----
Mr. Richard. Yes.
Mr. Denham [continuing]. And that we actually adhere to the
will of the voters. So my concern with--both on Caltrain, as
well as finding out--we want to make sure that it is a
transparent model, that--you should be having a discussion with
us. So when we find a grant agreement that comes up only a
couple of days before the administration leaves, or when we
find that there is a presentation that was presented to the
U.S. DOT a month before we had a hearing, and we were not privy
to that transparent document, it obviously raises questions.
So we would like to see a little more transparency. I am
looking forward to not only our sit-down to go through some of
these items, as well as the items that we are requesting in
writing, but also, again, taking up Mr. Costa's offer and
invitation, that we actually take a look at some of the jobs
that are being created in the Central Valley.
Mr. Richard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to it.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
You have more questions? I have got one final one for Mr.
Nissenbaum, I wanted to follow up. Your written testimony
mentions, with respect to oversight, that FRA uses its
resources to focus on projects that present the highest risk.
Do you consider California high-speed rail, the project itself,
to be one that presents the highest risk?
Mr. Nissenbaum. So, as I mentioned, 85 percent of the funds
in the Recovery Act HSIPR program went to six corridors. And
all six of those corridors are ones that we look at very
closely, because they are complicated, there are multiple
projects in them, there are lots of stakeholders and railroads
and other parties involved. So we look at all of those very
closely.
Mr. Denham. OK. Do all of them present a highest risk?
Mr. Nissenbaum. Any significant investment in a
transportation project is going to put it up into, for us, a
higher level of oversight. And that is the category for all of
the six corridors that are in the program, that we treat them
all on that level.
Mr. Denham. Have all six corridors received a waiver, or
received a tapered match?
Mr. Nissenbaum. Not all six, but we have--there have been a
number of tapered matches provided under the program.
Mr. Denham. Outside of California high-speed rail, where
else are we doing a tapered match?
Mr. Nissenbaum. I will be happy to get back to you with the
specific answer. I know of a few, but I don't want to misquote
them. There are several that we provided tapered matches to.
Mr. Denham. Is there guaranteed funding on the repayment of
that tapered match? If you are going to spend all the Federal
money upfront, and hope that there is State match in the
future, is that State match guaranteed?
Mr. Nissenbaum. Right. And not all of them were structured
so that it was a 100-percent Federal match followed by State.
There were different mixes. But it is the obligation of all of
the grantees under the program to complete the scope of work of
the project, which means they need to fulfill their match
requirements, and they need to cover any additional costs that
might be incurred. That is in the grant agreements, we have had
remedies in the grant agreements to address any failure to
comply with that, but that is absolutely our expectation.
Mr. Denham. Has FRA done an audit on California high-speed
rail?
Mr. Nissenbaum. We are not an audit agency. What we do is
we conduct assessments of risk, and work closely with our
grantees to try to identify areas to mitigate risk and to
address any concerns that we have.
Mr. Denham. In your testimony, in your written statement,
``FRA uses its resources to focus on projects that present the
highest risk.'' So FRA's oversight program, how do you conduct
oversight and use your resources to focus on projects that
present the highest risk, if you don't do audits?
Mr. Nissenbaum. Well, ``audit'' is sort of a formal term.
What we do is--oversight, from a grant perspective, which
involves looking at how the grantee is delivering the scope,
schedule, budget, identifying areas where there may be concerns
with any of those elements.
So oversight is a sort of standard term that is used for
grant-making agencies like ourselves. Audits are typically done
by organizations like the inspector general's office.
Mr. Denham. So do you ever coordinate with the inspector
general's office or any other office to conduct an audit?
Mr. Nissenbaum. Yes. In fact, we have had, I believe, 14
audits conducted on the program and some of our projects over
the course of the HSIPR program.
Mr. Denham. How many of these types of audits have been
done on California high-speed rail?
Mr. Nissenbaum. I will have to get back to you on that. I
know of at least one that was focused primarily on California
high-speed rail. There are others that have touched on a number
of our grants.
Mr. Denham. We would request to see each of those written
documents.
Mr. Nissenbaum. I will be happy to provide those.
Mr. Denham. So if you are going to do a full audit on the
project, what agency would be responsible for that full audit?
Mr. Nissenbaum. I can't say for sure what the right agency
would be. We could certainly--I will take that back to the
Department. We can get you an answer for the record.
Mr. Denham. How are you not sure? I am a little confused
here. So FRA changes its grant program. We have a grant program
that says, OK, State and local government, you have got to come
up with your match, and we will match it. We are going to do a
grant program and invest Federal dollars to match funds.
And then you take a waiver and you say, OK, we are going to
spend all the Federal dollars upfront with the promise that
these State dollars are eventually going to come, and you have
no idea who does the audit, or if there is an audit that has
been done to guarantee that the State----
Mr. Nissenbaum. Well----
Mr. Denham. So you can see where my concern is going here.
Mr. Nissenbaum. Yes. No, I----
Mr. Denham. Mr. Richard, in his testimony, understands that
at some point he is going to have to come back to the Federal
Government. And I imagine going to the rest of my colleagues on
this panel, that this panel is not going to be very kind to
that new request if they can't actually verify that a State
match has actually been fulfilled on the previous grant before
we issue another grant.
So, if we don't even know if there is an audit that has
been done, if we don't know who actually would do the audit,
obviously it would raise a number of concerns that this match,
that isn't there today, would actually come to fruition,
especially before we have a new grant request.
Mr. Nissenbaum. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I apologize if--I may
have misunderstood your question.
From the standpoint of our program being audited, and any
of the projects in our program being audited, the DOT inspector
general is the office that handles that. And they have
conducted a number of audits, and they may in the future
conduct audits. So that would be the agency that would do it
with respect to FRA, and how we have delivered, and any of our
grants under our program.
Mr. Denham. OK, but, to your knowledge, you have not done
an audit on the current grant.
Mr. Nissenbaum. We have not. But again, the inspector
general and the GAO have conducted--I believe the number is 14
audits of the overall HSIPR program, of which at least 1 of
those was focused on California high-speed rail.
Mr. Denham. And you have reviewed this audit?
Mr. Nissenbaum. Yes.
Mr. Denham. And are you convinced that this is no longer a
high-risk project, and that the State match will be fully
funded?
Mr. Nissenbaum. I would never suggest any of our projects
are not high risk. I mean we treat all of the projects with the
seriousness of a grant oversight agency, particularly the
large, complicated corridor projects. And so we will continue
to look at it. We have not changed our oversight regime at all
with respect to those audits.
Now, we did have some recommendations, which we have been
in the process of putting in place, and have actually closed
most of those recommendations. But we continue to oversee all
of our grants, and particularly these six corridors,
aggressively.
Mr. Denham. I would--I hate to assume anything in politics,
but it seems to me that if a State or a project came back to
the Federal Government and said, ``Hey, trust us, let me give
you some information and show you how great we are, we would
like to have a waiver so that we can spend all the Federal
money upfront instead of doing the obligatory State match at
the same time,'' that at some point you would be looking at an
audit or some type of guarantee to say this is less riskier
than the other corridors, or other projects, because of a lower
risk and a larger guarantee that the project will be done and
the grant will be fulfilled.
There has to be some type of understanding before we would
do a tapered match, would there not?
Mr. Nissenbaum. Correct. Whenever we get a request for a
tapered match--and we have had a number, and, as I said, we
have granted some--we go through a review process. It is a
standard grant tool that is used. We follow the same procedures
as the Federal Highway Administration when they do tapered
matches. We look at whether the benefits of that tapered match,
in terms of project efficiency and delivery, exceed the risks.
And in this case, we made that determination and granted that
tapered match.
And again, in all of our grant agreements we have terms and
conditions that are consistent across the grants that give us
remedies to address a failure to comply, or a failure to
deliver on any of the obligations to the grantee.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. This committee will be requesting to
take a look at and receive copies of what the guarantee was, or
the cost analysis that was used prior to approving the tapered
match, and then also take a look at where we are now, before we
request an audit. We will do both of those in writing, as well.
Mr. Nissenbaum. Absolutely.
Mr. Denham. Anything else before we close? No more? I yield
to Mr. DeSaulnier.
Mr. DeSaulnier. I just--two comments. I share the concern
expressed by the chair on these mega-projects. When we look at
risk management, risk assessment--not specifically towards
high-speed rail, but just from experience.
And then, Mr. Richard, in regards to the commitment to the
2 hours and 40 minutes, I feel obligated to at least ask you to
provide me with some information to the committee. The last
committee that I was involved with in Sacramento, the head of
your peer review group said--and it was well publicized--that,
under his belief, under the changes you had made at that time--
and that was 3 years ago--that you could no longer make the
2urs and 40 minutes, I think it was 3 years ago. You weren't in
attendance, Mr. Morales was. But it was well publicized. That's
my memory.
So we need to find out what changed, or what the difference
was, because it was a clear, unequivocal response to a question
I asked him, and it was the chair of the peer review group. So
we just need to find out. I would like to find out whether it
is 2urs and 40 minutes or not, whether he made an error in that
public meeting, or if something changed subsequent to that, so
that your testimony here is accurate.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Richard. I will provide that for you. I think I
understand where the difference is, and I will get that
information for you, but----
Mr. DeSaulnier. Because I have a--sitting here today I have
never heard an explanation of why he wasn't factually correct
in response to that question. So let's find out.
Mr. Richard. OK.
Mr. Denham. Well, let me thank each of our witnesses. We
normally in this subcommittee, with the help of Mr. Capuano, we
are usually very, very quick and very, very efficient. We
normally do not go over 3 hours. But I would like to thank each
of you for your indulgence, as well as your testimonies today,
and look forward to following up with each of you. We will have
some written questions, as well.
I ask unanimous consent that the record of today's hearing
remain open until such time as our witnesses have provided
answers to any questions that may be submitted to them in
writing, and unanimous consent that the record remain open for
15 days for additional comments and information submitted by
Members and witnesses to be included in the record of today's
hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
If no other Members have anything to add, the committee
stands adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:05 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
