- BUILDING A 21ST-CENTURY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR AMERICA: THE ROLE OF FEDERAL AGENCIES IN WATER INFRASTRUCTURE

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUILDING A 21ST-CENTURY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR AMERICA: THE ROLE OF FEDERAL
AGENCIES IN WATER INFRASTRUCTURE

=======================================================================

(115-5)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
WATER RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 9, 2017

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

24-656 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
Vice Chair                         Columbia
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        JERROLD NADLER, New York
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  RICK LARSEN, Washington
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
JEFF DENHAM, California              ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            Georgia
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
JOHN KATKO, New York                 ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut,
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   Vice Ranking Member
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana             LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia           CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         JARED HUFFMAN, California
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  JULIA BROWNLEY, California
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
DOUG LaMALFA, California             DONALD M. PAYNE, Jr., New Jersey
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas            ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
PAUL MITCHELL, Michigan              MARK DeSAULNIER, California
JOHN J. FASO, New York
A. DREW FERGUSON IV, Georgia
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
JASON LEWIS, Minnesota

(ii)

Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment

GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana, Chairman

ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              JARED HUFFMAN, California
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 JOHN GARAMENDI, California
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
JOHN KATKO, New York                 SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         CHERI BUSTOS, ILLINOIS
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  JULIA BROWNLEY, California
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           BRENDA S. LAWRENCE, Michigan
DOUG LaMALFA, California             PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon (Ex
A. DREW FERGUSON IV, Georgia         Officio)
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida, Vice Chair
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................   vii

TESTIMONY

Jerry Ellig, Ph.D., Senior Research Fellow, Mercatus Center at
George Mason University........................................     7
Gary McCarthy, Mayor, Schenectady, New York, on behalf of the
U.S. Conference of Mayors......................................     7
John Linc Stine, Commissioner, Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency, on behalf of the Environmental Council of the States...     7
Mike Inamine, Executive Director, Sutter Butte Flood Control
Agency.........................................................     7
Jonathan Kernion, President, Cycle Construction Company LLC, on
behalf of the Associated General Contractors of America........     7
Kathy L. Pape, Senior Vice President Regulatory Policy and
Business Development, American Water, on behalf of the
Bipartisan Policy Center, Executive Council on Infrastructure..     7
Kevin DeGood, Director of Infrastructure Policy, Center for
American Progress..............................................     7

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Jerry Ellig, Ph.D................................................    47
Gary McCarthy....................................................    52
John Linc Stine..................................................    66
Mike Inamine.....................................................   107
Jonathan Kernion.................................................   114
Kathy L. Pape....................................................   121
Kevin DeGood.....................................................   129

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Hon. Grace F. Napolitano, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California, submission of letter of March 1, 2017,
from John Linc Stine, Commissioner, Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency, and President, ECOS, to Hon. Mick Mulvaney, Director,
Office of Management and Budget, and Hon. Scott Pruitt,
Administrator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency............    22
Gary McCarthy, Mayor, Schenectady, New York, on behalf of the
U.S. Conference of Mayors, response to question for the record
from Hon. Grace F. Napolitano, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California...................................    65
Hon. Garret Graves, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Louisiana, submission of the following documents:

Written statement of Larry A. Larson, CFM, P.E., Director
Emeritus, Association of State Floodplain Managers.........   136
Letter of March 8, 2017, from Laura Ziemer, Senior Counsel
and Water Policy Advisor, Trout Unlimited, to Hon. Garret
Graves, Chairman, and Hon. Grace F. Napolitano, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment....   153
Written statement of Mary Grant, Campaign Director, Public
Water for All, Food and Water Watch........................   156
Letter of March 8, 2017, from National Rural Water
Association, to Hon. Garret Graves, Chairman, and Hon.
Grace F. Napolitano, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Water
Resources and Environment..................................   161
Article of November 4, 2016, ``Water Strategies for the Next
Administration,'' by Peter H. Gleick, Science Magazine.....   163
Blog post of November 3, 2016, ``New Major U.S. Water Policy
Recommendations,'' by Peter Gleick.........................   166
Op-ed of February 16, 2017, ``Oroville Dam Crisis Shows Why
We Can't Take Water Infrastructure for Granted,'' by Peter
Gleick, The Hill...........................................   168
Written statement of American Rivers.........................   171
Written statement of John A. Coleman, Chief Executive
Officer, Bay Planning Coalition............................   180
Report, ``The Future Role of Dams in the United States of
America,'' January 24, 2017, by Michelle Ho, et al.,
published by the American Geophysical Union................   184
Resolution on Reservoir Sustainability, from the Subcommittee
on Sedimentation, a subgroup of the Advisory Committee on
Water Information..........................................   201

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

BUILDING A 21ST-CENTURY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR AMERICA: THE ROLE OF FEDERAL
AGENCIES IN WATER INFRASTRUCTURE

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 9, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m. in
room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Garret Graves
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. The subcommittee will come to
order. Good morning, and thank you for being here. Before I
begin introducing our witnesses and doing opening statements
this morning, I want to dispense with some of the unanimous
consent requests.
I ask unanimous consent that members not on the
subcommittee be permitted to sit with the subcommittee at
today's hearing and ask questions. Is there any objection?
Without objection, so ordered.
I ask unanimous consent that written testimony submitted on
behalf of the following be included in this hearing's record:
from the Association of State Floodplain Managers; from Trout
Unlimited, including attached report prepared for the Building
America Investment Initiative; \1\ from Food and Water Watch;
from the National Rural Water Association; three articles by
Peter Gleick; from American Rivers; from the Bay Planning
Coalition; a publication from the American Geophysical Union;
and a resolution from the Subcommittee on Sedimentation, a
subgroup of the Advisory Committee on Water Information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The 100-plus-page report entitled ``40 Proposed U.S.
Transportation and Water Infrastructure Projects of Major Economic
Significance'' prepared for the U.S. Department of the Treasury on
behalf of the Build America Investment Initiative can be found online
at
https://www.treasury.gov/connect/blog/Documents/final-infrastructure-
report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Without objection, so ordered.

[The information can be found on pages 136-201.]

I ask unanimous consent that the record remain open for 30
days after this hearing in order to accept written testimony
for the hearing record.
Without objection, so ordered.
And finally, I ask unanimous consent that the record of
today's hearing remain open until such time as our witnesses
have provided answers to any questions that may be submitted to
them in writing.
Without objection, so ordered.
Thank you very much, again, for being here today, and
looking forward to hearing from our diverse witness panel
today.
The impetus for this hearing was thinking about the fact
that there has been a lot of talk about a major infrastructure
package, about the talk of investment of $1 trillion in
addressing some of America's infrastructure needs. If we are,
say, a year out from beginning, from moving forward on that
implementation, what are some of the things that we should be
thinking about right now? What are some of the obstacles to
delivering, to efficiently delivering infrastructure? What are
some of the impediments or opportunities to improve our ability
to quickly get these projects on the ground?
And that is what we are doing here today. We brought,
again, a diverse panel of witnesses to come provide to us their
insight and thoughts on some of the things that we could be
doing to help improve this process.
In the short time that we have been named subcommittee
chair, we have met with dozens and dozens of non-Federal
sponsors, of local governments, of State governments, and other
organizations from across the country, raising strong concerns
about regulations and permitting processes that are in place
that simply do not provide value.
And I want to be clear: the need for regulations that
ensure the protection of our environment, ensure the protection
of the health and safety of Americans, things that look to make
sure of the efficacy of investments, the cost-to-benefit ratios
are all things that make a lot of sense. But in many cases, we
have found regulations are solutions in search of problems. And
that raises strong concern.
So, again, looking forward to hearing from our witnesses
today.
And, with that, I am going to turn to the ranking member,
Mrs. Napolitano.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment as the new
chairman.
Mr. Chairman, when you and I met just over a month ago to
discuss a potential agenda for Congress, I suggested we start
those areas where we could find common ground. This
subcommittee is most successful when we work together in a
bipartisan fashion to rebuild our Nation's crumbling
infrastructure and prepare our communities for challenges they
will face in decades to come.
Without question, this Nation is witnessing a changing
water-related environment, and those changes are having a
profound implication on our local communities, our national
environment, and our overall way of life. Ironically, our
respective districts are facing very different challenges:
yours with too much water, and mine, too often, too little. But
the reality is that both districts must adapt and adequately
prepare for what lies ahead.
I am pleased that our first hearing focuses on an area that
we should find common ground: the need for increased investment
in our Nation's water-related infrastructure, especially
Federal investment. We all know that the challenges facing our
communities are in addressing the local water resources needs
and adapting to a changing world, whether the issue is
crumbling dams and levees, outdated sewers and stormwater
conveyances, inefficient navigation corridors, or large-scale
ecosystem restoration authorities.
I am certain that every Member in this room can point to
water-related challenges facing their constituents at home.
Yet, if your elected officials are like mine, the central theme
in meeting these challenges is the help needed for additional
funding. As former chief of engineers once noted before this
subcommittee, by failing to officially fund projects, we
ultimately fail the American taxpayer by delaying the
realization of project benefits, and by unnecessarily
increasing costs due to these delays.
Similarly, when we fail to provide the necessary resources
to invest in, update, and adequate maintain our infrastructure,
we should not be surprised when systems fail when communities
are placed at risk, and the cost begins to become greater, and
when our State and local economies underperform.
My communities want to do the right thing. They want to
provide our citizens with safe, reliable, affordable water and
wastewater services, but they cannot do it alone. They are
calling on us in Congress to renew the Federal commitment on--
to our water-related infrastructure.
I was excited when infrastructure investment became a
recurring theme during the 2016 Presidential election. I was
equally pleased when the President made his commitment to
triple the funding level for the Clean and Drinking Water State
Revolving Funds.
This subcommittee needs to take the next logical step and
advance legislation like a reauthorization of the Clean Water
State Revolving Fund, to renew the Federal commitment to
meeting our community's infrastructure needs. This
straightforward legislation last approved on a bipartisan basis
by this committee in 2009 will help our communities meet the
challenge of a changing water-related environment and create
well-paying jobs in the United States.
But we need to do much more. We need to address the very
real affordability concerns raised by the communities in a way
that does not weaken the Clean Water Act protections, and
ensures our neighborhoods have access to clean, safe water and
reliable waters--local environments. We need to look at
targeting more additional Federal resources to our urban and
rural communities when the traditional tools fail to meet the
financial challenges these communities face on a daily basis.
Mr. Chairman, I believe this committee can play an integral
part in creating and sustaining family-wage jobs, and ensuring
U.S. economic competitiveness and improving the daily lives of
all Americans. And I do look forward to working with you on a
bipartisan basis to honor these commitments to our communities.
And I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. And again, I look
forward to working with you and continuing to find common
ground.
With that, I yield to the chairman of the full committee,
the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Shuster.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Chairman Graves. And this is a
great way to start off your first hearing as chairman of this
subcommittee, with a hearing like this. So I appreciate it. I
won't tell anybody our private advice I gave you beforehand,
but I know you will do extremely well.
This is an important hearing. And, as the chairman
mentioned, the President of the United States has said that he
wants to figure out how to spend $1 trillion on infrastructure.
And look, $1 trillion is not going to come from the Federal
Government. It has got to come from a number of different
sources. There has to be a Federal component to it. We know--
look at the Highway Trust Fund, the Harbor Maintenance Trust
Fund, the Inland Waterways Trust Fund, other sources of
revenue. We have got to figure out how to get the Federal
revenue up to help with these projects and do its fair share
and do its important part of the work.
Public-private partnerships are part of that solution. I
think it is a good tool in the toolbox, but it is not the
toolbox. It is in there to help and assist, and we got to
figure out ways to do that better. But there is a lot of
private money and local money out there.
Just in my home State of Pennsylvania there are two $4
billion pipeline projects, 100 percent privately funded, and we
have got Government agencies getting in the way of moving these
forward. And I look across this country and there are billions
of dollars across this country that are stuck in the mud, so to
speak, with these Government agencies, and most of them, many
times, it is the Federal agencies. And so reform has to be a
huge part of this effort.
And I know that you folks here, you all deal with the Corps
of Engineers. And I know, as my experience has been across this
country, it takes far too long to get these projects approved.
And, in many cases, they take years to do it, and the projects
don't change that much because they were pretty sound projects
to begin with. So it is not just the Corps, it is FERC, it is--
again, you go across the Government agencies.
They have got to get to the table at the same time, they
have got to get these projects done. Because if you think about
the Interstate Highway System, they built 47,000 miles of road,
of interstate highway, in 14 years. I have 60 miles of roadway
that took 35 years to get through my district. And that is just
unthinkable in today's society, with the technology, the
science we have to be able to check these different projects
out. We ought to be able to move them forward, and that is
something that I know the chairman, this chairman, the former
chairman, Mr. Gibbs, and myself are all committed to getting
these reforms in place to move these projects forward.
When you look at the lack of investment in our ports, our
harbors, inland waterways, the locks, the dams, flood
protection, environmental restoration, these are all things
that we need to move forward with much faster than we have in
the past. And I think that we can do that.
One of the things that I will be supporting moving
forward--that I have always supported, but we got to get the
system put in place in the right way--is the Harbor Maintenance
Trust Fund. Those dollars, $1.8 billion, we only spent $1
billion on harbors and ports. The other $800 million, I am not
sure where it goes, here and there and everywhere. But those
dollars were put in that fund, and the trust was that it was
going to be spent on those projects and those ports and those
harbors.
So again, I talked with the President, his people. We have
got to get that into their budget. It makes it easier for us to
get it into our budget. So I am committed to working forward to
see that those dollars get spent on what their intended
purposes were.
And when you look at that $800 million, there is probably a
three-, four-, five-, six-times multiplier, because when the
Federal Government comes to the table with these dollars, the
locals, the States, the private sector are all going to make
the investments needed to do what they have to do in those
ports and harbors around the country.
So again, for me this is an exciting time. Never did I
think that a Republican President would be the one to stand up
at an inaugural address and use the word ``infrastructure,''
but it happened. And I am just glad to be here and be part of
this, and I am really excited about this hearing today, and as
we go forward.
So thank you all very much. I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And now I
recognize the ranking member, Mr. DeFazio.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to both
welcome the witnesses, and I want to congratulate you on your
first hearing as chair. I know you are vitally interested in
water issues, coming from a somewhat watery State, shall we
say, and I am pleased to be working with you. And I am pleased
that today we are jointly sending a letter to President Trump,
urging him to fully utilize the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund
as a part of his $1 trillion infrastructure plan.
As Chairman Shuster noted, $9 billion have been diverted
into a theoretical fund over at the Treasury. Every day, every
American who buys an imported good pays a little bit more for
it with the understanding that that is going to facilitate the
movement of freight in and out of the United States through our
ports, and that more efficient movement would actually pretty
much offset the minuscule tax. Unfortunately, if you don't
spend the tax, then you still have the delays, the ships parked
miles out into the ocean, and so people are paying the tax, the
money isn't being spent, and they are paying more for the
imported goods because of the delays.
We are breaking faith with the American people. It seems
kind of like a no-brainer. On a daily basis, our 59 busiest
harbors have 35 percent availability of maximum depth. And that
is not even to deal with the new challenges of the post-Panamax
ships. So I am hopeful that we can move forward with that.
I did get a version of that, somewhat awkward and crippled,
out of this committee because of the budget rules--which are
waived on a daily basis around here, but in that case, boy,
they had to be enforced--so I am hopeful we will do it honestly
and just say, hey, forget about the stupid budget rules, let's
spend the tax for the purpose for which it was collected, deal
with the maintenance backlog in our harbors, and more
efficiently move freight.
There is a regulatory pendulum. It can swing way over here
and way over there. The sweet spot is in the middle. And it is
always difficult to get there. I believe there are unnecessary
delays and impediments due sometimes to bureaucracy and to, you
know, misguided regulations. I have been having an ongoing
dispute with FEMA and National Marine Fisheries up in my
region. So I can understand that, and I welcome an honest
discussion of that.
But I also caution that you don't swing to the other
extreme, which is, you know, we are just going to facilitate
projects, whether or not they are well thought-out, whether or
not they have community support, and whether or not they might
have unintended consequences. Look at 50 years ago, the central
and southern Florida project, which was authorized in 1948,
which diked Lake Okeechobee, Kissimmee River. Part of the
Everglades was drained. It is widely recognized by the
residents, the communities, and everyone around there, as a
disaster. And now Congress, 50 years later, passed a plan that
cost $10 billion to reverse some of that.
So, if we approach some of these major projects in a more
balanced way, I think we will be better off and not have to try
and reverse their impacts later.
We have had significant testimony before this committee,
including a former colleague who was head of the Corps of
Engineers for a brief period of time until he came here before
this committee, presented the Bush budget for Corps of
Engineers, and I said, ``Is that budget adequate to deal with
these backlogs and all these other problems we have,'' and he
said no. The next week he resigned to spend more time with his
family.
So, you know, we need to encourage honesty. And the honest
thing is the most major impediment is lack of funding, plain
and simple. And then we can deal with any regulatory burdens
that crop up in the interim. I mean, in surface, you can't say
that the 150,000 bridges out there, 99 percent of which are not
going to require any major environmental analysis, that need to
be repaired or replaced, are not getting done because of
environmental, you know, restrictions. They are not getting
done because the Government isn't investing the money in the
National Highway System. It is the same with our ports and
harbors, which is under the jurisdiction of this subcommittee.
So, I welcome the witnesses here today. I want to hear and
hope to hear about that kind of balance and the need to better
invest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. With that, I would like
to turn to our first witness.
We have Mr. Jerry Ellig, who is the senior research fellow
at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University. Mr. Ellig,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
OK, this--is the timer working? OK.

TESTIMONY OF JERRY ELLIG, PH.D., SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW,
MERCATUS CENTER AT GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY; GARY MCCARTHY,
MAYOR, SCHENECTADY, NEW YORK, ON BEHALF OF THE U.S. CONFERENCE
OF MAYORS; JOHN LINC STINE, COMMISSIONER, MINNESOTA POLLUTION
CONTROL AGENCY, ON BEHALF OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL OF THE
STATES; MIKE INAMINE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, SUTTER BUTTE FLOOD
CONTROL AGENCY; JONATHAN KERNION, PRESIDENT, CYCLE CONSTRUCTION
COMPANY LLC, ON BEHALF OF THE ASSOCIATED GENERAL CONTRACTORS OF
AMERICA; KATHY L. PAPE, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT REGULATORY POLICY
AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT, AMERICAN WATER, ON BEHALF OF THE
BIPARTISAN POLICY CENTER, EXECUTIVE COUNCIL ON INFRASTRUCTURE;
AND KEVIN DEGOOD, DIRECTOR OF INFRASTRUCTURE POLICY, CENTER FOR
AMERICAN PROGRESS

Mr. Ellig. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess I should say to
multiple chairs and multiple ranking members, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. My name is Jerry Ellig. I am an
economist and a senior research fellow at the Mercatus Center
at George Mason University. And I come to approach today's
topics a little bit differently, because I was asked to talk a
little bit about some general problems and tendencies in the
U.S. Federal regulatory process that may be the source of some
of the frustrations that some of the members of the committee
and the subcommittee just mentioned in some of the opening
statements.
I come to this as a generalist. Most of my research in the
past 15 years has focused on the Federal regulatory process and
performance management of Federal agencies. So I don't come to
this as an expert on the particular programs this committee has
jurisdiction over. But, nevertheless, I was asked to talk about
some general regulatory issues.
There is a tendency in our Federal regulatory process for
folks to focus on intentions, rather than outcomes; intentions,
rather than results. And there are at least three kinds of
symptoms of this that I can mention.
One is a tendency of regulatory decisionmakers to focus on
activities and outputs, rather than results. So we have, for
example, a lot of folks in Federal agencies who honestly
believe that their job and their success should be measured by
production of regulations, or perhaps by enforcement activity,
rather than how many problems did they solve, what did they
actually accomplish.
A colleague of mine at the Mercatus Center interviewed a
number of economists in Federal regulatory agencies a number of
years ago, and one of them described the way his agency worked
as, ``Success is putting out 10 regulations a year, and bigger
regulations are bigger successes.'' You notice there is nothing
in there about actually achieving results, because we are
focused on measuring activities and outputs, rather than
focused on measuring what have you actually accomplished with
the regulation.
And the solution really has to start with Congress
articulating what outcomes it wants to achieve when it
authorizes regulatory legislation, and then following up to
ensure that retrospective assessment is done to find out
whether the regulation achieved the intended purpose. And, if
so, at what cost.
Another related problem is there are often serious
deficiencies in the analysis that Federal agencies are supposed
to do. They are supposed to inform regulatory decisions. Now, a
lot of water projects and other types of projects go through
some type of benefit-cost analysis. And you might say, well,
gee, what is sauce for the goose ought to be sauce for the
gander. Folks who want to constrain what can be done in those
projects through regulation should also be going through the
same kind of analysis. And executive branch agencies are
required to do this by Executive orders, but we often find that
there are serious deficiencies and omissions in the analysis. I
have seen that in my research. A lot of other folks who
actually research the quality of agency analysis, regulatory
agency analysis, find the same thing.
The final problem we often have is something I call ready-
fire-aim regulation. Now, this occurs when regulatory agencies
essentially decide what they want to do, and only then conduct
the research that is supposed to inform their decisions. And
the process of doing the research becomes the process of
creating a litigation support document to support decisions
that have already been made for other reasons.
One of my colleagues, who actually spent 27 years as an
economist in the Federal Government, told me about an adventure
he had where he was working on a regulation. The agency had
already decided to issue it. He was still working on the
analysis that was supposed to determine whether it was worth
doing, and he was told on a Friday afternoon, ``If you can't
find more benefits over the weekend, don't bother coming back
to work on Monday.''
Folks, that is not the way that regulatory agencies should
be approaching regulation. And again, this does not always
happen. There are good, committed people at regulatory agencies
who do a good job figuring out what they are supposed to do
before they make decisions. But there is also plenty of
research that demonstrates that there are often some pretty
significant deficiencies in either the quality of agencies'
underlying analysis, or maybe they do good analysis but they
don't necessarily pay attention to it.
So, all three of these kinds of problems occur when we
focus on good intentions, rather than focusing on outcomes. And
if we want to fix the problem, we need to flip that around so
that we are focused on regulatory outcomes first, and the
evidence of what is happening, whether it is being done, and
what agencies are actually trying to accomplish.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you.
Our next witness is the Honorable Gary McCarthy, mayor of
Schenectady, New York.
Mayor McCarthy, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. McCarthy. Chairman Shuster, Chairman Graves, Mrs.
Napolitano, members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to be here this morning.
Since 2011, Schenectady has borrowed, collectively, just
under $53 million to be spent on upgrading pipes, replacing
equipment, and rehabilitating our wastewater treatment plant.
In 2017 the city is embarking on an SSO [sanitary sewer
overflow] mitigation project, including a $24 million project
to eliminate a sanitary sewer overflow, and $6 million to
improve our system's overall resiliency.
Schenectady does not contest the importance of
environmental protections and efforts, and has significantly
invested in these projects. But we are being forced to expend
even more funds, while we are still attempting to recover from
the great recession and decades of population decline in an old
industrial city. Our strong local economic recovery has been
placed in a precarious situation by this significant burden.
In addition to the tax burden, the consent order the
Schenectady operates under requires a 4-to-1 exchange for new
connections. I want to emphasize that, that Schenectady is not
allowed to do a new hookup unless I remove four other hookups
or entry points within the system. This critically limits our
economic development projects, and is totally counterproductive
to what we have been trying to accomplish in our community.
While we face the burden of traditional infrastructure, we
are only scratching the surface on what is possible through
Smart City technology. Our partnerships with our business
community have allowed us to install at this point roughly 200
smart lights, which will reduce our cost and improve the
delivery of several key city services. This emerging technology
allows us to use this platform for real change. Data will be
collected and disseminated to users, allowing much more
educated and appropriate decisions to be made.
Additional devices, such as analytic cameras, temperature
and motion sensors, traffic monitoring devices, and the
potential for interconnected health care and other life safety
devices deployed on a network of over 5,000 city streetlights
provides an opportunity to evaluate numerous core challenges in
an urban environment.
This 21st-century infrastructure cannot be ignored while we
bear the burden of investment in the more traditional
infrastructure. To do so would be to put the city and the
Nation's long-term--is a peril, as we have missed this critical
opportunity for economic growth and improve educational
opportunities and long-term efficiencies within our
communities.
What I would ask today is that we need increasing
partnership. We look to continue the SRF program, as well as
CDBG, and looking to provide grants in the WIFIA funding in
protecting municipal bonds.
And other ways that you can help would include passing the
Integrated Planning and Affordability legislation, commonly
referred to as H.R. 465. I want to thank Mr. Gibbs for
listening to the mayors' concerns regarding unfunded mandates
and affordability in his introduction of H.R. 465. This bill
would allow local governments to work with the EPA to develop
plans where we can comprehensively deal with the biggest
environmental and public health needs first, and do it in a way
that is more affordable to our citizens.
I have a letter that is signed by members of--representing
the U.S. Conference of Mayors, asking for cosponsors in the
passage of H.R. 465, and that has been attached to my testimony
submitted to you.
By reauthorizing and fully funding the brownfields law, you
will be encouraging the recycling and reusing of properties and
upgrading of existing infrastructure. In addition, many
communities redevelop brownfields to create more green
infrastructure, which helps with stormwater controls.
And I have already mentioned how Schenectady is utilizing
new technology for our above-ground systems. However, there can
also be improvements that can be made below ground. All
utilities can improve service through the incorporation of
modern technologies specifically designed to increase
efficiencies and reduce cost. Congress and the administration
should be supporting the renewable public water and sewer
infrastructure in America through new technology.
There is much Congress and the Federal Government can do to
work in partnership with our Nation's cities to upgrade our
infrastructure and invest in our future. And we need to end the
siloed approach of handling issues, and think holistically on
how to deal with our infrastructure, environmental, economic
development concerns, as we work together.
Again, I thank the committee for the opportunity to be here
today, and look forward to your questions.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Mayor. And to
introduce our next witness, I am going to recognize Mr. Nolan.
Mr. Nolan. Thank you, Chairman Graves and Ranking Member
Napolitano, and members of the committee. As a member of the
full committee, I am grateful for your allowing me to sit in on
today's important hearing.
And by way of introduction, let me say, you know, one thing
we all agree on is that our Nation's outdated and obsolete
wastewater treatment and drinking water systems are desperately
in need of repair. And in many cases, crumbling before our eyes
and degrading our waters and the health of our people.
With that in mind, it is my honor to introduce my good
friend, Minnesota's good friend, our commissioner of the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, John Linc Stine, who is
here on behalf of the Environmental Council of the States.
John has spent over 30 years as a powerful and tireless and
gifted advocate in the fight to protect our precious air and
water and land from pollution and degradation. We are all very
proud of his great leadership, and I am very proud to have the
opportunity to introduce him to the committee here today.
John, welcome.
And thank you to the committee for allowing me to make this
introduction.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Nolan.
Mr. Stine, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stine. Thank you, Congressman Nolan. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, for this opportunity, and Ranking Member Napolitano. I
am John Linc Stine, I am commissioner of the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency, as Mr. Nolan said, and I represent
also, as the president of the Environmental Council of the
States, or ECOS, a nonpartisan national organization of my
colleagues who lead State and territorial environmental
protection agencies across America.
And, Chairman Graves, as you know, the Mississippi River
begins in the State of Minnesota at Lake Itasca, and ends in
your State. And I take it as my duty to deliver the cleanest
water possible that Minnesota can send your way.
States hear every day from our citizens about the value of
clean water, adequate flood control, and prevention of
pollution. Infrastructure underpins every one of those issues,
and we know that a society cannot thrive without clean water.
Industry and jobs depend on a reliable water supply and the
capacity to process wastewater.
Clean water is vital to manufacturing, recreation, and
other industries that are central to our economy. The community
of Worthington in southwestern Minnesota is making needed
improvements to their wastewater treatment plant to accommodate
a meat-packing operation that needs to expand. Nearby, Morris,
another community, needs to make improvements to their drinking
water system to provide water for their ethanol plant.
ECOS aims to strengthen the partnership between the States
and the Federal Government to implement our Nation's
environmental laws and policies while focusing on results.
Water infrastructure is one of the focus areas of our ECOS
document, ``Priority Issues in a Time of Political
Transition,'' which we produced to address the new
administration's priorities. Our members identified 20 priority
projects for wastewater and water supply, by State, that are
ready to go in 2017. That list amounts to $18.2 billion in
need.
Our country prospered and thrived, thanks to the
investments that were made in water infrastructure 75 to 100
years ago. Some of the most significant of those have occurred
since the passage of the Clean Water and Safe Drinking Water
Acts. Federal, State, and local partnerships helped make those
investments successful, and we need to continue to make
investments that are critical to the upkeep of those initial
investments. Federal funding, using portions of the EPA's State
and Tribal Assistance Grants, which make up the Clean Water and
Drinking Water State Revolving Loan Funds, are critical to
those investments.
The revolving nature of those loan programs and States'
efforts to maximize the Federal capitalization grants ensure a
continuing return on investment. The successful history of
national water and wastewater programs, however, is
overshadowed by the enormous and extensive need. Estimates
range from $384 billion through 2030 for our drinking water
infrastructure, and $271 billion through 2022 for wastewater
infrastructure needs.
Our distressed urban areas, small communities, and rural
communities are particularly pressed to make the needed water
infrastructure investments. Many of these communities find it
difficult to keep up with the numerous increasingly complex
Federal requirements due to a small tax base, lack of adequate
financing options, management skills, trained personnel, and
systems to manage environmental requirements.
ECOS continues to raise the importance of efficient,
affordable, and timely financial award to these distressed
communities. For example, the community of Gilbert in
Congressman Nolan's district is a mining town that is facing an
$8.6 million project to replace a old wastewater treatment
plant to reduce overflows of raw sewage. They have a declining
population and high unemployment. They simply cannot afford a
project of that size without assistance.
Reliable infrastructure is critical to the protection of
public health and community well-being because lack of clean
water is a serious health threat. In the southern Minnesota
community of St. Peter they had high nitrate levels in their
groundwater because shallow groundwater is the only available
water source in that part of our State. And in order to protect
their community, they needed to make the investments to treat
for nitrates. They did it to protect their children's health,
and the health of their elderly.
Minnesota has invested in programs to monitor and regulate
corrosion and aging water systems, and we need to continue to
do that at the State level.
As science has increased the awareness of public health
risks, and the environmental regulatory system has grown more
complex, there are disagreements over the cost and levels of
protection that continue to make national headlines. But we
must remember our foremost obligation: to protect the
environment and public health through investments in our
country's infrastructure. Thank you very much.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Stine.
Our next witness is Mr. Mike Inamine, who is executive
director of the Sutter Butte Flood Control Agency.
Mr. Inamine, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Inamine. Good morning, Chairman Graves, Ranking Member
Napolitano, and members of the committee. My name is Mike
Inamine, and I am executive director of the Sutter Butte Flood
Control Agency. Thank you for the opportunity to address the
committee on this most important timely issue.
Before beginning my testimony, I would be remiss if I did
not acknowledge Congressmen LaMalfa and Garamendi who are not
here right now. These are two members of the committee who have
been true partners on these local efforts from the start. But
for their efforts, I would be telling a very different story
today.
Sutter Butte Flood Control Agency, or SBFCA, as it is
known, was formed in 2007 to consolidate the efforts of several
agencies and communities with flood management responsibilities
and implementing locally led flood protection projects. SBFCA
is a joint powers authority composed of the cities of Biggs,
Gridley, Live Oak, Yuba City, the counties of Sutter and Butte,
Levee Districts 1 and 9. SBFCA leads the planning and
implementation of flood control projects in this historic
agricultural basin.
The Sutter-Butte Basin covers 300 square miles along the
west bank of the Feather River, immediately downstream of Lake
Oroville. The basin is home to 95,000 residents and encompasses
$7 billion of damageable assets. The region has sustained
numerous floods, including the 1955 levee failure on the
Feather River, which resulted in the deaths of at least 38
people.
The goals of the agency are to achieve 200-year level of
flood protection for urban communities in the north, and 100-
year protection or equivalent in the south, in the rural areas.
Under State law, urban or urbanizing areas cannot be developed
without achieving a 200-year level of protection--that is twice
the FEMA level of protection--thus eliminating opportunities
for risky residential development. SBFCA is nearing completion
of the $300 million Feather River west levee project that
provides a 200-year level of protection for the northern basin.
The United States Army Corps of Engineers has traditionally
been the most important builder of flood projects, as well as
the most powerful regulator of these same projects. I would
like to briefly comment on the local relationship of the Corps
of Engineers under these two important processes.
Basically, there are two ways for a local agency to get a
Federal project levee fixed in California: partner with the
Corps of Engineers under the Civil Works Program and wait a
couple of decades or more; the second path is for a local
agency to pass a local assessment, often very difficult, then
cost-share with the State of California and be consistent with
the strategic Central Valley Flood Protection Plan, then seek
permission from the Federal Government to fix their levee under
an article of law called section 408.
This latter process is also quite slow, taking 3 to 4 years
for large flood projects. This year, SBFCA will complete the
Feather River west levee project, which improves about 30 miles
of Federal project levee, without changing the design or
purpose of the project, and without spending a dime of Federal
money. Yet this permission process took 19 months, and is
considered light speed, a world's record.
The Corps has recently improved the civil works planning
process. SBFCA was pleased to be one of four pilot projects
selected from throughout the country to test the 3x3x3 planning
process. To the Corps' great credit, the Sutter Basin study was
a great success, and met all objectives. The Corps delivered.
However, authorization is only part of the story. The
appropriations process takes more Acts of Congress and takes
several years, never mind construction. In the case of the
Feather River west levee project, we have already constructed
80 percent of the Federal project with our own money, yet we
are struggling to get the Federal Government to finish the job.
Thus, the successes of the planning study, State/local
innovative financing, and local initiative may be squandered on
this traditional appropriations process.
There are a number of things the Corps can do to improve
risk reduction, whether performed by local, State, Federal, or
even private entities.
Prioritize work by risk reduction, not who builds the
project. Incorporate the successful 3x3x3 process into the 408
permission. We are heartened and grateful that Civil Works
Director James Dalton has already initiated changes, and we
hope to see these expanded and codified. This is a big deal for
local agencies.
Do not intermingle 408 permission processes with separate
civil works processes. Otherwise, delays are inevitable.
Allow local, State, and even private entities to construct
civil works projects. WRRDA 2014 [Water Resources Reform and
Development Act of 2014] includes a provision to advance this
concept. However, this pilot has not happened to date.
And finally, proactively consult with the Advisory Council
on Historic Preservation on issues concerning Native American
cultural resources.
This statement would be incomplete without noting the
importance of the single most important flood control feature
on the Feather River, Oroville Dam. Feather River is the
discharge channel of Oroville's spillway. Dams and levees are a
system, and as the ongoing crisis at Oroville Dam evolves, it
is easy to forget that the primary failure mode that will
result in loss of life and property is not necessarily dam
spillway failure, but rather, levee failure. Oroville Dam has
appropriately captured all of our attention at the moment, but
we cannot neglect the vulnerability of our levees in the system
that includes the Oroville Dam.
Thank you for holding this hearing and your continued
attention to these important issues. Our lives and livelihoods
depend on it.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you very much.
Next witness is Mr. Jonathan Kernion--thank you very much
for being here--president of Cycle Construction Company.
Mr. Kernion. Thank you. Chairman Graves, Ranking Member
Napolitano, Chairman Shuster, and other members of the
committee, thank you for inviting me to speak before you today.
I am Jonathan Kernion, president of Cycle Construction
Company, based in Kenner, Louisiana. Our company is a family-
operated general construction firm founded in the late 1990s.
We focus on heavy civil construction, marine construction,
coastal restoration, environmental infrastructure, underground
utilities, roads, bridges, demolition, waste management, and
emergency response. I testify before you as a member of and
representing the Associated General Contractors of America.
I want to add something in this--what I am talking, and I
am going to plagiarize something I heard from one of our levee
district heads in--down in South Lafourche. He has been waiting
now to build the levee for 5 years to get a wetlands permit so
he could build the levee to save, literally, hundreds of
thousands of lives, money, property, everything else. And he
still hasn't got a wetlands permit.
And he made a very, very unique reference to that, and he
said that in 1941 Japan bombed Pearl Harbor. We were not a
superpower at the time, but at the time we didn't have much,
you know, as far as power. And what he said was, in the 4 years
after that, we built close to 80,000 aircraft, 1,200 large
combat ships, recruited and trained well over 7 million combat-
ready troops, and we became a superpower of the world. But
today, in 2017, he can't get a Federal wetland permit in 5
years to build a levee to save lives, which pretty much sums up
the story and tells it.
I will go on from there. In order to build a 21st-century
infrastructure, we need to be able to build it some time this
century. Sadly, that is easier said than done. There are many
kinks in the chain that can delay construction for years. In my
testimony, I try to highlight some opportunities to more
efficiently deliver water infrastructure projects during the
preconstruction and actual construction phases.
Before construction begins, there are many--too many--
Federal agency cooks in the environmental review and permitting
kitchen. They follow laws and regulatory processes that came
about independently, laid on top of one another with little or
no regard for how they fit in the overall process. And even
when you get to the top of the environmental review ladder, a
backyard lawsuit can shoot you down to the beginning of the
game.
As such, projects can be delayed years and even decades,
waiting for environmental reviews and permits to be completed.
In my home State of Louisiana, we don't have years to protect
and restore our environmental sensitive coastline. A football
field worth of coastline erosion is caused, on average, every
hour. It is alarmingly ironic that the lengthy environmental
permitting and review processes that are intended to protect
our coastline could, at least in part, lead to its further
destruction.
AGC looks forward to working with this committee to better
integrate the Federal environmental review and permitting
process, building upon the reforms of NEPA and the past
transportation reauthorization bills, and curving frivolous
environmental lawsuits.
During construction, contractors face two primary problems:
certain and reliable project funding streams, and Federal
agency indecision. We do not build our homes from the ground up
over a course of 30 years. However, we too often build our
Nation's water infrastructure that way.
While we can point to Federal agencies as a cause for many
problems, the buck starts and stops with Congress, literally.
Until Congress allows water infrastructure projects to be
funded outside the whims of the annual appropriation process,
where funding comes in uncertain dips and drabs, we will
continue to face unnecessary construction delays.
One of the greatest challenges contractors face on the
Federal water infrastructure job site is obtaining decisions
from Federal agencies. Former President Theodore Roosevelt is
credited in saying, ``In any moment of decision, the best thing
you can do is the right thing, the next best thing is the wrong
thing, and the worst thing you can do is nothing.''
As with any construction project, unforeseen issues may and
will emerge. The problem comes with getting the Federal agency
to make a decision to act or not. Decisions may have to move up
the chain of command. If the right person or persons are not
available, the decision sits on their desks. AGC hopes to work
with the committee to reduce the links in the chain of the
command necessary to shorten and obtain timely decisions during
construction.
Thank you again for inviting AGC to testify before the
committee today. I look forward to answering any questions you
may have.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Kernion.
Our next witness is Ms. Kathy Pape, senior vice president
of regulatory policy and business development at American
Water.
Ms. Pape, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pape. Thank you, Chairman Graves, Ranking Member
Napolitano, Chairman Shuster, and members of the committee. My
name is Kathy Pape. I am senior vice president of regulatory
policy and business development at American Water, which is the
largest investor-owned water and wastewater service provider in
the United States. We provide water and wastewater service to
about 15 million people in 47 States, and that includes 12
military bases, as well.
I appear before you today on behalf of the Bipartisan
Policy Center's Executive Council on Infrastructure. That
group's goal is to focus on how private investors can help to
fund public projects. We have three recommendations for you
today. But before I get into those three recommendations, I
would like to give you a real-life example of a private company
helping a public project about 110 miles north of here in
Fairview Township, Pennsylvania, in late 2015.
Fairview Township decided to sell its wastewater system to
Pennsylvania American Water. As a result, that township was
able to pay off all of its sewer debt, was able to reduce
property taxes by 50 percent, and it was able to refund a
$10,000 per-customer hookup fee that the township charged. Just
one example of many that I could give.
We have three recommendations today, and the first one
involves where investment goes. And our belief is--and
recommendation is--that investment should go towards
sustainable and compliant water and wastewater systems. That
means spend Federal money wisely. The way the system is set up
now, most Federal dollars will go toward the most noncompliant
systems. There is points given for noncompliance. Our belief is
that putting money toward a poorly run system is like a shot of
Botox. It is short term, it won't erase years of abuse, and you
will need it again and again and again.
Dollars should go towards those systems that are capital-
efficient and that are also cost-transparent. And by that I
mean systems that charge true cost of service. Many times true
cost of service is not charged either because there has been an
influx of Government money, or because Government leaders don't
believe that charging true cost of service will help them
politically. But a system is not sustainable if true cost of
service is not charged.
Our second recommendation goes towards options and
alternatives. As somebody said this morning, the Federal
Government can't fully fund $1 trillion. But there are many,
many private investors who are willing to help do that. We have
56,000 community water systems, 19,000 wastewater pipe systems,
14,000 wastewater treatment systems, many of which were funded
in the 1970s by Government grants, and those Government grants
aren't around any more.
So we have our economic vitality being challenged, as well
as the health of our children and grandchildren. We need to
look for new ways and break down regulatory burdens. More
alternatives, more options.
And finally, the third recommendation is relatively simple,
and that goes to the Clean Water State Revolving Fund. Private
companies are not eligible for funding under the clean water or
the wastewater part. We can access Drinking Water State
Revolving Funds, so we would ask that that is one of the ways
to help private companies help the Government to fund the
infrastructure that is needed.
In summary, our recommendations are three: invest wisely,
put dollars toward those systems that are most compliant, that
are sustainable, and have a track record of doing what should
be done; second, that is break down those regulatory barriers
and offer more options--many of those barriers have been
mentioned this morning; and finally, provide access to the
Clean Water State Revolving Fund.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Ms. Pape. I appreciate
your testimony.
And our last witness is Mr. Kevin DeGood, who is director
of infrastructure policy at the Center for American Progress.
Mr. DeGood, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeGood. Thank you, Chairman Graves and Ranking Member
Napolitano, and members of the committee, for inviting me to
testify. It is an honor and a privilege to contribute to this
committee's work.
Water is an essential element of our daily lives and vital
to our economy. The start of the 115th Congress presents
Members with the opportunity to review the investments and
policies needed to move the country forward in the coming
years.
And while the elections on November 8th produced a change
in leadership in Washington, one thing remains clear: no one
walked into a voting booth demanding dirtier water, lower
wages, and higher profits for Wall Street. And yet, weakening
the Clean Water Act, eliminating Davis-Bacon prevailing wage
standards, and pushing high-cost equity capital through public-
private partnerships will do all of those things.
Rather than rolling back the environmental progress of
recent decades, this Congress has a clear mandate to build a
stronger, cleaner future for our communities by providing
direct funding to improve water quality and reliability, flood
control, and navigation in a sustainable way.
State and local governments, as well as drinking and
wastewater authorities face enormous infrastructure challenges.
Many legacy facilities have come to the end of their useful
life, requiring major rehabilitation or outright replacement.
At the same time, population growth, source water pollution,
and increasingly extreme weather patterns brought about by
climate change have added to the complexity and cost of
providing safe and reliable water and protecting against the
ravages of flooding, drought, and sea-level rise.
The EPA estimates that the Nation will need approximately
$655 billion to maintain current health and environmental
standards. The recent winter storms that have lashed northern
California offer a powerful lesson in how rapid swings from
intense drought to intense precipitation can overwhelm critical
facilities that were designed using more stable climactic
assumptions.
More than 180,000 residents in the Oroville region had to
be evacuated on short notice due to spillway failures. This
episode highlights the fragility of older facilities, and the
essential role that water infrastructure plays in supporting
public health, safety, and economic productivity.
California is not alone in facing water infrastructure
challenges from climate change. For example, south Florida must
modernize a host of facilities to deal with rising seas. For
these communities, adapting to climate change is an issue of
basic economic viability. Based on detailed technical work from
Swiss Re, a company in the reinsurance industry, the Miami-Dade
sea level rise task force determined that major improvements
would be needed to ``avoid or postpone wholesale abandonment
due to noninsurability or the high cost of premiums.''
The stress that climate change places on the built
environment will only grow over time. We have a choice: invest
and adapt, or pay an even higher price down the road.
In the Cleveland area, the Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer
District faces significant challenges meeting Clean Water Act
standards. Like many older communities, Cleveland has a
combined sewer system that, during heavy rains, often
discharges untreated wastewater into the Cuyahoga River and
Lake Erie. On average, the district discharges more than 4
billion gallons of untreated sewage each year. In 2011, the
district entered into a consent degree with the Environmental
Protection Agency to make numerous upgrades to their system,
including a combination of gray and green infrastructure.
These public agencies responsible for managing the water
infrastructure highlighted by these examples share one key
characteristic. They don't need another credit card from
Washington or to saddle taxpayers with expensive private equity
through public-private partnerships. What these jurisdictions
need is a strong Federal partner ready to provide direct
funding.
Proponents of public-private partnerships often state that
there are billions of dollars of capital waiting on the
sidelines. Implicit in this statement is that water agencies
and other project sponsors face a lack of liquidity. This is
simply not the case. Demand for public debt in the U.S. is
robust. Moreover, the favorable tax treatment afforded to
municipal bond investors means the public sector is able to
secure municipal financing that is often three to five times
cheaper than equity capital.
Today the public sector has access to municipal financing,
as well as Federal credit facilities like WIFIA and federally
supported State revolving funds at historically low rates.
Simply stated, for many cities and water utilities, access to
affordable credit is not the binding constraint. Instead, there
is a shortage--the shortage of local revenues to support new
project debts.
Many communities do not take full advantage of their
capacity to generate additional revenue through taxes and user
fees. However, even when they do, there are real limits on the
total additional revenue they can reasonably generate, which
often falls short of overall needs.
Increased Federal funding is needed to grow our economy,
ensure timely compliance with water quality mandates, as well
as to deal with changes presented by climate change. These
resources should be used to leverage additional State and local
dollars where possible, and to target those communities facing
the greatest need.
Additionally, Federal funds should focus on those
categories of projects that, all too often, take a back seat to
traditional gray infrastructure, including efficiency upgrades,
watershed restoration, and nonpoint source pollution
mitigation.
Thank you again for the opportunity to address this
committee.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. DeGood. I
appreciate your testimony. We are going to go ahead and roll
into questions, and I am going to recognize myself for 5
minutes.
Mr. Ellig, when I was reading your testimony last night I
was really impressed with the thought process, and that you
talked about appropriate metrics on regulations in ensuring
that regulations are truly focused upon outcomes that are in
the best interest of the American public.
Just a few months ago, or a few weeks ago, we had
bipartisan legislation that was included into the Regulatory
Accountability Act, a bill that we had introduced last year
called PROVE IT [Providing Retrospective Observations
Validating Economics and Increasing Transparency]. And what
that does is it requires that Federal agencies come back 5
years after a regulation has been finalized to collect actual
compliance information from stakeholders. Not predicting, but
actually collecting real information, doing a look back,
determining the impact of--the true impact of those
regulations, and we were shocked to find that there was little
in--required of agencies to actually go back and true-up their
cost estimates on--in terms of the cost of compliance with
regulations.
Do you have specific examples of where you have seen
regulations, or the regulatory process, improperly applied that
you could say?
Mr. Ellig. Well, I think some of the types of problems like
that that I have seen, and that my colleagues at the Mercatus
Center have seen in their research, involve barriers that maybe
prevent better or more intensive use of some of the existing
infrastructure.
For example, several of my colleagues have looked into the
issue of supersonic flight and found that one of the biggest
barriers to supersonic flight in the United States is it is
banned in the Continental United States. And this was because
of a legitimate concern about noise, about sonic booms. But
with advances in materials, advances in engineering, it may
very well be possible to design airplanes--probably not as big
as the Concorde--but design airplanes that can actually travel
supersonic speeds while meeting a reasonable noise standard
that protects the public. And that is the difference between
focusing on outcomes versus just focusing on intentions.
If we really want a regulation that focuses on outcomes,
then have a noise standard that supersonic air transport needs
to meet. Don't ban it, entirely. But those are the kind of
barriers to innovation that we get when we just, you know,
focus more on the process----
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Sure.
Mr. Ellig [continuing]. Rather than getting results.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Yes, thank you. And I think--I
would love for you to give a clinic to Federal regulatory
agencies to focus on outcomes and true interest to the American
public.
Mr. Inamine, I want to ask two questions. Number one, you
talked about the 408 process. And certainly that has been
something that I think Ranking Member Napolitano and I have
both heard a lot of concerns about, just predictability and
timeframes associated with that review process. While certainly
it is important to ensure that we understand the impact of any
project to Federal infrastructure, Federal water resource
infrastructure, can you talk about the timeline of--and I know
you mentioned 19 months, lightning speed, but the timeline of
that decision, and what would have happened if it was approved
faster?
Mr. Inamine. So for that specific incident--I say 19
months. It actually took much longer. And I want to point out--
this is not a hit piece on the Corps of Engineers. They are a
really competent, well-meaning, smart people, people that are
working on this 408 process. I think they are bound up in a
very stovepiped organization, and it makes it very difficult to
perform, because the outcome of this, as noted by a previous
speaker, is public safety. It is very important. Most people
are generally pointed in that direction.
Now, with regard to 19 months, what had to happen was the
Corps of Engineers, in order to set that world's record of a
very fast 408 process, they had to split the project up into
two pieces. We had a levee at the time, just prior to
construction, that was suffering some internal erosion. We just
found evidence of that just a year prior. It is the site of the
historic 1955--very dangerous site. It was recognized as the
highest priority, highest risk levee on that system.
And so, staff--to their credit, Corps staff, to their
credit--split the project into two pieces. But under the normal
process----
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. I have got 25 seconds left.
Mr. Inamine [continuing]. We might still be waiting for
that project to resolve.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Last, very quickly, you are a non-
Federal sponsor with a project with the Corps of Engineers. Can
you just tell me the percentage of cost that you, implementing
the project on your own, as opposed to doing it with the
Federal Government--you compare those two?
Mr. Inamine. So we have--so we prepared--so we were
completing a locally--State of California and locally funded
project. It encompasses the vast majority of the parallel
Federal project. And so, our costs have been roughly half of
what the Federal cost estimate is to do it under the normal
process.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you very much. I recognize
Ranking Member Napolitano for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you all for your testimony today.
And as I stated in the opening statement, my communities often
approach me about the need for increased Federal funding. That
is why I am conflicted by the statements of President Trump.
One hand, he called for tripling the amount of funding the
Clean Water and Drinking Water State Revolving Fund. We call
that a win. On the other hand, the forthcoming infrastructure
proposal is reportedly to focus solely on increased use of
private financing to close our Nation's infrastructure gap. It
won't work for many of my communities.
Most recently we learned the President plans to cut the
funding for EPA by close to 30 percent. It would have a
devastating impact on the ability of my State and other State
communities and communities to address the water quality
challenges.
Starting with the State revolving fund authority, Ranking
Member DeFazio and I are planning to reintroduce legislation to
finally reauthorize clean water SRF.
To the panel, all of you, yes or no. Clean Water State
Revolving Fund program is an important tool to address local
water challenges. And would you urge this committee to
authorize--reauthorize the program? Yes or no?
Mr. Ellig. I would say yes and no, and use private capital
when you can get it.
Mr. McCarthy. I would encourage it be reauthorized. Again,
the revolving loan fund provides that mechanism for financing
for municipalities that sometimes just is not there, otherwise.
Mr. Stine. On behalf of all States, we have several
resolutions at ECOS that would say yes.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you.
Mr. Inamine. I will abstain, as the flood guy.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Kernion. I tend to agree with--that use a little bit of
both----
Mrs. Napolitano. When necessary.
Mr. Kernion. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Pape. I would say yes, and certainly give access to
private companies, as well, and marry it up with private
funding, as well.
Mr. DeGood. We strongly support the ranking member's
proposal to reauthorize the SRF and to expand to $4 billion a
year.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. Many of you directly utilize
programs of--or funding provided through the EPA. What would be
the impact of a 30-percent cut in these programs to the ability
to meet your local needs?
Mr.--let's see, Mr. Stine?
Mr. Stine. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mrs. Napolitano. The
States have been working with the EPA and with OMB in the last
3 weeks to understand the magnitude of the cuts. At this point
we have not seen the actual programmatic budget line items that
are proposed.
However, a 30-percent reduction in the State and Tribal
Assistance Grants, which include a variety of sources of
revenue that States rely on for implementation of our basic
water and air protection programs, as well as brownfield and
superfund sites, would cut across approximately 15 to 25
percent of most State programs.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. Last week, Mr. Stine, the
Environmental Council of the States submitted a letter to Mr.
Trump and the administration on proposed cuts, which I ask
unanimous consent to include in the record.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Without objection.

[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Napolitano. In this letter you state the cuts to EPA
budget ``will have profound impacts on States' ability to
implement the core environmental programs as expected by our
citizens,'' including clean water programs and State permitting
programs. Can you elaborate a little more?
Mr. Stine. Mr. Chairman, Mrs. Napolitano, yes. That is a
statement that builds on my previous statement, which is States
use the funds to leverage existing programs at the State level.
For example, our clean water and drinking water revolving loan
programs are matched in the State of Minnesota by capitalized
bonds that the State issues to leverage the Federal dollars. So
that would be one specific impact in my State.
But when you look at how States fund their existing
environmental protection programs, whether it is air, land, or
water, all of the States utilize Federal funds across a suite
of activities. It is too soon to say what the direct impacts
would be, but they would be, as I stated in the letter,
profound.
Mrs. Napolitano. To Mayor McCarthy, while not a direct
focus of the hearing, I too support the EPA's brownfield
program. That is why I am concerned to read the President may
propose to eliminate all Federal funding for brownfield. Is
that a proposal you would support?
Mr. McCarthy. No. I would encourage, you know, Congress
represents the State level to look at those options, to
remediate brownfields, to do conversions that bring them back
as productive pieces of real estate.
Schenectady, my testimony reflects--the testimony submitted
reflects an old brownfield site, which was the American
Locomotive Works in the city of Schenectady. It sat there for
50 years. It was abandoned, underutilized, really an
embarrassing piece of real estate. Everybody was afraid that it
was beyond salvage.
When we actually got in and worked through in a systematic
process, the remediation was not that--or the problems weren't
that bad. We were able to put there--now there is a--we just
opened a new casino, which is a $300 million project. We have
underway a $150 million mixed-use housing project going
immediately adjacent to the Mohawk River.
And so it shows that, again, working together, we are able
to take that site that people had really ignored, and make it
really an asset, not only for Schenectady, but the region.
Mrs. Napolitano. Congratulations, sir. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. We are going to go to
the chairman of the full committee, Mr. Shuster, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Pape, I appreciate your testimony. Besides upsetting
the Botox world----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Shuster [continuing]. It was fantastic, fantastic
testimony, and I think a great example, too.
When I talked earlier about private-sector dollars, I think
the water systems, wastewater, clean water, is--this is an
option for us. And only 2 percent--I think was your testimony,
you said--of water systems are operated by companies like
yours. Do you see that growing? Do you see people coming to you
more and more, saying we need to use the private-sector
solution?
Ms. Pape. Sir, we have certainly seen it more and more as
municipal governments, especially, have dealt primarily with
underfunded pension issues.
Mr. Shuster. Right.
Ms. Pape. They have looked around and just tried to decide
what assets can we sell. Scranton, Pennsylvania, is one that we
recently acquired at the end of 2016.
Mr. Shuster. And you always buy them? Do you lease them,
or----
Ms. Pape. We always buy.
Mr. Shuster. Always buy.
Ms. Pape. And I would like to explain one of the reasons
why, because it goes to the affordability question. One of the
methods we have in Pennsylvania is that we can spread the cost,
the expenses and the capital cost of our assets, over our large
base of customers, which is 700,000 in Pennsylvania. So we can
use that law when we acquire assets. We couldn't use it if we
leased.
Mr. Shuster. And your rates, when they go up, do you do
that by yourself, or you have to consult with somebody to----
Ms. Pape. The rates have to go through the Public Utility
Commission----
Mr. Shuster. Right.
Ms. Pape [continuing]. Through a long 8-, 9-, 10-month
process. Again----
Mr. Shuster. So there is protection for the citizens if
you--somebody saying, ``Oh, that is a private company, they are
going to jack our rates up.'' Because one of the biggest
challenges I face in my district, a rural district, a high
senior population, incomes declining, and half the district
flows into the Susquehanna, which is the Chesapeake water--and
which causes us a lot of problems with water.
So again--and I have many, many water systems, old systems
that, you know, we have tried to push them this way. But it is
a challenge to get them to consider this, because they are
afraid they are going to give up their water, and not have any
kind of control over it. So I appreciate what you are doing.
And I would like to see more examples, because I have seen
the--many examples where you are rebuilding their systems, and
their rates have not gone through the roofs. In fact, some
cases they stay relatively stable, so----
Ms. Pape. We do have a customer assistance program also for
people who cannot pay the rates.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you.
Mr. Ellig, have you seen any examples of good governance
in--when it comes to these regulations, in either the U.S.
Government or in foreign governments that you can point to to
say this is how it should run, this is how we see it, so we can
use it as examples to demonstrate to other agencies that there
are cases where this can be done?
Mr. Ellig. Yes, let me highlight one example. One of the
things that I have spent a lot of time looking at is how well
Federal regulatory agencies account for costs. And typically,
what they do when they are issuing regulations, most of the
agencies that do a good job, they are still only counting
compliance expenditures as a measure of cost, and not looking
at broader costs to society. And some of those costs have been
mentioned here. In general, agencies are not good at taking
account of the costs that arise when regulations make people
wait for stuff.
Now I am going to give you the good example. The good
example is, the U.S. Department of Transportation is actually
better at this than most, maybe because it is transportation,
and they realize that waiting time and transit time are
important. And so, I will single out USDOT as being pretty good
at trying to take into account the effects of making people
wait when it is issuing regulations. And they actually have
values that they ascribe to people's travel time and waiting
time. So that is a good practice that a lot of other agencies
could learn from.
Mr. Shuster. It is good to hear there are some good
examples. I would like to continue talking to you in this
discussion to try to identify more and more of these types of
good programs that are out there.
A final question to the mayor. You are under a consent
decree. One hookup for every four you have to de-hookup. What
is--why--what is the ratio? Who came up with that, and what is
the sense in that? I don't----
Mr. McCarthy. In New York State we work with the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation, which acts as
the EPA's representative. And it was the terms that they put
forth on the city to enter into the decree and move forward.
And we want to remedy the problem, where we have the outflow,
but that is the terms that they gave us.
Mr. Shuster. Right, but what is it based on, just their--
they just pulled it out of the sky and said, ``one to four
sounds good to us''? Because it sounds to me like, from your
testimony, it causes you a lot of harm.
Mr. McCarthy. We have right now a project where--it is an
old industrial city. We have--a number of partners have come
forth within the community, and we are doing a new construction
housing project, fair market, within the city. We are having
trouble getting the approval to be able to hook those houses up
within the city of Schenectady to handle the wastewater because
of the consent order.
And over--we are permitted at 18.5 million gallons a day.
Our average now is running about 11.8 million last year. And
over the last 7 or 8 years, we have reduced the flow within our
systems by about 4 million gallons a day, through dealing with
I&I [inflow and infiltration] issues. So we have tried to do
that. But again, it is that regulatory environment that
sometimes logic just is not part of the discussion.
Mr. Shuster. I went over my time, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
very much for letting me.
And you mentioned the important word, because my father
keeps staring me on the wall. He would always say that people
come in his office--when you start talking logic, he says that
is the greatest sin in Washington, DC, is to think logically.
So I think all of you are sinners at the table today.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We are
going to go to the gentlewoman from Illinois, Mrs. Bustos, for
5 minutes.
Mrs. Bustos. Thank you, Chairman Graves and Ranking Member
Napolitano. I appreciate you holding this hearing. And I also
want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today.
In Illinois--I represent the northwestern region of
Illinois--we have a real problem. Our aging water
infrastructure is inefficient and can even put public health at
risk. On top of that, we know that our fix-as-fail approach to
locks and dams puts our growers and manufacturers, as well as
the navigation industry, in a guessing game of whether they
will be able to deliver to consumers on time. So, simply
unacceptable.
When we invest in our water infrastructure we create good-
paying jobs, protect our public health, and help get goods to
market more efficiently. There is no reason we shouldn't work
together to make sure our country's water infrastructure
programs work for users and help address the massive backlog
many of our communities face.
So, again, my district, northwestern Illinois, live along
the Mississippi River. The Illinois River runs through the
southern part of my congressional district. So locks and dams
are absolutely critical. So when I think of the water
infrastructure, certainly I also think of water lines and the
Clean Water Act. But in my district we also, as I said, think
about navigation.
So, for the panel, is anyone here prepared to discuss the
navigation infrastructure on our rivers? And just wondering if
that is something that any of our panelists would care to
address. And that can be addressed to any one of you. Anybody
want to volunteer for that?
Mr. DeGood. I would go ahead and just say that I think, as
part of a broader infrastructure package, that inland
navigation has to be a part of that. And we support efforts to
try and take both the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund and Inland
Waterways Trust Fund off budget, so that the full amount of
revenue that is paid in by users through excise taxes on barge
fuel and through the goods that are moved through our ports can
be put to good use constructing the kinds of projects and
making sure that the number of days that locks and dams are out
of service due to maintenance and delays goes down.
Mr. Stine. Mr. Chairman, I am just going to speak to one
project that I am familiar with in my role on the Great Lakes
Commission, which is the replacement of the Soo locks, which is
a critical piece of infrastructure, vital to the economy of the
Great Lakes. Our harbor of Duluth and Superior in Minnesota/
Wisconsin is a key piece of the national infrastructure,
creates a vulnerability in our processing of goods and services
across the Great Lakes, St. Lawrence Seaway, and that is one
critical project that the Great Lakes Commission has passed
resolutions supporting and has spoken up clearly on.
So that is in a different hat that I wear on a different
day. I will be back next week on behalf of that organization.
Mrs. Bustos. Anybody else have anything to add on that
topic?
[No response.]
Mrs. Bustos. All right. So this one I will address, Mr.
Stine, to you. And then also, Mayor McCarthy. You guys had
mentioned the State revolving funds in your testimony. It has
been really important to my congressional district. The Clean
Water State Revolving Loan Fund has been an invaluable resource
in our area. We have got--including an $11 million sewer
improvement project that wrapped up last year in a town called
Rock Island, Illinois.
Also, in a community called Galesburg, in my congressional
district, incredibly important to replace about 2,000 solid
lead lines that are going to people's homes from the water
main. And so very important.
Wondering if you have thoughts about the demand for these
revolving loans, and whether the demand is outpacing what
Congress provides annually in appropriations for that fund.
Mr. Stine. Mr. Chair, Mrs. Bustos, yes, the demand far
outstrips the available funding. States apply various
approaches to leverage those dollars through their own
resources. But the need is somewhere in the area of a couple
hundred billion dollars over the next 5 years. Just for
drinking water systems alone, it is probably $300 billion over
the next 15 years. And as for clean water and wastewater
infrastructure, the appropriations through the revolving funds
are a significant source of revenue for States and local
communities to meet those needs.
Mrs. Bustos. Mayor McCarthy?
Mr. McCarthy. Thank you. It is really critical for a lot of
municipalities, and also smaller levels of Government, where
the revolving loan funds--you know, New York you also have a
set of expertise from that side, where they are doing unique
projects that are in water and wastewater, so that they add a
little bit of value to the community. And the no-interest and
low-interest loans are, again, sometimes deal-makers in terms
of allowing communities to go ahead with the projects, to meet
the regulatory requirements that we are all dealing with.
So I would encourage Members to look at funding those at
levels that provide adequate resources for the local
governments.
Mrs. Bustos. All right, thank you. And I have used up my
time. I yield back, thank you.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. And I am going to turn
to the former chairman of this subcommittee and mentor, Mr.
Gibbs from Ohio, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, and I want to congratulate Chairman
Graves on your new position. I look forward to working with you
in the majority.
Anyways, Mr. Ellig, it is really refreshing to hear
somebody talking about challenges we have with regulations. And
your comment about the--some of our agencies using research to
support their agenda, and then also using the media or social
media--I can think of one example, and that was the United
States rule that was pushed through I think was biased. Would
you agree that that was an example of research that--to drive
an agenda, a political agenda? And the----
Mr. Ellig. Oh, yes. I am aware of that example, and it was
highly controversial. I think, from my perspective, the bigger
problem is when you have agencies that are supposed to be doing
objective analysis, and then that gets turned into something
that is supposed to be used for advocacy, rather than something
that is supposed to inform decisions.
Mr. Gibbs. Mayor McCarthy, thank you for referencing my
integrated planning permitting bill. I really appreciate the
support from the Conference of Mayors.
Can you elaborate a little bit on your consent decrees? You
know, this permitting planning bill, you know, it is really to
develop a long-term plan and set benchmarks on goals. But when
you are on a consent decree and under the restrictions of the
permit, how is that--on hindering--is it--on the cost side,
what would this bill--how would it really help you on the cost
side?
Mr. McCarthy. Our--some quick background on the overflow
that we are dealing with is a valve in the city of Schenectady
that we----
Mr. Shuster. Can you pull the mic closer? Pull the mic
closer to you a little bit----
Mr. McCarthy. I am sorry. It is a valve in the city of
Schenectady that we would open two or three times a year for
hours during the day to handle high-water events. And that is
the decree that we had to enter into. It is, you know, $14
million that we are addressing to remediate that.
We want to stop the outflow. But again, the cost and then
the criteria where you have the 4-to-1 offset, it is very
frustrating. We are taking an old, industrial city, we have got
a lot of good things happening, we are seeing new investment,
we are seeing people view the community differently. It is the
birthplace of GE celebrating its 125th anniversary as a
company. They are looking at opportunities within the
community. And the 4-to-1 is, again, extremely restrictive.
And where we have met all the other criteria--we have
taken--we are permitted at 18.5 million gallons a day. We are
only running about 11.8 million. And the last 4 years, through
management, we are reducing the I&I inflow into the system. We
have reduced that by about 4 million gallons a day. And if I
would be able to----
Mr. Gibbs. Yes, but having a longer framework than 5
years--the permit is 5 years, I believe, that--you know, set
benchmarks that reach that.
Are you under--being fined in this consent decree, or not?
Mr. McCarthy. We have not--well, there is always the threat
of being fined. But we are, again, working in a manner where we
have entered into the consent decree. We have negotiated with
it, and trying to remediate the issue and again move forward so
it is in everybody's best interest, even though the terms are
frustrating to try and manage a city on a daily basis.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. DeGood, you brought up Cleveland and their
challenges of having--I am from Ohio. The integrated planning
permitting bill, how would that--in your instance, you brought
up Cleveland. Would that be a benefit to them? Can you expound
on that?
Mr. DeGood. Well, I think it is important to note that, in
the Cleveland example, they signed on to that consent decree in
2011. And the program of projects that they put forward that
the EPA agreed to includes a combination of gray and green
infrastructure. So I think we are supportive, broadly, of the
concept of integrated planning. But it is not necessary for
that legislation to be passed for people to be able to use
green infrastructure as part of a consent decree.
I think our only concern with the legislation as is
currently drafted is that some of the language comes
precariously close to allowing affordability to be a mechanism
by which we actually are reducing or weakening the limitations
that we would normally put into our NPDES permitting processes.
And I think, for us, that is probably a break point.
Mr. Gibbs. My intent is really for the EPA and the local
entities, districts to work together to come up with a long-
term solution. Because the problem you have, they can't charge
the ratepayers enough, they can't always do everything at once,
and give them that flexibility. But if you--a long, multiyear,
long-term plan and set benchmarks, and you can get there.
Mr. DeGood. Sure.
Mr. Gibbs. I think that----
Mr. DeGood. In the Cleveland example, they signed a 25-year
agreement. So I think, you know, the EPA was cognizant of the
fact that Cleveland had financial restrictions, and that the
level of improvements that they were asking for were
substantial enough that they went ahead and gave them what, at
the time, was one of the longest consent decree implementation
windows that had been ever given. So I think the EPA is aware
of those challenges that local districts face.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Chairman. Time is up.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. I recognize Mrs.
Lawrence for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you, Chairman and Ranking Member, for
this opportunity. Thank you all so much, panel.
I am--I represent the--a part of Michigan. And so the Flint
water situation was something that was extremely emotional, and
something that has reconfirmed my commitment to clean water in
America, and protecting our families and our health through
water.
Months after warning signs, the water in Flint, Michigan,
as you know, did not meet the levels of--in lead that would be
healthy for children in a city that depended on that. A man-
made disaster is a tragic outcome.
We have found that in September 2016 the U.S. GAO released
its study of water infrastructure for selected mid-sized and
large cities with declining population, and it was alarming,
what they found. They found many of them have lost a
substantial percent of their population, as you mentioned,
Mayor. And, because of that, they are seeing declining
revenues, which makes it difficult to address the
infrastructure needs. And in our investigation of Flint we
found the finance and revenue of maintaining a water system was
part of the equation that was used to make a very unfortunate
decision.
So my question is to you, Mayor McCarthy. In your written
statement you talk about how your city is not atypical. It is
older, it is industrial. I know a thing or two about that,
being a mayor, myself. Can you talk about the water and
infrastructure challenges in cities? Because you hear, as--U.S.
Conference of Mayors.
And if any other member wants to talk about that, because
it is important that, as we move forward with the matches that
we are talking about, that is the challenge--that we are very
clear on investment in water infrastructure is not a luxury or
a pretty thing, it is a necessity.
So, Mayor, please.
Mr. McCarthy. Thank you. The water in wastewater systems
are key, in terms of basic quality of life, and then also,
trying to rejuvenate and reinvigorate older communities. You
want to be able to attract people there, you want to attract
business, and you have to have those systems in place. We want
them to maintain and be able to produce the highest quality
water, treat wastewater.
But the numbers, to be able to finance those systems, are a
lot of times a burden on the community, and it comes a point
where businesses, families, individuals choose to live in other
places, as opposed to the older urban areas that you have some
of the infrastructure in place that really just needs to be
upgraded and modernized.
Mrs. Lawrence. So I know in Flint--and you are seeing it,
too--is economics. It is housing, and it is also--builds a
community or--but most of all, it is a health component. Some
people say quality of life. It is a necessity.
Mr. McCarthy. Absolutely.
Mrs. Lawrence. OK. Anyone else want to comment on that?
[No response.]
Mrs. Lawrence. Mr. DeGood, in your written statement you
talk about the need for sound regulations such as the Clean
Water Act, which restores and maintain the chemical and
physical integrity. Are the regulations the reason we have a
crisis in our water infrastructure in America today?
Mr. DeGood. I think the answer to that is a resounding no.
I think we have a crisis of underinvestment that is, in some
cases, a shared burden for locals in the Federal Government.
There are certainly places where we can point to where
water services are underpriced. And I think, rather than trying
to point to the regulations that we ask EPA and our State
partners to enforce as being the problem, what we need to do is
put some additional money on the table.
I think what the construction grants program--from the
original 1972 Clean Water Act--demonstrates for us is that when
the Federal Government shows up with resources, often times
local elected officials find the courage to raise money
themselves. That is not always the case. There are certainly
communities that are so economically challenged that you need
to have different matching requirements and an understanding
and a sensitivity to that.
But those initial construction grants were, for the most
part, a 55/45 Federal/local match. So our local communities
stepped up and did what was asked of them. But I think, when
you are faced with a bill and somebody is telling you it is all
on you, go ahead and borrow the money, go ahead and do a P3,
that is really not the answer.
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you. I want to close with this. In
America we are going to start seeing water affordability being
an issue in our cities, because we have to fund them, we have
to provide safe, clean water. And when cities step up to make
those investments, they have to get the revenue. And water
affordability is going to be a issue we are going to talk
about.
Thank you. I will yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. Next is the gentleman
from Pennsylvania, Mr. Smucker. Five minutes.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As a member of the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, but not a member
of this subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to be here
this morning. Thank you for allowing me to do that.
I specifically want to highlight an issue that is important
in the district that I represent in Pennsylvania, the
Chesapeake Bay watershed.
Mr. Ellig, this was brought up earlier by Mr. Gibbs. And I
appreciated, as well, your testimony in regards to the--some of
the problems with our regulatory process which produces
undesirable results at times. And specifically for our
community, the interpretation of the EPA in regards to wOTUS,
Waters of the U.S., and the extension of what is considered
waters of the U.S., is a major problem.
This was also briefly mentioned by Mr. Kernion. I was a
contractor, as well, and so I understand the impact on
development projects of interpretation of that law.
But the Pennsylvania Farm Bureau president, Rick Ebert,
noted after President Trump's Executive order that virtually
all of Pennsylvania's land mass can be claimed by EPA officials
as regulated water, subjecting land owners and communities to
extreme and needless Federal permitting requirements and land
use restrictions.
These farming groups have also claimed that if they were to
dig a drainage ditch on their property, it would potentially
become a United States waterway under the WOTUS provisions.
This is an example that I think--some of what you were
describing--of an overreach of regulations.
So, Mr. Ellig, I just--you know, how is it, if we have a
regulation like that in place, how could groups go about trying
to find a better balance between the goal that we want to
achieve and that overreach?
Mr. Ellig. Well, yes. I understand why this is a difficulty
for development. Also, for farmers in Lancaster County. I think
we have to go back to basics and insist that our discussions of
regulation be based on actual fact, and investigation of
whether regulations really are likely to create the intended
benefits, and whether they actually do, after they have been
implemented, create the intended benefits.
Because, unfortunately, an awful lot of the debate over
regulation, particularly environmental regulation, has become
kind of a holy war, where everybody argues on the basis of
their intentions, rather than what actually happens as a result
of the regulation.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you----
Mr. Ellig. So I would say, first things first, let's get
back to factual investigation of what the actual likely results
and the actual----
Mr. Smucker. Thank you----
Mr. Ellig [continuing]. Results of regulation----
Mr. Smucker [continuing]. Thank you, and completely agree.
One of the other points you made, which I thought was very
good, you said regulatory agents often act as if enforcement is
more important than compliance or achievement of regulatory
outcomes.
And just recently, farmers in the Chesapeake Bay watershed
did a voluntary study and highlighted some of the actions that
have already been taken, for which they are not recognized. So,
for instance, 475,800 acres of nutrient manure management;
97,562 acres of enhanced nutrient management; 2,164 animal
waste storage units; 2,106 barnyard runoff control systems. You
can go on and on.
And the point I want to make is what farmers in my area
want to see is more collaboration and less enforcement. Why can
we not see that occurring by some of our agencies?
Mr. Ellig. Well, you would get that if agencies were
rewarded--individual agencies were rewarded for actually
achieving results, rather than for achieving outputs or
activities that are measurable--that may or may not produce
results.
Mr. Smucker. And again, additional point to make is
farmers, builders, contractors, the municipalities in my area
want to see clean water. They all enjoy clean waters on their
farms. They want the Chesapeake to be clean. But again, they
want to see more of that collaboration, which, I think, is
sorely missing.
So I--again, I appreciate your comments. I know we have
taken the first step in this regard with the President's
Executive order. And I know that this is of concern to the
chairman of this subcommittee, as well, and I look forward to
us continuing to work on this issue. Thank you.
Mr. Ellig. Thank you.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. We are going to go to
the gentleman from California, Mr. Lowenthal, for 5 minutes.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Ranking Member
Napolitano. I am honored to join you as a new member of the
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, and the Water
Resources and Environmental Subcommittee. I look forward to
working together to improve the work of the Army Corps, to
protect the Clean Water Act, and to build upon its successes,
and that we craft a robust and equitable Water Resources
Development Act. I want to thank you for convening this
hearing, and for the people on the panel, for highlighting the
importance of water resources and the relevant Federal agencies
and the role they play in our Nation's infrastructure.
First question I have is for Mr. DeGood. Recent reports--
and certainly not--we are not clear yet, but they seem to
indicate that President Trump plans to propose devastating cuts
to the EPA's funding and staff levels. Several of its most
important programs may face elimination all together. Your
testimony, and the written testimony, highlighted the
importance, the enormous importance of the EPA to communities
across the country, from protecting clean water infrastructure
to safeguarding public health.
What do you think that these cuts that we have been at
least hearing about to EPA would mean for the Federal
Government's efforts to maintain and improve clean water
infrastructure?
Mr. DeGood. So I think I would make three points to that
question.
One, we have had a lot of talk already this morning about
frustrations that people have--I think often legitimate--with
the length of permitting processes. I think when you are
talking about potentially a 30-percent or greater cut to EPA's
budget, you are talking about eliminating many of the
positions, many of the people whose job it is to try to review
these applications and to provide timely determinations. So, if
our goal here is to give people greater certainty and to speed
those processes up, I don't see how cutting Federal staff and
Federal budgets are going to do that.
But I think, more importantly, we really undermine our
long-term productivity and long-term community health. As just
one example, the section 106 grants program provides money
directly to States to allow them to do the very implementation
work of things like the Clean Water Act, right. This is
monitoring and assessing water qualities, developing water
quality standards, determining total maximum daily loads,
ensuring compliance, taking enforcement actions. This is really
the core of laws like the Clean Water Act. We hand off to
States to do that work. And when we take money away through EPA
budget cuts, we take away their ability to enforce those laws.
And the last thing I will note is about the brownfields
program. These are very productive dollars. And it comes down
to a question of efficiency, and it comes down to linear
infrastructure. If you allow a parcel that has been polluted
over time through a prior industrial use to sit idle, and you
go out and you have to build new infrastructure--that is water,
that is sewer, that is roads, stop lights, all the things that
go along with that--to try to attract new housing or new
commercial development, you are creating additional facilities
that you are going to have to try to maintain for decades into
the future.
When we remediate parcels that have existing pollution,
what we are really doing is creating a pathway for future
economic development at that site that will generate tax
revenue on top of existing infrastructure. It is not something
we have to go out and build new. So we are really cutting off
our nose to spite our face when we talk about zeroing out the
brownfields program.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you. Next question I want to clarify
something that I am not really clear on.
Mr. Kernion, you brought up the issue of funding for
Federal water agencies. And we have heard already of the
backlog the Army Corps has for authorized but unconstructed
projects, which--where the valuing is estimated at over $56
billion.
Now you talked about--in your written testimony,
especially--that environmental review processes have played a
major role in some of the backlog, or holding up the process.
But we also heard from the opening statement from Ranking
Member DeFazio that the Corps budget cannot deal with the
backlog. It is not only--or it is not really the burdensome
regulations that are leading to the backlog, but the lack of
funding for the Army Corps.
Could you kind of deal with this relationship and where you
see this relationship between the funding and also the
regulations?
Mr. Kernion. Personally, I have seen both. And I am just
speaking offhand. I have worked for--as a contractor for the
Corps of Engineers now for over 30 years. And I have seen quite
a bit of the both take place. In waiting on funding, I have
seen projects shut down because they didn't have funding, where
they have actually gone to contractors and said, ``Look, in
order to keep going, you have to finance your project, or stop
and take the brunt of it until we get more money appropriated
for the project.''
I have also seen the environmental things which I alluded
to when I spoke about before. One of the biggest things that I
have seen personally it wetlands issues. Now maybe EPA issues
in other States--of course, where we are, it just seems like it
is more wetlands.
Congressman here talked about diverting water. Every time
you divert water, it is not opening up another waterway, but,
uh-oh, is that water going to go to an area that is now going
to become a wetlands, and it is not dry--it is now dry, but you
run water through it, it might be wet, and then you can't use
the land again.
And so, I have seen, actually, both of them. I don't know
if I am answering your question right, but that is my personal
experience with it.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. Next we are going to go
to a gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Chairman Graves. Congratulations. I
had a quick question for you that--you know, I kind of injured
my finger on the chair, scooting my chair in earlier. Do you
think the Corps could use some investigations money in their
account to help me get to the bottom of why you have tried a
conspiracy in your first hearing to attack my finger? I mean
this is just outrageous.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. I think the Corps would love to
investigate that.
Mr. Davis. First off, it is great to have Chairman Graves
and the Water Resources and Environment Subcommittee here, and
I appreciate all of the testimony. We are all in the same boat.
We all want to see infrastructure built in this country.
Mr. Stine, you mentioned that the Mississippi River starts
in Minnesota and ends in Louisiana. Well, you know what? It
digests through Illinois. And our navigation system and the
infrastructure that it needs to continue to keep our navigation
system moving from north to south and south to north is right
in my district. So it is imperative that we see action.
And that is what we haven't seen. Twenty years ago I saw
which plan the Corps was going to use to update the locks and
dams in the Illinois and Upper Miss systems, and we have seen
nothing since then, except the plan that they wanted to use. We
see no investment. And we have seen, from the last
administration, since 2010, that we have invested nothing in
NESP to try and upgrade those antiquated systems. So we have
got to have the progress in the middle of your area and his
area to ensure that our products get from point A to point B
and out into the global marketplace.
That being said, Mr. Kernion, great to see you again. We
met last night. One of the things that I proposed in the last
WRDA [Water Resources Development Act] bill was to require a
GAO study to study alternative models for management of the
Inland Waterways Trust Fund, including a possible not-for-
profit corporation or Government-owned corporation that would
actually put us on a path to have a continuous funding source
for doing what the Corps of Engineers should do, and has done
well in the past. That is to build infrastructure and design
infrastructure. Seems pretty simple to me. Seems like sometimes
over the last few years they may have lost their mission.
That being said, you are a builder. What would more
certainty, faster project delivery of navigation projects for
someone like you, what would that mean to your employees? And
what would it mean if we had a continuous funding source that
industry could utilize to actually do what the Corps should be
doing, build things?
Mr. Kernion. Well, I am going to answer it like this. I
think the Mississippi River, if you look at it, is probably--
and you compare it to a human body, it is one of the largest
arteries, or the largest artery in the body. And at that point
I believe you have to do everything you can to keep that river
flowing, keep it from overflowing, and keep commerce up and
down that river, because commerce is as important as anything.
One of the things talked about is dredging the river deeper
to get the Panamax ships into the river. If that was done, we
would actually get--more commerce going up and down the river
would flow, and it would be a different way to run, you know,
goods through that artery.
At the same time, the river is treacherous and is deadly. I
have seen the river do some devastating things. I didn't
realize water was as dangerous as it could be until I had a
levee break years ago--I tried to stop it--after a hurricane,
and it is brutal, what it can do and the damage it can do to
people.
But also, and what you had alluded to last night, was
getting the projects funded for up there. For us, of course, we
are 100 percent behind that. We would love to see it happen.
The more projects up and down the river, we are happy. I was
last year's president of Mississippi Valley--Mississippi River
Valley's Associated General Contractors, and a lot of the
contractors in our district work on that river, and they depend
on getting the funding to build that infrastructure.
Mr. Davis. Well, a lot of the contractors in my district
work on that river. And you are absolutely right, we have got
to have some movement.
And I don't have much time left, and I know the chairman,
he is not going to give me any extra time. So I want to make
sure you--the witnesses know my opinion. You know, I think a
body resembling the inland waterway users board and including
other key stakeholders like many of you at this table,
including Government representation, like the Corps of
Engineers, would do a much more efficient job of identifying a
project schedule and making expenditures to priority projects
that have already received approval from Congress.
After all, you guys are the people paying for the projects,
right? Let's actually make sure they get done.
And, with that, I have got about 2 seconds left, and I am
going to yield it back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. That is impressive efficiency.
Thank you, Mr. Davis.
With that, we are going to yield to the gentlewoman from
Connecticut, Ms. Esty.
Ms. Esty. Thank you, Chairman Graves and Ranking Member
Napolitano. And thank you to the entire panel. Many of us are
bouncing between committees. I have got all three of mine going
simultaneously at this hour.
A couple of quick comments. To Mr. Stine, greetings from my
husband, former commissioner of DEEP in Connecticut, and thanks
for the good work ECOS does, in having grown up, in part, in
Winona.
To Mr. Kernion, father and grandfather, both AGC
contractors, and my grandfather built locks and dams on the
Mississippi River. So some experience with that.
To Mr. Inamine, I grew up in northern California, in part.
Very familiar with the Feather River and challenges there.
So, to Mr. Ellig, I want you to know that there is support
on both sides of the aisle for focusing on technology and
outcomes. And I think it is vitally important, with constrained
budgets, having been a local town council member, State
representative, and now in Congress, we have got to figure out
how to be faster and more efficient. And I appreciate you
flagging time as a real cost. And that is something we really
need to focus on, and I think we need to streamline our systems
and get better outcomes with less time, and free up those
resources to actually be spent on getting the outcomes.
I wanted to turn to the issue of brownfields. And I think
Mr. Katko is going to join me on that. We have legislation we
are putting back in in this Congress. We need funding and to
really focus on the vital importance of that, and rebuilding
communities.
And it is actually related to some of the issues Ms. Pape
raised, too. If we don't get the funding in those communities--
and I represent Connecticut, I have got cities like Waterbury,
Connecticut, which has major parcels of land right in the
middle of downtown. If we don't rehab those, we are not going
to be able to create jobs, we are not--we are going to be
chewing up farmland elsewhere. So it is bad for the ecology of
other communities. And, frankly, we are not going to have the
jobs.
So I would like, if you could, Mayor, if you can talk a
little bit about how important brownfields are for
revitalization of our communities, and which of the grants that
are most important to you. Because, again, if we are looking at
a 25-percent or anything like that kind of cut, we are going to
be really challenged in figuring out how to work through that
backlog on brownfields.
Mr. McCarthy. Thank you. Brownfields, as you point out,
they are underutilized, they are a negative influence on
communities. And they have, largely, a proud history. There was
something there at one time that added value. For whatever
reason, it is no longer there. And so you have to have the
tenacity and the systematic approach to work through whatever
the problems may be.
And a lot of times people will--they think that you can't
solve the problem. But you can. And it is--requires the
partnership that State, local, Federal-level, the private
sector to come up, to do the evaluation, to look at the
opportunities that are there, to create real value, and so that
the funding from the Federal level is key in driving that
overall discussion and the partnerships that can form if the
funding mechanism is in place.
Ms. Esty. We would love to cycle back with you on some
specific proposals we were looking at to include P3s and other
ways of leveraging those resources, whether it is for parks,
which are part of creating that quality of life, or repurposed
industrial sites, or shopping malls, or whatever it may be. We
are trying to put some urban greenhouses in one of ours to
bring food back into the city, cap those sites, but then
actually repurpose them for use.
Mr. DeGood, you talked a little bit about that. Can you
speak both about brownfields and the importance of that, and
also return a little bit to the importance of leveraging that
Federal funding? Because I saw it at the local level. If
communities don't have those match for water systems, they
can't get the goodwill of local residents to raise the property
tax to pay for those projects.
Mr. DeGood. I think that is absolutely right. I think one
of the hardest things, as an elected official, is when somebody
tells you that it is your responsibility, and your
responsibility alone. And it is a hard thing to go out into
your community, even if you passionately believe in the value
of something like the Clean Water Act or the flood control
standards that the Army Corps has, even if you want to try to
engage in redevelopment, if you are saying, ``We are on our own
here.''
And so, that is why, when we start hearing stories about
the kinds of budget cuts that this administration is
contemplating for the Environmental Protection Agency, it is
disheartening because we know that, ultimately, for an
administration that has spent so much time talking about jobs,
taking these dollars out are actually going to do just the
opposite. It is going to take the stick out of local elected
officials' hands and make them unable to deliver for their
communities.
Ms. Esty. I see my time is expiring, so I am going to yield
back my 5 seconds. Thank you.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Ms. Esty. With that we
are going to turn to the gentleman from New York, Mr. Katko,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and congratulations on
your chairmanship. I look forward to working on this committee.
Mr. McCarthy, welcome, and I appreciate your testimony thus
far. As you may or may not know, I am from upstate New York, in
Syracuse, and spent a lot of time in Schenectady. And in so
doing, I led--it led me to the conclusion that Schenectady is
very much in this same boat of all the upstate New York cities.
We have lost tremendous amounts of manufacturing and tremendous
amounts of tax base over the last several decades, and that has
led to profound infrastructure problems, which I am not quite
certain that this--we have delved into it with enough detail.
That is what I want to do for the next few minutes.
As you may or may not know, in Syracuse we still have--we
have such a profound problem with our water infrastructure that
some of the pipes we use in the city of Syracuse are still
wooden from, like, the late 1800s, early 1900s, which is
unbelievable to me. Last year we had well over 100 water main
breaks in the city of Syracuse. And some of the really up-and-
coming areas, like Armory Square were often peppered with back
hoes digging up lines and fixing them and water problems, and
it just seems, in this day and age, that is crazy.
So, with that as a backdrop, if you could describe for me,
you know, the state of your water infrastructure, and then I
have some followup questions from there.
Mr. McCarthy. Schenectady is fortunate for its water
supply. We get that from the Great Flats aquifer, the
recharge--it is the Mohawk River. And so we have a high
quality, really, low-cost source of water.
Mr. Katko. Same in Syracuse, yes.
Mr. McCarthy. Again, it is one of the great things about
upstate New York. And at the same time, as you point out, we
have infrastructure that was put in 100 years ago, 125 years
ago, sometimes longer. And it just has a realistic life span.
And so, you have to be able to manage those resources. And
without--you know, you hope that those pipes are going to last
another 50 years. The reality is they are not going to. And the
ability to predict when something happens is unfortunate--it is
just that element of randomness, so that you are dealing with a
major break in a water line or sewer line, and it is always
occurring at 2 o'clock in the morning on a weekend, and you are
having to mobilize crews that would be normally doing other
things.
But if we can get ahead of that problem, those cities in
upstate New York--and mirrored across the country--have long,
distinguished histories of significant economic outputs,
centers of innovation, technology, and you want to have that
water and sewer system in place so that we can position the
communities for, really, that next generation of innovation and
evolution of urban life.
Mr. Katko. Right. And I totally agree with you. And from an
industry standpoint, I can only note that we really have a
limitless supply of water between Lake Ontario, the Finger
Lakes--it is just amazing, in upstate New York, that the
quality of water that we have is consistently some of the best
in the country, and we don't have systems to deliver it.
So how do you, in your mind, assess the adequacy of the
funding to replace these--to fix these projects? And what would
you suggest we try to do, from a legislative standpoint?
Mr. McCarthy. In Schenectady, we have largely dealt with it
ourselves, even though we have had some assistance from the
State, some assistance from--some Federal money in the funding
streams. But Schenectady gets referenced continually as having
one of the highest tax rates, not only in New York State, but
in the country. And it is because we are paying for those
things. And it is not only water and sewer, but it is other--
roads, school district--other community assets.
And you get to the point where, even though you are trying
to keep up and keep ahead of the curve, it creates a negative
influence where it, in fact, deters our ability to attract
residents, to attract business, to plan the assets of the water
and other natural resources that exist not only within
Schenectady, but in upstate New York.
Mr. Katko. All right, so how would you--I understand the
problem, but how would you fix it? What would you think we need
to do?
Mr. McCarthy. I would like a funding formula that has
participation at all levels, so that you have Federal money,
there is State money, there is local money. Some of the highway
and bridge money, it is a good formula, it is 80 percent
Federal, 15 percent State, and then 5 percent local.
Mr. Katko. Well, how about the Clean Water State Revolving
Fund? Is that a fund you can access? And, if you can, is that
adequate for the job?
Mr. McCarthy. We have found it adequate, because, again, we
have had low cost for our water source. I am not sure that is
shared by other communities across the country, and I don't
have some of that information directly available, but we will
have it forwarded to you at the conclusion of today's hearing.
Mr. Katko. I appreciate it. Thank you. I yield back my
time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Katko. And, with
that, we are going to recognize the gentleman from California,
Mr. Garamendi, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garamendi. Chairman Graves, thank you--
congratulations--Ranking Member Napolitano, and what is left of
the committee.
Just a couple of comments before I ask a question. Mike
Inamine is here. He faced a most difficult situation over the
last month, when the floods occurred in California when the
Oroville Dam spillway failed and--releasing an extraordinary
amount of water down the Feather River through his responsible
area on the west side of the Feather River and the community of
Yuba City, causing--the failure of the spillway caused a
massive evacuation of over--almost 200,000 people, of which
about 100,000 of those were in the community that he was trying
to protect by flood-fighting.
An extraordinary piece of work, fighting a flood while
everybody was leaving town. And I know you and your crews did
not leave town, you stayed there and fought the flood, even
though you might have been under 20 feet of water had that
spillway actually failed. That is the emergency spillway
actually failed. Within 7 hours you would be under 20 feet of
water. Courageous, necessary.
One of the major--as I understand it, Mr. Inamine, is that
the--one of the significant flood fight areas--that is a levee
that was failing--was to become a part of a Corps of Engineers
project, but had not yet been designated in the New Start
programs that we receive occasionally from the Corps of
Engineers.
My point here is that if that particular 1-mile stretch of
the levee--I think there was two, two stretches, actually--had
been designated in the 2017 work plan, would you have been
fighting floods?
Mr. Inamine. There are really two parts to respond to that
question. And it gets back to my earlier comments about how
flood control projects are repaired or improved. And it is that
we collaborate with Corps of Engineers to get New Start
designations, new projects constructed by the Corps. And, in
fact, that reach of critically deficient levee has been a
source of a couple of failures, protects 20,000 people, just by
itself, was part of the Federal project authorized by Congress
in 2014.
But through the State of California, we--for these
critically damaged sites, we can't wait. And so we applied,
while we were working with the Corps on the civil works
process, we worked through the Corps of Engineers under the 408
process, and used our own money, and just do it ahead of time.
Well, under that circumstance, in fact, we had applied to
repair that reach of levee, or a portion of that critically
damaged reach of levee, last year. We were lined up to do it
last year. And because of some cultural resource issues, we had
to go through another--a second 45-day review period through
the 408 process. Rather extraordinary. As a result, killed our
construction season.
Fast forward to last month. We are flood-fighting that
reach that would have normally have been repaired under a
normal construction season. That is money out of our pockets.
We are hopeful that the State will reimburse us at the end of
the day. And that was work that could have been done in a
normal construction season.
Mr. Garamendi. I think the point I want to make here is
that there are all kinds of projects. There are the nice-to-do
projects, there are the necessary projects, and then there are
those projects upon which human life depends. And in this case,
these levee improvements, they are known levee weaknesses. It
is not just in my district, although I have 1,100 miles of
levees, but around the Nation.
There are known weaknesses in levees upon which human life
is at risk. And we ought to be prioritizing, you know, nice to,
necessary, economic development or whatever, and then life
threatening. And we should urge the Corps of Engineers, in the
process that we have now established, where they come to us
with their proposed projects, that we keep in mind the life-
threatening projects.
And so, we have more than enough in my district, but I
suspect that the Members of Congress, some of whom are still at
this committee hearing, have similar necessary-to-preserve-
human-life projects.
I am going to be out of time in 6 seconds, but I want to
really congratulate, Mike, you and the work you have done. You
have taken more than 40 miles of levee, you have upgraded those
40 miles of levee in a very rapid process. Had you not done
that, surely, even without the failure of the emergency
spillway, there would have been lives lost, had you not been on
top of these projects over the last several years.
Congratulations to you and thank you for that effort.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Garamendi. Next we
are going to go to the vice chair of the subcommittee, Mr. Mast
from Florida. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Chairman, and each of you for your
testimony today. I really appreciate it. I enjoyed reading
them.
You know, number one, you know, I live in one of those
areas. Very similar issues as so many here, issues with the
Corps of Engineers, issues with the infrastructure that is
going on in my community. Personally, it is regularly plagued
by massively harmful discharges coming out of Lake Okeechobee,
and going out towards the east coast and west coast of Florida.
They are implemented by the Corps of Engineers. Sometimes these
discharges are--freshwater into our saltwater estuaries are as
high as 7 million gallons a minute at their peak flows. It is
very devastating. We get just absolutely devastating algae
blooms.
And again, probably the most disconcerting part to me is
that these are imposed by the Federal Government on us. But
they are not cleaned up by the Federal Government, and that is
one of the worst things that I can say about them.
Now, one of the other things that we could say about this
is this is just freshwater that is simply lost out to sea. And,
as we look at each of our areas across the country, where we
see people--some people that don't have enough water--and, as
was said before, some of us that have way too much water--it
can become very troublesome and very frustrating to all of us.
And that is just as an aside here.
Now, from my vantage point, one of the best ways to ensure
that water is utilized in a beneficial way, instead of being
wastefully discharged, is for the Corps of Engineers, in many
of these cases, to marry their flood control efforts and that
mission with their ecological restoration mission that they
have in so many places.
For my area it is mirroring the flood control of the dikes
surrounding Lake Okeechobee with the ecological restoration
that is south of Lake Okeechobee that feeds into the Florida
Bay and the Florida Everglades. And that means, in order for
them to get this done in a timely way--which hasn't happened in
my area--tackling what we are talking about today, these
burdensome regulatory problems, construction issues, funding
delays that are just slowing the Corps of Engineers from
completing projects. In my area the Herbert Hoover dike
rehabilitation, 60-plus projects. When they don't get done, it
really adds up.
So what I really want to ask you all, this kind of, to me,
is Exhibit A of how there can be otherwise well-intentioned
rules and regulations that exist out there, but they actually
end up hurting our communities and impeding environmental
protection and impeding the progress of infrastructure.
So, with that in mind, I was particularly struck by your
testimony, Mr. Kernion, when you said a couple of things. One,
in order to build a 21st-century infrastructure, we have to
build it some time this century. And I think that is a very
important thing to say. But more specifically, when you talked
about the Port of Savannah going through a 14-year
environmental review process--14 years--and a 30-year-to-
completion process.
So, in that being your testimony, I wanted to ask you two
specific things. One, can you pinpoint one specific thing, the
biggest bang for your buck, ``This is what we do to enable this
infrastructure to be completed to''--you know, which piece of
it do we get out of the way? What is your number-one piece to
enabling this to get things done?
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Make sure your microphone is on,
please.
Mr. Kernion. I said this earlier. The biggest thing that I
have seen is the--lack of a better way to say it, red tape with
the environmental procedures and approvals to get projects
moving forward.
Mr. Mast. Now, you listed in your testimony a number of--
you know, you listed wildlife, EPA, NOAA, and a number of
others. Can you point to one specifically?
Mr. Kernion. Yes. Well, there is a lot of things. And I
will give you an example. If we are building a levee, and there
is a tree in the way and it has got an eagle in the top of the
tree, that levee is going to be moved to buy houses, something
is going to happen. Don't have anything against eagles, I think
they are great. But it costs a lot of dollars to move it, you
know, rather to go ask the guy if he could find another tree.
But--and I am not trying to be funny about it, but I will
see some things that are--really get to be, like, major impacts
to what we do, that is all. And it is the environmental things,
more so than anything. Indecisiveness? Yes, big issue there.
But a lot of the environmental red tape on some things that are
really--you know, they shouldn't happen, that is all.
Mr. Mast. OK. I have another question for you--I got a
couple more seconds here--and that is this. I get an answer
often from the Corps of Engineers when I talk about timelines
for getting things done that there is simply not enough
manpower, not enough qualified crews to go out there and get
some of the projects done, specifically in my area, around Lake
Okeechobee, that the Corps of Engineers is conducting.
Can you speak to whether you think that is an accurate
assessment? Is there enough crews out there to go out there and
complete things in a faster way? Do you guys have the manpower,
as general contractors, construction contractors?
Mr. Kernion. Do the contractors, or does the Corps?
Mr. Mast. The contractors.
Mr. Kernion. The Corps of Engineers--General Van Antwerp,
years ago, asked us after Katrina if the contractors had the
manpower to put it in place, all of the restoration efforts.
And contractors stepped up to the plate and got it done. Corps
of Engineers stepped up to the plate and got it done, also.
One of the things that I do not know is--I have never
worked personally with that district around Lake Okeechobee. I
have heard some rumors about guys that have worked with them,
and I will refrain from comment on that, what I have heard, but
it is a different district. And when you work for the Corps of
Engineers in different districts, they operate totally
different.
You know, we did FEMA trailers on a Corps contract after
this most recent flood up in--around Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
And dealing--they had one of the district--I think it was the
northern Alabama--came down. Totally different ballgame than
working with the New Orleans district. I mean totally
different. Some of it was shocking, what we have to go through,
be quite honest with you.
But I don't--I have never worked with the people in your
area to be able to comment on that that much, as far as the
Corps, then. But the contractors, I think contractors are--can
come up to the plate and make it happen.
Mr. Mast. OK. My time has expired, so I thank you for your
comments.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Mast. I am going to
go to the ranking member, Mrs. Napolitano, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Napolitano. Just last one before we let you go. Mr.
DeGood, if the President were to put forward a proposal that
privatized leverage private equity capital as the primary
Federal role in addressing water infrastructure projects, what
would be the likely impact to communities like mine, or anybody
else's, where local ratepayers already having a difficult time
making ends meet in addressing the water quality in their area?
And the second question--and I will make it--I want to get
over it--you described a recent trend for local communities to
take on more debt to address local water challenges. Yet often
the communities have insufficient tax and user fee revenues to
cover these debts. I strongly believe they want clean water,
just like anybody else, but often have competing needs for
municipal service, fire, and police that need to be addressed.
And the solutions for this change would be what? How can the
Federal Government play in this?
Mr. DeGood. Right. I think it is important to understand
that private equity, even with the presence of the tax credits
that President Trump and some of his team have talked about,
would have very little value for many communities. If you are
already struggling to find the financial resources to repay
municipal bonds at 3 percent or 3.5 percent, it is unlikely
that you are going to magically have the resources to be able
to cover the return on private equity that can be anywhere from
10 to 18 percent, depending on the project.
And again, even with the presence of tax credits bringing
down the cost of that equity somewhat, it is still going to be
a stretch for communities. And I think one of the things that I
have found that is troubling about some of the public-private
partnerships that have happened in recent years is the extent
to which local communities are paying the premium price that
goes along with a P3, but not receiving some of the benefits
that we normally associate with this form of procurement.
Specifically, if we compare this to the transportation side, we
see that there is more of an opportunity for true risk
transference, especially for projects that may exceed $1
billion or $1.5 billion.
But when we are talking about smaller systems, where the
only infrastructure upgrades that are contemplated as part of
these capital improvement programs are basic repairs and
rehabilitation--replacing pump stations, we can't really
honestly say that that private-sector contractor is taking on
this risk payment because of the complexity of the work.
Again, some of these contracts have the public maintaining
complete liability for any environmental discharges that
violate Federal or State laws. They have the public on the hook
for any rate increases for the water deliveries they may take
for regional drinking water providers. They have the public on
the hook for any cost overruns in the infrastructure projects
that they have in their capital plan.
So, to my mind, it is troubling for us to say to local
communities, ``Don't worry, you can always go out, take equity
capital, take these tax credits from the Trump administration,
and that is going to solve your problem.'' It just really
isn't.
Mrs. Napolitano. Anybody else?
[No response.]
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Ms. Pape, I am curious if you
would care to respond to Mr. DeGood's comments.
Ms. Pape. I would. I can't speak to a leased form of
private equity investment, but I can speak to acquisition of
assets by private entity. And in that case, in many instances,
we can spread those costs, because we have a larger base. It is
a very capital-intensive industry.
We also take on all risk. We don't leave risk with the
community. We take it on, not only for the assets that we are
buying, but for upgrading. And asset renewal is an ongoing
effort. It is not a once and done, it is every day, every year,
you are continually looking at what needs to be replaced, what
condition do you have.
So, in terms of the private companies that buy assets, we
do assume the risk, and we are able to spread out the cost, as
well. So the impact on the customers is not as great.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Great, thank you. I will tell you
I have a number of other questions for all of you. You have
been patiently sitting there for 2 hours, and we are most
appreciative. We are going to have, I think, a number of
questions for the record for each of you.
I just want to say, in closing, I am going to go back to
home, and Mr. Kernion is from Louisiana. He made mention in his
testimony about a situation at home where we have an eroding
coast. We have lost approximately 2,000 square miles of our
coast, wetlands. And we are all familiar with how important
wetlands are, and we are familiar with the Clean Water Act, and
404 permits, and things along those lines.
Well, the primary cause of this wetlands loss in the State
of Louisiana is actually the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. And
it is interesting to see this--kind of the irony in the
regulatory program, in that they are making everyone else
protect wetlands and restore wetlands and mitigate wetlands,
yet in the case when their own actions cause loss, they
literally are doing nothing. And, not only doing nothing, but
in fact, impeding efforts, as was noted, by the State and
others, in some cases, to actually restore wetlands.
And so, look, this isn't a partisan issue, this isn't--this
is something that all of us need to be working very closely
together on. Make note. The administration, again, announced
that they intend to pursue a $1 trillion infrastructure
package.
We have a project in south Louisiana called the Gulf
Hurricane Protection Project that has been in the study phase
since 1992. The Federal Government has not stuck a shovel in
the ground. We have a hurricane protection project in Louisiana
called the West Shore project. The project just came out of the
study phase, and, thankfully, the committee authorized the
project in the WRDA bill, but it was in the study phase for
approximately 42 years before--I want to be clear--before a
project recommendation was made, right? So not a single thing
has been done, just a project recommendation.
We heard Mr. Inamine note that in his case, when he carried
out the project on his own, that he was able to do it for
approximately half the cost.
So this isn't anything to beat up on anyone, this isn't a
partisan issue. This is all about the fact that we have limited
resources. And many of you, in your testimony, talked about the
need for greater investment. Well, one of the ways you get
greater investment is by stretching your dollar, by ensuring
that you are most efficiently using the resources that you
have. If you can carry out a project for half the cost, you can
do two of them.
It is a simple concept, and something that I think we need
to be paying careful attention to, the amount of money that we
are spending on administrative, on regulatory compliance, and
on project implementation to ensure that we can sit here and
tell taxpayers that we are maximizing the limited resources
that are available.
So, with that, I again want to thank all the witnesses. You
can expect questions for the record that we will be submitting,
and ask for your response to those. And thanks again. It has
been very helpful. And if no other Members have anything to
add, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:17 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
