- BUILDING A 21ST-CENTURY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR AMERICA: AIR TRANSPORTATION IN THE UNITED STATES IN THE 21ST CENTURY

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUILDING A 21ST-CENTURY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR AMERICA: AIR TRANSPORTATION
IN THE UNITED STATES IN THE 21ST CENTURY

=======================================================================

(115-4)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
AVIATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 8, 2017

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

24-655 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
Vice Chair                         Columbia
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        JERROLD NADLER, New York
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  RICK LARSEN, Washington
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
JEFF DENHAM, California              ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            Georgia
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
JOHN KATKO, New York                 ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut,
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   Vice Ranking Member
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana             LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia           CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         JARED HUFFMAN, California
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  JULIA BROWNLEY, California
RANDY K. WEBER, Sr., Texas           FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
DOUG LaMALFA, California             DONALD M. PAYNE, Jr., New Jersey
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas            ALAN S. LOWENTHAL, California
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
PAUL MITCHELL, Michigan              MARK DeSAULNIER, California
JOHN J. FASO, New York
A. DREW FERGUSON IV, Georgia
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
JASON LEWIS, Minnesota

(ii)

Subcommittee on Aviation

FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    RICK LARSEN, Washington
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              Columbia
JEFF DENHAM, California              DINA TITUS, NEVADA
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JULIA BROWNLEY, California
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            DONALD M. PAYNE, Jr., New Jersey
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               BRENDA L. LAWRENCE, Michigan
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia           HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
DOUG LaMALFA, California             Georgia
BRUCE WESTERMAN, Arkansas            RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
PAUL MITCHELL, Michigan, Vice Chair  PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon (Ex
JASON LEWIS, Minnesota               Officio)
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    vi

TESTIMONY

Brad Tilden, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Alaska Air
Group, Inc.....................................................     6
Russell ``Chip'' Childs, President and Chief Executive Officer,
SkyWest, Inc...................................................     6
Joseph C. Hete, President and Chief Executive Officer, Air
Transport Services Group, Inc..................................     6
Sara Nelson, International President, Association of Flight
Attendants--CWA, AFL-CIO.......................................     6
Charles Leocha, President, Travelers United, Inc.................     6

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Brad Tilden......................................................    42
Russell ``Chip'' Childs..........................................    45
Joseph C. Hete...................................................    55
Sara Nelson......................................................    58
Charles Leocha...................................................    71

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Hon. Rick Larsen, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Washington, submission of the following:

Written statement from Captain Timothy Canoll, President, Air
Line Pilots Association, International.....................    81
Letter of March 7, 2017, from Captain Timothy Canoll,
President, Air Line Pilots Association, International......    88
Written statement from Robert A. Ross, National President,
Association of Professional Flight Attendants..............    90
Chart prepared by Hon. Peter A. DeFazio, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Oregon, submitted by Hon. Todd
Rokita, a Representative in Congress from the State of Indiana.    17

ADDITIONS TO THE RECORD

Written statements from:

Christian A. Klein, Executive Vice President, Aeronautical
Repair Station Association.................................    93
Atlas Air Worldwide..........................................    98
Stephen A. Alterman, President, Cargo Airline Association....   100
Candace McGraw, Chief Executive Officer, Cincinnati/Northern
Kentucky International Airport, et al......................   102
Will Lofberg, Vice President, International, Government and
Environment Affairs, Emirates Airline......................   104
FedEx Corporation............................................   111
Phillip N. Brown, Executive Director, Greater Orlando
Aviation Authority.........................................   118
Jonathan Ornstein, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Mesa
Air Group, Inc.............................................   122
Frode Berg, Chief Legal Officer, Norwegian Air Shuttle.......   124
Paralyzed Veterans of America................................   130
William J. Flynn, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Atlas Air Worldwide, et al., on behalf of U.S. Airlines for
Open Skies.................................................   136

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

BUILDING A 21ST-CENTURY INFRASTRUCTURE FOR AMERICA: AIR TRANSPORTATION
IN THE UNITED STATES IN THE 21ST CENTURY

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 8, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Aviation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank A.
LoBiondo (Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. LoBiondo. Good morning. The subcommittee will come to
order. Thank you all for being here.
Before I begin the prepared remarks, I would like to thank
the Colgan family for once again being here, for so many of
them being so strong in their continued dedication and
commitment to enduring aviation safety. So thank you very much.
Today, the Aviation Subcommittee is holding its third
hearing in preparation for the upcoming FAA authorization bill.
As all of you know, the focus of the Transportation and
Infrastructure Committee this year is ``Building a 21st-Century
Infrastructure for America.'' Today, we will be looking at the
current state of our Nation's air transportation system and
those who operate in it. We will also learn what those
operators believe are needed for the system to move into the
future.
And we also want to learn from those in the public in the
days ahead. We have created a dedicated email address to
receive your ideas and welcome them very much. It is

[email protected]
. Please send us your ideas.
Air transportation has become so commonplace that we really
don't think about what an impact it has on our daily lives.
Journeys that once took days, weeks, or even months are now
safely completed in hours. We can order something online and
have it delivered the next day.
Today, air travel is routinely and readily available to
millions of Americans. In fact, last year more than 800 million
passengers traveled by air within the United States, a figure
that is projected to grow to 1 billion within 10 years.
This remarkable system is a testament to the hard work of
the pilots, flight attendants, mechanics, and others who take
us safely across the country and around the world.
Air transportation in the United States is diverse. Along
with private aviation, it also includes mainline airlines,
regionals, all-cargo airlines, and charter companies, each
playing a vital role in meeting various needs of the traveling
public and economy.
Mainline airlines connect our major cities and also connect
us to other countries. Regional airlines help connect many
small and medium-size communities to large hub airports,
providing them access to the globe. For other communities and
certain travelers, such as small business operators, charter
service or fractional ownership may be the only viable air
transport option. Cargo airlines allow for our factories and
supply chain inventories to remain fully stocked and keep goods
flowing between businesses to consumers. They also play a large
role in e-commerce.
Our panel today represents a range of air transportation
companies and stakeholders. Each witness brings a unique
expertise and perspective on the state of our system. I look
forward to their testimony on how Congress can help facilitate
the building of a 21st-century aviation infrastructure.
Before recognizing Ranking Member Larsen for his remarks, I
would like to ask unanimous consent that the record of today's
hearing remain open until such time as our witnesses have
provided answers to any questions that may be submitted to them
in writing and unanimous consent that the record remain open
for 15 additional days for comments and information submitted
by Members or witnesses to be included in the record of today's
hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
I would now like to yield to Mr. Larsen for any remarks he
may have.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling today's
hearing on the state of today's U.S. air transportation
industry. I too would like to recognize the families of the
passengers of Colgan flight 3407 who are with us today.
Welcome, and thank you for your tireless efforts to improve
aviation safety.
I also want to welcome to today's panel of witnesses Brad
Tilden, the CEO of Seattle-based Alaska Airlines and a fellow
Aleut. Brad and I know what that is. It is not necessary to
explain it.
The U.S. airspace is the busiest and most complex in the
world and is undergoing a historic shift in modernization in
the form of FAA's NextGen program. Alaska Airlines has been a
strong advocate for NextGen, which has delivered more than $2.7
billion in benefits to airlines and operators of GA aircraft
and is expected to produce $13 billion in benefits for the
Government and users by 2020 and over $160 billion by 2030.
I understand that NextGen's performance-based navigation or
PBN procedures allow Alaska Airlines flights to fly more
directly and precisely into Juno each day. And the Greener
Skies initiative improves the efficiency of the airline's
flights, its landings at Sea-Tac International Airport.
So, Mr. Tilden, I look forward to hearing from you today
about how the state-of-the-art NextGen technologies and
procedures are improving efficiency in today's airspace and
providing benefits for the aviation industry generally.
Not only the busiest and most complex, the U.S. is the
safest aviation system in the world, and I would like to
commend the FAA and all the industry witnesses here today and
everyone involved in the air transportation system for their
coordination and continued commitment to ensuring the highest
level of safety. This laudable safety record of U.S. commercial
airlines in recent years is due in large part to the 2010
congressional mandate that each airline pilot possesses an
airline transportation certificate. I personally support that.
I believe that current pilot training requirements are
nonnegotiable.
At the same time, though, I realize that some regional air
carriers, among them there is some concern about the shortage
of pilots in this country. So earlier this week Ranking Member
DeFazio and I made a request to the Department of
Transportation's inspector general--I am sorry. At our request,
the DOT inspector general reported that some regional airlines
have started increasing pay to attract additional pilots. That
is a step in the right direction.
I also look forward to hearing today from Ms. Sara Nelson
from the Association of Flight Attendants. We are in the midst
of the safest period in U.S. civil aviation history, thanks in
large part to the hard work of U.S. flight attendants. Their
training and readiness to spring into action have saved lives
and dangerous accidents. Therefore, it is critical that flight
attendants are well-rested and that out-of-date Federal
regulations of flight attendants' flight and duty periods are
reformed.
Last year's long-term FAA bill, as reported by the
committee, included such a provision. I look forward to working
with Chairman LoBiondo to ensure its inclusion in the FAA bill
this year.
And today, I am pleased to join with Ranking Member DeFazio
in introducing a bill to improve passengers' travel experience
by requiring airlines to be more transparent about what they
will do for passengers caught up in large-scale network
meltdowns, among other things.
We must continue to ensure the air travel experience is
fair and devoid of discrimination. On this front, I was pleased
to have included in last year's short-term bill a provision on
air travel accessibility and look forward to hearing what more
the subcommittee can do to improve passengers' travel
experience.
And finally, Mr. Chairman, I would ask for unanimous
consent that written statements prepared by the Air Line Pilots
Association, International and the Association of Professional
Flight Attendants be entered into the record.
Mr. LoBiondo. Without objection, so ordered.

[The information can be found on pages 81-92.]

Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to the
witnesses' testimony.
Mr. LoBiondo. Now I would like to recognize Mr. Shuster for
any comments he may have.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Chairman LoBiondo. Let me start by
echoing your thanks to the families, the Colgan families, for
being here, and your efforts to make sure that we have the
safest possible system we can have. And so thank you very much
for that dedication.
I want to thank Chairman LoBiondo and Ranking Member Larsen
again for this third in a series of the Aviation Subcommittee
hearings focusing on FAA reauthorization and building a 21st-
century aviation system for America. I look forward to
discussing the state of the transportation industry. It is a
vital industry to America. It is one of our most important, one
we invented, and it for all my efforts is to continue to make
sure that America leads the aviation industry in the world.
Private air transportation plays an important role in our
aviation system, connecting our smaller communities. I come
from a rural community. It is vital that we have those
connections. The general aviation also provides a tremendous
training ground for potential future pilots to be able to go to
work for the bigger carriers to make sure that we have the
levels necessary to staff those planes and to continue to grow
air transportation in this country.
As I said, we have been a leader in it, and I want to
maintain that leadership in the world. We have done lots of
things over the last 40 years, from low-cost carriers,
fractional ownership, giving people more and more choices, how
we get our tickets, whether it is an e-ticket, which I am still
not sure I know how to do, but I stumble along.
It is true. I know what Aleut means, too. That is what
pirates used to do.
But, no, I stumble and bumble along with the technology,
but having 20-year-old kids, they seem to get me to where I am
going, as well as Mr. Larsen sometimes helps me.
Again, in 2016, we took steps in the extension to help
families sit together, things like that, that we thought would
be helpful to the folks that are traveling in this country.
Forty years after airline deregulation, which occurred in
1978, the airline industry continues to evolve. And I am really
interested in hearing from our witnesses today and to continue
efforts to evolve and provide America with more choices, more
opportunities for safe air travel.
So I look forward to being here. Thank all of you for being
here and taking the time to help educate us and help in this
discussion.
And with that I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Now I would like to turn to Mr. DeFazio for
any remarks.
Peter.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, we are living in the safest period of the U.S.
civil aviation history. We can all be thankful for that. We
want to sustain that. We are also looking at one of the longest
and most profitable sustained periods for the airlines,
combined after-tax profit, $25.6 billion in 2015, including
$6.8 billion in bag and reservation change fees.
And I would like to recognize that Brad Tilden here,
representing Alaska, registered a record profit in 2016 of
nearly $1 billion. Congratulations.
A healthy industry is good for everyone, travelers,
employees, our economy as a whole, and we want to see this
continue into the future.
I am concerned, and Ranking Member Larsen raised it
earlier, about the IT situation. We had many thousands, tens of
thousands of people stranded over the last couple of years
because of IT meltdowns, some that relate to the dispatch of
the planes, some that relate to the reservation systems.
One high-profile event at Chicago Midway International
Airport was described by a travel blogger as a war zone with
the floors covered by stranded passengers. None of the airlines
represented here today caused those disruptions, although
SkyWest partnered some that did, and I am going to be
interested if Mr. Childs has any reflection upon how difficult
it was for them and their intended passengers because of those
problems.
So the bill we introduced would give people--I mean, people
in Chicago Midway were just told by that particular airline: Go
look at your contract of carriage if you want to know what you
can get. We think it should be a little more clear than paging
through the fine print somewhere online what obligations the
airlines have when the airline itself has caused the problem
with an IT meltdown. So I have introduced that bill today.
The most important issue, as I said earlier, is safety. And
we have Colgan families here today, many of whom I have met
with and worked with in the past, and I appreciate your
persistence. I think probably I first raised the issue of 250
hours rating back in the early 1990s. It took way too long to
change that, and unfortunately you had tremendous losses that
ultimately did lead to that change. You know, I observed many
times that people who are becoming hair stylists and
manicurists in Oregon had to have 600 hours of training, but
you could have people's lives in your hands and fly a plane
with 250 hours. That was not adequate.
Some are out there saying that this has led to a pilot
shortage. As Ranking Member Larsen said earlier, we have a
study showing that the pay is pathetically low at some regional
airlines. Just look at Embry-Riddle. If you go to school there
and go through the training for your certificate, it comes to
about $300,000.
But say, OK, some are advocating let's roll back the hours
and some other things, cut the cost. All right, let's cut it
down to $200,000 to get a certificate, something I don't
support. But if you think about what that means, $200,000 is a
little over $2,000 a month on your loans, and you are earning
$20,000 a year.
Now how does negative $4,000 income work out? That is why
we had the copilot on the Colgan flight living in her parents'
basement in Seattle and deadheading across the country. That
shouldn't happen.
And a lot of young people are not going to make a rational
decision to become pilots until the pay better matches the
costs of getting the certificate and engaging in that
occupation. So I think that is a problem, but weakening the
rules is not the solution.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. DeFazio.
I would now like to turn to our witnesses. And on the panel
today included are Mr. Brad Tilden, chairman and chief
executive officer of Alaska Air Group; Mr. Russell ``Chip''
Childs, president and chief executive officer of SkyWest,
Incorporated; Mr. Joseph Hete, president and chief executive
officer of Air Transport Services Group; Ms. Sara Nelson,
international president of the Association of Flight
Attendants--CWA, AFL-CIO; and Mr. Charles Leocha, chairman and
cofounder of Travelers United.
Mr. Tilden, you are recognized for your statement.

TESTIMONY OF BRAD TILDEN, CHAIRMAN AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
ALASKA AIR GROUP, INC.; RUSSELL ``CHIP'' CHILDS, PRESIDENT AND
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, SKYWEST, INC.; JOSEPH C. HETE,
PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, AIR TRANSPORT SERVICES
GROUP, INC.; SARA NELSON, INTERNATIONAL PRESIDENT, ASSOCIATION
OF FLIGHT ATTENDANTS--CWA, AFL-CIO; AND CHARLES LEOCHA,
PRESIDENT, TRAVELERS UNITED, INC.

Mr. Tilden. Chairman LoBiondo, Ranking Member Larsen,
Chairman Shuster and Ranking Member DeFazio, and members of the
committee, thank you very much for this opportunity to testify
today. It is a real pleasure to be here to talk about Alaska
Airlines and the industry.
My name is Brad Tilden, and I am the CEO of Alaska Air
Group. Alaska Airlines is the fifth-largest airline in the
United States following our recent acquisition of Virgin
America. We now have approximately 19,000 employees, 280
aircraft, and we fly about 1,200 flights a day.
While that may or may not sound like a large company, we
are small by airline standards. We have been in business for 85
years, but we don't fit the legacy carrier mold in that we are
low cost, low fare, and in the end that we have grown at a
significantly higher rate than the average airline.
Our customer-facing employees are focused on making the
flying experience from start to finish as great as possible
every day for our guests. As a testament to their skill and
dedication, we are honored to have been recognized for 9
consecutive years by J.D. Power as the best traditional network
airline.
We are bullish on the airline industry, and we believe that
with our cost structure, customer orientation, and operational
capability, Alaska is well positioned to take advantage of an
improving industry. Warren Buffett, who in the past famously
derided investing in airlines, now invests nearly $10 billion
in the industry. That says something.
The industry has changed a lot in the last 10 to 15 years.
The pervasive bankruptcies and consolidation we have dealt with
have been painful and challenging, but the industry as a whole
is now in a different and healthier place. Airlines are
investing in their facilities, people, and products in order to
win new customers.
For example, Alaska recently launched premium class
service, providing our guests more leg room and amenities as an
option. We are enhancing in-flight entertainment and
connectivity options. We are adding popular new local food and
beverage options. And we are taking steps to make our industry-
leading mileage plan even better. Beyond these areas, we are
also making major capital investments in things like new seats,
space-saving bins, and airport improvements.
Despite improvements in the industry, it is more important
than ever that aviation policy supports vigorous competition.
Today, the four largest airlines comprise more than 80 percent
of the domestic market, whereas 10 to 15 years ago it took nine
airlines to make up that much of the market.
As you consider aviation policy issues, we ask you to
embrace policies to keep the industry vibrant, including
enhancing the ability for smaller carriers to gain access to
constrained airports and enhancing our ability to share feed
traffic with larger airlines.
On that point, there are different perspectives on the Gulf
Carrier Open Skies issue. As a smaller airline without a global
network, Alaska needs to partner with airlines from around the
globe to have a chance of competing with U.S. airlines that
have a global footprint and that can offer a one-stop shop to
customers needing global access. We believe it is imperative
that the U.S. Government do zero harm to the vibrant U.S. Open
Skies policy.
The subject of this hearing is about building 21st-century
infrastructure in America. Alaska believes it is imperative to
speed up modernization of air traffic control to deal with
increasing congestion and delays and to bring it into the
modern era. To be fair, modern GPS technology is used today by
most airlines for the en route portion of flights, but once an
airplane starts its descent, efficient operations are typically
interrupted by the use of 1950s-era radar-based manual
procedures.
Herein lies a big opportunity. We need to modernize the
system to connect the en route navigation structure with the
arrival and approach phases of a flight.
Alaska Airlines is deeply familiar with this technology. In
the mid-1990s, we pioneered what is called required navigation
performance, which are GPS-based approaches and which are a key
building block of NextGen. However, today, more than 20 years
later, we use these RNP approaches for just 4 percent of our
approaches nationwide.
We believe that in the future airplanes should not be
vectored left and right for spacing and engines shifted from
idle to powered as airplanes descend and then level off in a
stairstep approach to the runway. Instead, aircraft should
arrive at a specific waypoint in the sky at a predetermined
point in time to provide for spacing, and they should then
begin a continuous glide at idle power, following a precise
curving flight path down to the runway. This will allow more
airplanes into the system. It will materially reduce noise,
fuel consumption, travel time delays, and environmental
emissions.
As a pilot myself, I can tell you that this country's air
traffic controllers manage the safest system in the world, and
the FAA is full of talented professionals who have made
progress with NextGen. However, under current governance and
funding, we run a real risk that demand for airspace is going
to rise at a rate that is more rapid than our rate of
technology innovation, worsening delays.
While we understand ATC reform may be a topic of future
hearings, and while we know that there are numerous viewpoints
on this subject, we would like to go on record with our belief
that ATC reform, including the separation of ATC operations
into an independent, nonprofit entity, as most other
industrialized countries have done, is needed, and such a
change will allow innovation and technology deployment to
flourish.
Thank you very much for this opportunity to speak with you
today.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Mr. Childs, you are recognized.
Mr. Childs. Good morning, Chairman LoBiondo, Ranking Member
Larsen, Chairman Shuster, Ranking Member DeFazio, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee. I am Chip Childs,
president and CEO of SkyWest, Inc., which is the largest
regional airline in the world.
SkyWest, Inc. owns and operates two regional airlines,
SkyWest Airlines and ExpressJet Airlines. Combined, these
entities complete more than 3,000 flights per day and carry 53
million passengers a year. This includes service to more than
250 cities in North America, Canada, Mexico, and the Caribbean.
On behalf of SkyWest, ExpressJet, and more than 18,000
employees, I appreciate the opportunity to be here today and
offer testimony about the importance of the regional airline
industry.
Regional airlines operate under parts 121 and 135 and
generally utilize aircraft with fewer than 100 seats in
partnership with major airlines. As such, we are held to the
same safety standards as mainline carriers. We treat Federal
safety regulations as the floor, not the ceiling, and take
pride in meeting and exceeding these standards.
We believe in one level of safety for all passenger
carriers, and our safety culture drives everything at SkyWest
and ExpressJet. To that end, we utilize advanced technology and
innovative safety programs. Our flight crews and mechanics are
some of the most experienced and thoroughly trained in the
entire airline industry, with training programs that are lauded
by the FAA.
We are part of the regional airline industry, which is by
no means small. In 2015, regional airlines operated 44 percent
of the Nation's departures and safely carried 157 million
passengers on nearly 4 million departures, about 11,000
departures a day.
We play a critical role in the aviation industry by
connecting communities large and small to the global air
transportation network. We fly as Delta Connection, American
Eagle, United Express, and in partnership with Alaska Airlines.
We share our majors' codes and have their names, color schemes,
and logos painted on our aircraft.
Regional airlines are job creators. Our industry employs
more than 59,000 employees. Among these employees are
approximately 15,000 flight attendants and 20,000 pilots, and
our industry needs more. While SkyWest has been able to stay
fully staffed with qualified pilots, our industry has been hit
by a growing pilot shortage.
We are honored that the major airlines recruit heavily from
the regional industry, but this honor comes with consequences.
According to university studies, major airlines will hire more
than 18,000 pilots in the next 3 years. That is nearly the size
of today's active regional airline pilot workforce. Within a
decade, cumulative demand for pilots is forecast to reach
50,000 pilots.
Overall the shortfall of commercial airline pilots is
forecast to reach 15,000 by 2026. Using an industry standard of
roughly 10 pilots per aircraft, a shortfall of this magnitude
would necessitate parking 1,500 aircraft. For perspective, this
number corresponds to roughly two-thirds of the regional
airline fleet in operation today.
Thanks to the leadership of this committee, Congress gave
FAA tools to address these concerns. Recognizing the high value
of structured training, Congress authorized the FAA to approve
alternate pathways for first officer qualification, allowing
specific academic training courses to be credited toward a
portion of total flight-hours where the Administrator
determines that these academic training courses will enhance
safety more than requiring the pilot to fully comply with the
flight-hours.
Pilots following these approved pathways hold restricted
privileges ATP [Airline Transport Pilot] certificates and may
serve as part 121 airline first officers. These R-ATP pathways
create a much higher level of safety and are well supported by
data.
Although Congress gave the FAA the authority to approve R-
ATP pathways, the agency has taken a narrow view of its
authority to grant additional pathways outside of military and
degree program institutions. We urge Congress to prompt the FAA
to use its existing authority to authorize additional R-ATP
pathways.
We could also help fill the shortfall with student loans.
One of the single greatest deterrents facing new pilots is
cost. Aspiring pilots can spend as much as $100,000 to $150,000
on a flight training path to commercial airlines, but the
return on investment on these training dollars exceeds that
spent on teachers, lawyers, and even doctors.
While we seek ways to reduce costs and offer tuition
reimbursement, scholarships, and other incentives, Congress can
help by backing loans to these students to achieve their dreams
and meet the pilot shortfall.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Members and distinguished members
of the subcommittee, it is my pleasure to be here today, and I
look forward to taking your questions at the conclusion of the
panel.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Mr. Hete.
Mr. Hete. Chairman LoBiondo, Ranking Member Larsen, and
members of the subcommittee, I am privileged to serve as the
president and CEO of Air Transport Services Group. Thank you
for the opportunity to highlight our company's vision for all-
cargo aviation in the 21st century.
ATSG wholly owns two airlines, ABX Air, Inc. and Air
Transport International, each independently certificated by the
U.S. Department of Transportation. The company's airlines
separately offer a combination of aircraft, crews, maintenance,
and insurance services, commonly referred to as ACMI services.
ABX operates Boeing 767 freighter aircraft, while ATI operates
767s, 757 freighters, and 757 combi aircraft. Combi aircraft
are dedicated to the U.S. military and are capable of carrying
passengers and cargo containers on the main deck. The airlines
can conduct cargo operations worldwide.
The air cargo industry is unique compared with other
industry users. We have a different business model and
operational characteristics. So it is important to recognize
our segment of the aviation industry when making policy
decisions. Today, I would like to share with the committee some
of the challenges and concerns we have and how they affect our
cargo airline operations.
We at ATSG have seen a great deal of change take place in
the air cargo industry over the past 2 years. With stiff
competition in the industry, removing specific regulatory
burdens have the potential to pay off in the form of
operational efficiencies, which will undoubtedly improve our
costs and competitive abilities, as well as for our primary
customers, the U.S. military, DHL, and Amazon.
There are a few key topics of concern for our industry that
I would like to share with you. Over the past few years, a
debate has been waged over whether cargo pilots should continue
to be regulated under the existing part 121 rules or whether
they should be subject to newer, part 117 rules. The Federal
Aviation Administration, after no less than three separate
reviews, each time correctly found that the cargo pilots should
be regulated under part 121.
These rules work for our industry. There has been no sound
evidence to suggest a move to a one-size-fits-all rule would
improve safety for all cargo pilots, and this makes sense as
the air cargo industry is inherently different from the
passenger carrier industry. As I mentioned earlier, ATI
operates the 757 combi, which carries passengers, and those
flights are operated under the part 117 rules.
If ATSG's airlines were forced to comply with the 117
rules, we would have to hire more pilots, which would be a boon
for the pilots union, but would allow for even less flying time
for each pilot, potentially affecting their proficiency.
Changes in flight and duty time rules that apply to all cargo
carriers is a bad idea, and doing so could actually make our
operations less safe and put our pilots at risk.
At ATSG's airlines, we provide more and longer flight crew
rest opportunities in our cargo operations than our passenger
counterparts. Most importantly, our pilots average 40 to 45
flight-hours per month and are usually point-to-point, while
passenger carrier pilots fly approximately 60 hours each month
and include many segments per day. Our pilots are also only
scheduled for duty 14 to 16 days out of every month, and in
many cases that includes weekend layovers.
Former Administrator Randy Babbitt said it best at an ALPA
Safety Conference: ``In rulemaking, not only does one size not
fit all, but it's unsafe to think that it can.''
With regards to the air transport of lithium batteries,
ATSG supports the promulgation of tough and internationally
consistent regulations governing the air cargo transportation
of lithium batteries, as well as stringent enforcement of those
regulations around the world.
The key issue here for our company is consistency. We can
simply not have a patchwork of international lithium battery
transportation standards. Harmonization avoids confusion among
shippers, carriers, and others in the supply chain while
maximizing safety.
Regarding the Open Skies issue, I share the opinion of the
Cargo Airline Association that opposes altering the country's
policy of expanding international opportunities through the
negotiation of Open Skies agreements with trading partners. The
all-cargo carriers have global networks with destinations all
over the world, and we rely on the access that Open Skies
agreements allow us to provide time-definite delivery of high-
value goods.
Unlike the passenger carriers, all-cargo carriers do not
have code share agreements or worldwide alliances and depend on
the beyond rights inherent in Open Skies agreements to provide
global service. Therefore, we oppose any attempt to jeopardize
our existing Open Skies agreements.
Finally, one of the biggest impediments to NextGen may not
in fact be funding or transfer of ATC to a private entity as
many have talked about, but rather aircraft noise. With new,
more fuel-efficient flight paths for aircraft being implemented
as part of the airspace redesigned for NextGen, new communities
are exposed to noise that previously were not. Further, as a
cargo operator we fly a substantial number of nighttime
operations, and any call to impose nighttime flight
restrictions would be problematic. These issues tend to be
local-level problems that then get elevated and then in time
become congressional problems.
While a lot of advances have been made in the area of
aircraft noise, and a significant decrease in those exposed to
noise has been achieved, this issue will continue to prove
challenging for both the FAA and operators like us.
In summary, I would oppose any effort to impose new
aircraft noise restrictions that may undermine our national
aviation and airport system or inhibit the implementation of
NextGen modernization projects, which are crucial for the
efficiencies of the future of air transport.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today, and discuss the issues important to ATSG, its airlines,
and the future of the airline cargo industry. I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you very much.
Ms. Nelson, you are recognized.
Ms. Nelson. Thank you Chairman LoBiondo, Congressman
Larsen, and members of the committee. We appreciate the
opportunity to testify today about maintaining the safest,
globally competitive U.S. aviation system in the world. As
international president of the Association of Flight
Attendants--CWA, representing nearly 50,000 flight attendants
at 19 mainline, niche, regional, charter, and international
airlines, I am proud to bring the expert voice from the
aircraft cabin to this discussion.
It is fitting that on International Women's Day, our union
that was founded by strong women and which remains largely a
workforce of women would have a platform to testify in the
United States Congress. Our members are dutifully performing
their work as aviation's first responders around the world
today.
But aviation would come to an immediate halt without the
contributions of women in aviation, as there is a call for a
day without women. We should recognize these women for the work
that they do in aviation, and we appreciate the opportunity to
testify on issues of equality in aviation today.
My written testimony addresses four key issues flight
attendants need: proper rest to do our work, an orderly and
secure cabin free of voice calls, a reality check on the
disparate compensation at regional airlines, and the
enforcement of Open Skies agreements to keep global competition
on a level playing field.
AFA continues to advocate for equal rest with our flight
deck counterparts, and thanks to over 100,000 flight attendants
and our supporters speaking out and the action of this
committee, a 10-hour minimum rest requirement and the
implementation of a Fatigue Risk Management Plan for flight
attendants was included in H.R. 4441 last year. We look forward
to inclusion of this language in the base bill this year.
Our job as aviation's first responders and the last line of
defense in aviation has only become more challenging in recent
years with staffing at minimums and aircraft cabins fuller than
ever. The FAA rest minimum for flight attendants is 8 hours,
even after a 14-hour duty day. During our rest breaks, flight
attendants exit the airport, eat dinner, check into and out of
hotels, and report for duty after returning to the airport and
transiting security. The reality is we only have an opportunity
for 4 or 5 hours of rest.
Studies commissioned by Congress show we need more rest. We
are thankful to Chairman LoBiondo, Congressman Capuano, Ranking
Members DeFazio and Larsen, and the members of this committee
for including 10 hours' rest in the Fatigue Risk Management
Plan in the FAA reauthorization bill.
Our industry is the safest in the world because of the work
of the stakeholders represented today, the oversight of
Congress, and our airlines' ability to compete on a level
playing field with any other aircraft operator in the world.
Our union is gravely concerned that this is all at risk due to
the failure to enforce Open Skies agreements.
The U.S. has negotiated 120 Open Skies agreements with the
intention of providing increased travel and trade, enhancing
productivity, and spurring high-quality job opportunities and
economic growth. The majority of these agreements are working.
However, failure of the previous administration to enforce Open
Skies agreements with the Gulf States, means Emirates, Etihad,
and Qatar Airways are distorting the market with over $50
billion in subsidies from their governments.
We can compete with any airline in the world, but competing
with the treasuries of their governments is unsustainable and
threatens to choke out U.S. carriers, ultimately destroying
consumer choice as well.
Every route ceded is a cost of 1,500 U.S. jobs. If these
airlines cannot play by the rules, then we must consider
canceling these agreements that are being violated.
In addition, the Obama administration made a grave mistake
when it approved the foreign air carrier permit of Norwegian
Air International. NAI violates article 17 bis of the EU/U.S.
Open Skies agreement by setting up an Irish subsidiary to
capitalize on less restrictive labor laws. NAI's deliberate
effort to undermine Norway's strong labor protections violates
Open Skies and sets in motion a downward spiral for U.S.
aviation and 300,000 U.S. jobs.
This committee is uniquely positioned to take up this issue
and stop the expansion of the approval of foreign air carrier
permits for airlines operating according to this flag-of-
convenience model.
Aviation, born in the U.S., is perhaps one of the greatest
symbols of our freedom. Our members and our passengers fly to
every corner of the earth when only some can dream of crossing
borders. Our airlines are staffed with those who come from
service in our military, and we proudly transport our military
around the world, most wonderfully to bring them home.
The U.S. aviation industry accounts for 5 percent of U.S.
gross domestic product, contributes $1.6 trillion in total
economic activity, and supports nearly 11 million jobs. It is
the symbol of American progress, innovation, and opportunity,
and we must protect it.
I understand with gut-wrenching firsthand experience that
safety, security, and economic strength are paramount for an
industry that continues to capture the imagination and
attention of the world. As a Boston-based flight attendant on
September 11, 2001, I lost my dear friends.
But I know too that in the midst of our grief and our
resolve to keep our airlines flying, we lost over 100,000
aviation jobs, took massive pay cuts, lost our pensions, and
now spend more time away from our families with staffing cut to
minimum. Aviation workers had to face the harsh realities of a
post-9/11 world, and so have our families.
But in the long run, any aviation business model that seeks
to operate solely on the backs of the people who make our
airlines fly is not only inhumane, it is a threat to our
safety. September 11 is not the exception to the rule for our
charge as stakeholders, including, with deep respect, the
Colgan Air families who are here today, and together with your
careful oversight.
It is forever the reality that a breach in aviation
security and a wounded U.S. aviation industry is a threat to
the very freedom of our Nation and the prosperity of every
community across the United States.
Thank you, Chairman LoBiondo, Congressman Larsen, and
Congressman DeFazio, for serving as the strongest imaginable
champions for our vital American industry. Flight attendants
appreciate you and the members of this committee for the
opportunity to testify here today, for your oversight, and for
the protection of good American jobs. I look forward to
answering your questions.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you very much.
Mr. Leocha.
Mr. Leocha. Thank you for giving passengers a seat at this
hearing. My name is Charlie Leocha. I am president of Travelers
United, the country's largest travel advocacy group. We work
intimately with both Government and travel stakeholders here in
Washington.
Anyone who has flown recently in the back of a plane knows
that passengers have far less personal space, planes are flying
fuller than ever, leg room and seat width is being reduced, and
ancillary fees are exploding. My testimony today focuses on a
list of changes that have developed over the past decade in the
aviation marketplace.
Number one, common carriers. Airlines are common carriers.
There are centuries of settled tort law. Pricing of common
carrier services is considered public information. It used to
be nailed up next to the door of their offices. It has been
that way for thousands of years.
The airlines, however, decided since 2008 to publicly
release only partial pricing. Today it is impossible to
effectively comparison shop for airfares and fees. This has
stopped IT development in its tracks.
Once the full airfare and fee data is released, IT experts
can expect new shopping engines that will allow passengers to
comparison shop for airline travel. Don't tell the airlines,
but they will make far more money selling their products
throughout their total distribution network.
Public pricing. Once an airline decides to work with travel
agencies, their pricing should become public, and it always
should be under common carriers. Airlines should not be
permitted to pick and choose where their airfares and fees
appear. Their prices are public information.
Reservation system outages. These are under the complete
control of the airlines. Airlines should not be allowed to
treat them like acts of God. Bizarrely, passengers are being
punished for the failures of the airlines.
When there is an airline IT system failure, the airlines
are responsible and should make their customers whole. Full
refunds should be made available, and all airline tickets
should be valid for at least 1 year from the date of the
disruption. Plus, additional expenses should be covered.
Next, DOT should reevaluate the antitrust immunity and
airline alliance rules. Originally, these grants were developed
to create a better travel experience for passengers. Today, the
airlines are using these DOT-provided grants to stop
competition.
As smaller airlines, like Alaska, JetBlue, Southwest, and
Hawaiian, begin to look at new markets, they are being faced
with coordinated efforts by large alliances to deny them useful
takeoff and landing slots at international airports. Airlines
simply cannot compete without takeoff and landing slots. And
without competition, consumers suffer, prices rise.
Open Skies treaties. These have been the bedrock of
expansion for the U.S. aviation industry since the early 1990s.
Today, these treaties are providing consumers some hope for
competition and lower transatlantic and international airfares.
Middle Eastern carriers, Etihad, Emirates, and Qatar, are
serving a part of the world that was virtually ignored by the
U.S. carriers for years, and low-cost carriers, like Wow and
Norwegian, are finally forcing Delta, American, and United to
lower transatlantic airfares.
Better service to the fastest growing areas of the world
and lower transatlantic airfares are both enhanced by Open
Skies treaties.
Next, airport taxes. As head of Travelers United, I have
never met a traveler who thought they should pay more taxes for
using an airport. Any increase in airport funding should come
from the surrounding municipalities that benefit from the
economics of the airport. Passengers are already paying their
fair share. Proposed airport fee increases may result in more
than $60 of fees being added to a ticket before passengers even
spend $1 on airfare, and that dollar is taxed another 7.5
percent.
And finally, this one should be easy: Educate travelers
about their rights. Congress doesn't have to pass any bills.
DOT doesn't need any rulemakings. The only thing we need from
our Government is the courage to let passengers know their
rights regarding compensation. And there are only two of them.
One, passengers are due compensation for lost, damaged, and
delayed luggage up to $3,500. And when passengers are bumped,
they can get compensation up to $1,350. That is it. End of
domestic passenger compensations.
I look forward to any questions.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you very much.
Mr. DeFazio, you are recognized.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So we have heard from two people mention Etihad. Let's talk
about that for a second. H.E. Sultan Bin Saeed Al Mansouri is
head of the aviation authority, H.E. Eng. Mohamed Mubarak Al
Mazrouei is head of the airline, H.E. Eng. Awaidha Murshed Al
Marar runs the airport, and the Government is dumping massive
amounts of money into a losing proposition.
And it isn't just that they are providing service to parts
of the world that were underserved. Emirates is flying planes
to places like Milan, Italy, and using their Fifth Freedom
Right to come across the Atlantic.
Simple question: Do you think we should allow a State-owned
enterprise in a monarchy dictatorship, do you think that is
fair competition for our airlines, just because you get a
little bit off the ticket?
Yes or no, Mr. Leocha? Do you think it is fair.
Mr. Leocha. Well, if what you are----
Mr. DeFazio. Yes or no?
Mr. Leocha. If what you are saying is true, no.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes, it is true. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Leocha. OK. I don't----
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Tilden? So do you want to be ultimately competing--I
mean, you want to partner with a State-owned enterprise, but
what happens if a State-owned enterprise starts competing with
you?
Mr. Tilden. What I would say about this, Alaska Airlines is
a domestic airline operating in the U.S., but we have treaties
with these other countries----
Mr. DeFazio. I know, but my question, do you think the
United States of America should have policies that require our
capitalist, privately owned companies to compete with State-
owned enterprises from dictatorships that are being financed in
that manner?
Mr. Tilden. I think every country in the world sets up
their airline industry a little differently.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. All right. So you are not going to----
Mr. Tilden. Well, what I will say is that all these
airlines should be required to comply with the treaties. I do
believe that.
Mr. DeFazio. Well, I don't think the treaty--you know, most
of our trade policy is a failure, and that is another example
of it.
Now, we just had a panel last week, Mr. Leocha, of airports
talking about their needs. You are opposed to an increase in
the passenger facility charge.
Now, I will give you an example. Denver was in to see me.
They are doing everything they can, including a P3 to redo
their main terminal, which needs to be redone to tremendously
facilitate the movement of passengers through security and also
will provide much more shopping environment and all that kind
of stuff.
So they are using P3s. They have got a PFC. They are bonded
out. You are saying they shouldn't be allowed to increase their
PFC, but they have a dire need to extend their terminals to
accommodate additional traffic so people won't be sitting on
the ground waiting to get to a gate. So you are just saying you
are against PFC increases no matter how well they are merited?
Mr. Leocha. I am saying that we don't need PFC increases.
There are other ways to increase the money for the airports.
Mr. DeFazio. Well, excuse me, sir, but they are using a P3.
They are getting a huge benefit from that. They are charging
the airlines fees. They are doing everything else. And the
question is, at some point you are bonded out, and what are you
going to do when you are bonded out?
I was the Democratic author of PFCs because I use the
Eugene Airport. Eugene had to do municipal bonds to expand the
airport. I didn't pay a cent. I don't live in Eugene. Now, you
are just saying, well, the municipality benefits, and I live in
the next town over, which you can hardly distinguish, but I
shouldn't pay anything.
Mr. Leocha. Those are questions which need to be raised by
the localities and municipalities serviced by the airports.
Mr. DeFazio. Well, I raised them 20 years ago when we
established the PFC, which I think is the fairest way to have a
user fee-based system. And there are all sorts of restrictions
on the PFCs. There are no abuses of the PFCs. It is all
benefitting the flying public.
So I find your adamant opposition--I don't like the
Greyhound bus experience, which I find in a number of airports,
that are constrained from making improvements, and the PFC is a
fair way to make it. And in the case of Denver, the
municipality isn't necessarily benefitting from all the people
who are just changing planes in Denver, and that is what some
of the terminals are targeted toward. What is the benefit
there? So I just find your adamant opposition very problematic.
And then, finally, I did not want to get into ATC today,
but if you could hold up the chart.

[The chart follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. DeFazio. Just again, Mr. Tilden, this is the
organizational chart, because there is a little problem in
privatizing in the United States of America. The Germans had to
change their Constitution. We are not changing ours.
So we prohibit private entities from doing anything that
affects competition. So that means if they want to increase
taxes, obviously it has to go to the Secretary. If they want to
change flight paths, it has to go to the Secretary. If they
want to change NextGen procedures, it goes to the Secretary. If
they want to change anything else regarding ATC, it has to go
to the Secretary. If they decide to close an air traffic
control tower, contract tower, et cetera, it has to go to the
Secretary. If the Secretary disagrees, then we go to court.
I don't find that to be a more efficient system. Plus, you
are cleaving the FAA in half, and certification, which is vital
to manufacturers, stays over here, and, yes, we move ATO over
here. I believe there are other ways to resolve longstanding
issues, and I didn't really want to get into this today, but
since you raised it, I had to say that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. DeFazio.
Is Mr. Davis back yet?
Mr. Gibbs.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Hete, welcome, fellow Buckeye. I hear you are from
Ohio, from Clinton County. I just wanted to recognize you,
fellow Buckeye.
I guess the first question is to anybody on the panel that
wants to talk about it. You know, we have seen, we had a
downturn in the industry and the industry has bounced back and
doing well now, and we are seeing things turn around a lot. And
we have also seen quite a few mergers in recent years.
And I guess my first question is, how does the capacity
issue interact with the regional carriers and the big carriers
for slots and just airports in general? How does that
interaction work? So anybody that wants to try to answer that,
I appreciate it.
Mr. Childs. I will take a shot at it, if I could. Our
business model that we have at regional carriers, to be clear,
what we do is, as in my opening statement, we fly for the major
carriers, and we are under contract with them to where we get
paid a block hour, which is a flight-hour basis to fly the
routes that they want us to fly.
We do not have any material say in the slots or how we are
scheduled in the big cities. That is completely up to the major
carriers that make all those decisions for us. We just go where
they want us to go and make sure we coordinate it and do it in
a very safe and effective manner. But we don't have any say
relative to how we are utilized in those big areas.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Tilden, I see you are biting at the bit
there.
Mr. Tilden. Yeah, I think this is an interesting time in
our country. These airports were built 40, 50 years ago. In
some cases a runway was added 10 or 15 years ago. But
facilities are constrained. I think almost every airport in
Alaska is in significant--every big airport, LAX, San
Francisco, Portland, Seattle, is significantly constrained. I
just think that is a fact of our future.
To points that others have made, I do think this is a time
for substantial investment in infrastructure. I think folks are
doing this. We are on board with that. I think the industry is
a lot healthier today than it was 10 or 15 years ago, so
airlines are better able to support these very substantial
capital programs.
And I think airspace is a part of that. So we need more
capacity in the airspace. We need more capacity at the airport
itself.
Mr. Gibbs. That is the other part of my question, capacity.
So we have got the issue with runways, getting passengers
through the terminals, and then issue with airspace, so they
are obviously intertwined. So if we ever get the NextGen
adopted and moving on, does that solve that airspace issue?
Mr. Tilden. That will go a long way to helping. There are
constraints, airspace, runways, terminal gates, even roadways
in front of the airports, there are constraints sort of at
every step of the process. But airspace is certainly a big one.
Mr. Gibbs. Go ahead.
Ms. Nelson. Congressman Gibbs, I think it is also important
to recognize the interplay between the regionals and the
mainlines for the people who make the airplanes fly. As Mr.
Childs testified, the regional airlines provide 45 percent of
the lift in the domestic market, but the pilots and flight
attendants are also being paid at 45 percent the rate, even
though the same passengers are buying the same tickets and
expecting to get to the same destinations. So it is an
important piece within a part of all this discussion.
Mr. Gibbs. Since you brought that up, Ms. Nelson, I saw, it
must have been about a year ago, an article in a newspaper, and
I was really taken aback by what they were saying the salaries
were for regional personnel. And as I recall, I think, I don't
know if it was a pilot or the copilot, could be around low
$20,000 annual pay. Is that correct?
Ms. Nelson. That is correct. It is insufficient, and it is
part of the reason that you have twice as many pilots with
certificates to fly today as are performing the jobs today. If
we can increase those wages and provide a living wage for these
people, we will encourage people to enter the market.
Mr. Gibbs. So you just said there are twice as many pilots
that are available, they are just not, because they have got to
find other jobs to support their families. Is that what you are
saying?
Ms. Nelson. Correct.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Anybody want to respond to that?
Mr. Childs. Yeah, I would love to respond to that. I think
that there has been a tremendous move and shift in compensation
in the last couple years with pilots and some flight attendants
as well. And it is important to note, as we went through the
statistics early on in my testimony, and in my written
testimony, we are the only source of travel for over 60 percent
of the airports that we serve.
We have never really come out of service at SkyWest or
ExpressJet due to a lack-of-pilot scenario. We have come out
because it didn't make economic sense. Now, other carriers
outside of us do have a very, very difficult time, and all of
us see a very significant pilot shortage on us today, and a lot
of people believe that there is a very strong inventory out
there.
I can tell you from personal experience, because we hire
them and we interview them and we train them, that that is
absolutely not the case. We are deeply concerned about the
statistics as it is moving forward in the next 3 years. There
are a lot of retirements at the mainline carriers, and there
simply is not enough backfilling them as of today. So we need
to do some things to make sure that we fix that.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Chairman. My time has expired.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tilden, in your written testimony you discussed RNAV
[area navigation], instrument procedures and such, and said
nationwide it is 4 percent. For your flights, it is about 4
percent. And Sea-Tac, do you have a percentage?
Mr. Tilden. I do not have that percentage with me. Despite
Greener Skies, it isn't 25 percent even.
Mr. Larsen. Oh, yeah?
Mr. Tilden. Yeah. It is less than that.
Mr. Larsen. And what steps, either nationally or even at
Sea-Tac, could be done to increase that to something higher
than it is?
Mr. Tilden. Yeah. The situation we have is that these
Greener Skies or RNP [required navigation performance]
approaches have to be approved for every approach to every
runway end at every airport. So Sea-Tac there are three
runways, so that means there are six runway ends, and there are
two or three approaches to each runway. And there is noise--one
of the other gentlemen spoke to noise--noise is a big part of
the review process. The FAA takes time to develop the
procedure.
So what we have is a one-by-one approval of each of those
approaches. And I just think somehow we need a much more
rapid--in my own way of thinking about this, there should sort
of be a default view that these approaches, this technology is
better than what we have today. Even though the noise may be a
little bit, it will be an engine at idle power, and with GPS it
will be the same track every day. It may hit one house more
than the current system, but there will be way less noise with
this new technology than we have with the old. So some sort of
fast-tracking of those approaches I think would help us.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah. So it is not just a matter of different
approaches. It is also in how you operate that approach as
well, is what you are saying?
Mr. Tilden. Yes.
Mr. Larsen. If you have the same kind of approaches, but we
still do the stairstep in and out, we are not really taking
full advantage of the technology.
Mr. Tilden. Correct. Correct. But I think in the perfect
world, these approaches are designed so that the airplane at
altitude, 38,000 feet, it goes to idle power, and it stays
there until maybe a little bit of a true-up just at the end
before it touches down.
Mr. Larsen. Just don't tell your passengers that.
Mr. Tilden. Safety is number one above everything else.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah, I know. Just flew in yesterday.
Ms. Nelson, could you give a little more detail on flight
attendant fatigue and why it is an important issue to you all?
Ms. Nelson. Yes, I appreciate that very much. Flight
attendant fatigue is something that we have been working on
addressing for the last 30 years. The first duty and rest
regulations went into place in 1994, and they were essentially
a dart thrown at a dart board just to get something on paper.
Then-Chairman Norman Mineta suggested that there should be
a 10-hour free-from-duty rest. And the reason for that is what
we have seen through the fatigue studies, seven fatigue studies
commissioned by Congress that show that there needs to be more
rest in order to avoid fatigue. If you can imagine, that was
the conclusion.
And so, in order to get that proper rest, because of the
duties that have to be completed during that rest time as well,
it is important to have the 10 hours' rest that is equal with
our flight deck counterparts that is now in place.
And we are adamant to get this done, especially with the
increased duties and less staffing that flight attendants have
on board, with more opportunity for error with fewer of us
handling more passengers. It is simply unacceptable. We have
got to address this fatigue issue and have equal rest with our
flight deck counterparts.
Mr. Larsen. Thanks.
Mr. Hete, I believe the current administration pulled back
a rule from FMCSA [Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration]
on lithium, transporting lithium batteries. But I understand
you support the ICAO's [International Civil Aviation
Organization's] work to improve the standards for transporting
lithium batteries. Do you have a consistent pattern about how
you transport lithium?
Mr. Hete. Yeah, I think it is critical, because if you look
at our customers, DHL, for example, everything that we handle
for them throughout their North American network is an
international ship, either originating or destinating in an
international environment. And so if you have a mixed bag of
rules and you don't have harmonization of those rules, you have
an exposure to a shipment getting into the system without
following prescribed procedures, and no one wants to see that
happen. So it has got to be consistent across the board.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah, thanks.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield back and let someone else have a
chance. Thanks.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Mr. LaMalfa.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Childs, thank you for appearing, and for the whole
panel here today. I am from far northern California, where--
including airports such as Chico and Redding--until 2014, Chico
had service from SkyWest.
And I know that regional airlines do face unique
challenges, et cetera. And some of the testimony I heard from
the panel here that they can operate between the smaller
airports, but this is also at the behest of what the parent
airline that you are contracting with requires.
So is it different to operate just between the smaller
airports or when you have to tie into a larger one where the
major aircraft and the parent airline is operating? Is there a
difference in the way you can operate that way? Do you have
more freedom to set rates or types of service, numbers of
trips, et cetera, like, say, Chico to Redding or Redding to
Oregon, places like that?
Mr. Childs. Yeah. So let me go back, because we miss
serving Chico, honestly. And from our perspective on how that
happens, there are some models that we do under a prorate
arrangement, where we do have some freedoms to do some things.
That only constitutes about 10 percent of our particular model,
and many regional carriers don't even have that model.
So back historically, when it was with Chico, we enjoyed
great service there. We did it with a turboprop, a 30-seat
Brasilia. And as we continued to evolve as a company, we
started to take larger aircraft, and as we continued to execute
on some good strong compensation models with our people.
Unfortunately, what happened was that it did not make economic
sense and we couldn't do it profitably there.
So that technically was one of our decisions that we also
made with our partner. We were doing it with United at the
time. And that was one at which the cost was prohibitive
because of certain elements of our business model where that
service was----
Mr. LaMalfa. Understood. We had some airport
representatives, as was mentioned earlier, last week, and some
of that tied into the conversation.
So if a 30-seat turboprop plane, as you mentioned and they
talked about last week also, those are being phased out, what
is the size of the aircraft, the more regional jets? Is that
the volume part of the reason that it is priced out on more
regional airports like that?
Mr. Childs. Yeah, that is exactly----
Mr. LaMalfa. Sixty, seventy passengers, is that what you
are dealing with?
Mr. Childs. Yeah. So the majority of our fleet is a 50-seat
jet. And we now are taking more new aircraft that are at 76
seats with first-class configuration and longer range and that
type of stuff. So that is the trend. That is what the
manufacturers are making.
You bring up an excellent point, because there are cities
that, from our economic model, we can't serve anymore. We have
gotten bigger, and certainly, given our compensation strategy
with that, we can't serve with a 30-seat aircraft anymore.
There are a lot of other carriers that can, and they are the
ones that are struggling with attracting pilots and they are
the ones that are struggling with some of the things that they
can do to actually execute on those plans.
So, unfortunately, Congressman, your city is an interesting
case study about what our situation is, because our economic
model is very volatile and it is one which it can't bear a lot
of fluctuation relative to costs. And that is kind of what we
have to work with within our industry.
Mr. LaMalfa. Are the facilities themselves part of the
issue, being able to handle, versus the turboprop aircraft the
jet, the jetway, or what are some of the issues with that that
the facilities might need more upgrades on to accommodate a
newer----
Mr. Childs. There are a lot. If this industry continues to
evolve the way it is, away from turboprops to jets the same way
that we did, there are a lot of small airports that need to
make airport adjustments--longer runway, wider runway,
emergency equipment, those types of things--to accommodate the
jet.
We are working in no less than 10 cities since we pulled
out with turboprops and want to go back in with 50-seat
aircraft. If it is economically viable, that the communities
need to upgrade their airports and their facilities to
accommodate a 50-seat jet, which would be the next step for
most of these communities.
Mr. LaMalfa. Well, Chico, for example, has a 6,700-foot
runway and I have seen 737s take off there. So that is probably
not the issue there, right?
Mr. Childs. Not in Chico, no.
Mr. LaMalfa. OK. Is there anything that Department of
Transportation regulation-wise that are causing any kind of
imposition to be able to do what you need to do, either on the
regional basis or in its integration with the larger carriers
or larger airports?
Mr. Childs. And I don't know if there is anything that the
Department of Transportation specifically can do, but in my
opening statements we talked a lot about some solutions to keep
the regional airline viable and strong. We fundamentally
believe that if we keep a strong stream of pilots coming into
the industry, good things happen all around. Everything becomes
more safe. We can make more clear decisions relative to some of
the things that the manufacturers want to make.
I mean, part of our problem, particularly with Chico, is if
it is not supportive of a 50-seat aircraft, we need a
manufacturer that makes an aircraft that can fit the size of
your town. And the manufacturers simply don't want to make that
aircraft, because they don't have confidence that we have a
strong pilot stream within the industry.
So the industry needs confidence about the fact that we
will have pilots. As an entity, you are comfortable that we are
going to do what it takes to do it safely. But, again, the
other thing that we can do is do some of these restricted ATP
things, which actually enhance safety.
We are not out here to reduce the 1,500-hour rule. I
actually like the rule, and I think that that is a good mark.
But I think that we know now that there are some things from a
safety perspective that we can have some alternate pathways to
help people get integrated into the industry.
Mr. LaMalfa. I am sorry, I have to yield back.
Thank you. I appreciate the answers.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Lipinski.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I know Mr. DeFazio, Ranking Member DeFazio had talked about
the Middle Eastern airlines and the unfair competition. We want
to make sure that we have rules that are in place that help the
airlines, the airline employees, and the flying public.
I wanted to raise another related issue in regard to
international competition in the Norwegian Air International.
As most of you probably know, NAI is flying as an Irish airline
with flight crews employed by contracts that are governed by
the laws of several Asian countries. It sort of leaves you
wondering who the regulator is here.
Clearly--well, unfortunately, this was approved here in the
U.S. I would assume that, going forward, there may be more
attempts to do something similar. I think it really undermines
our Open Skies agreement in regard to maintaining labor
standards.
And so I wanted to ask Ms. Nelson what the effect of
something such as NAI has on your members' employees?
Ms. Nelson. Thank you, Congressman Lipinski.
Yes, this is a grave concern for us. What Norwegian has
done here is they have created a subsidiary with the Norwegian
name to essentially hoodwink the public and regulators to
believe that they are going to be flying under the same
standards, high standards that we would expect from Norway. As
a signatory to the U.S.-EU Open Skies agreement, that was
negotiated based on the idea that we would maintain the high
labor standards in the U.S. and EU. None of the other
provisions would have gone forward unless that first standard
was met.
And yet, the NAI permit was granted, setting aside,
essentially, article 17 bis. Not saying that it wasn't being
violated. It is being violated with this flag of convenience in
Ireland, which will allow Adecco or OSM, essentially these temp
agencies that hire out aviation workers, pilots and flight
attendants and other workers, from anywhere in the world where
they can find the lowest labor standards.
We cannot compete with that. Not only that, but there are
U.S.-based Norwegian flight attendants working today, working
for Norwegian today. What Norwegian has attempted to do is to
also hoodwink the public into believing that the NAI
certificate needed to be approved in order to offer U.S. jobs,
when, in fact, we have no assurances from Norwegian that they
will continue to hire under U.S. or European contracts once
this takes hold.
Our European counterparts told us that their airlines were
very honest with them that they were opposed to this flag-of-
convenience model that NAI sets up, but if it was approved they
will have to immediately compete within 2 years' time. SAS has
already filed for an Irish certificate just since this permit
has been approved. So we are seeing this. This is going to be a
faster destruction than there was with the flag-of-convenience
model with U.S. shipping, where now we see Liberian flags
flying in our ports. All of our airlines will be choked out,
because they will not be able to compete.
The flight attendants flying for Norwegian here today have
just unionized. They are voting right now to join the
Association of Flight Attendants, because we are going to beat
back these temp agencies who form short-term contracts with
them. When they get too old, too fat, they are the wrong color,
they don't go along, they can just end their contracts when it
comes to the next time. They only have a 4-year pay scale,
because they do not intend for these people to stick around.
These are some things that we beat back in 1946, and this
is where our aviation industry is headed if we allow the flag
of convenience to remain in place, if we allow Norwegian to
continue to hoodwink the public and allow other carriers to
follow their suit, to follow this flag-of-convenience model for
putting down their flag wherever they need to in the world so
they can find the lowest labor standards and compete based on
that.
Our airlines can't compete. U.S. aviation workers can't
compete. And the reality is that 300,000 good U.S. aviation
jobs are at stake here.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you.
Can I have another minute, Mr. Chairman? You can say no.
Mr. LoBiondo. Go ahead.
Mr. Lipinski. Sorry, I will yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Go ahead.
Mr. Lipinski. Very quickly. Mr. Tilden, Mr. Larsen went
through some of what you are doing to increase efficiency. I
know you have done some work with--you did a flight with
biomass fuel. You work with Boeing. Boeing uses the CLEEN
[Continuous Lower Energy, Emissions, and Noise] program to
research for engine efficiency. Is this something that is also
very helpful to what you are trying to do with efficiency?
Mr. Tilden. It is. We are really proud. I think it is still
the case that Alaska Airlines has the most fuel-efficient fleet
in the industry. That is also true of Horizon Air for regional
airlines. And we have been a big partner with anybody that
approaches us with biofuels or other alternative fuels.
There is a big role for the science community and the
engine manufacturers and others in that. What we are really
trying to do is demonstrate that there is a market. If somebody
can bring a new fuel to the market, we have run several of
these flights, commercial flights with biofuels on board, just
to demonstrate, if this fuel does come to market in a feasible
fashion, we will buy it.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
granting Mr. Lipinski the extra minute. That was a great
question. I am supportive of that.
And also, I want to thank you for asking the question of
Ms. Nelson, because you took mine. So I want to add my name to
being supportive of that question too.
But thank you for your response, and thank you for what you
are doing. You know, we want to make sure that we offer
bipartisan consensus on some of the concerns that were
addressed.
Mr. Childs, during your opening remarks--and I fly a lot of
regional airlines in central Illinois, thank you for what you
do in keeping many of my regional airports active--but you also
mentioned something about student loans and student debt. I
have got a bill I would love for you to take a look at that is
called the Employer Participation in Student Loan Assistance
Act. I figured our team probably could have thought of a
shorter title, but they didn't, so I will address that later.
But what it does is it creates a private sector incentive
for companies like yours and others to have another tool in the
toolbox to address student debt, and that is a tax incentive to
provide up to $5,250 a year to your employees to pay down their
debt. The employees wouldn't be taxed on it. It is a win-win,
addresses a big problem. Please take a look at that. We would
love your support.
Now, Mr. Tilden and Mr. Childs, my colleague Mr. DeFazio
talked a lot about ATC reform. He and I are good friends. He
may not admit that, but I do. But I am on the other side of
that debate. I support ATC reform. I think NextGen's rollout
has been a continuous inefficient, expensive rollout that we
are not seeing progress in.
Now, there were a lot of charts put up. I don't have any.
But I want to hear from you. What are your thoughts on those
charts? What are your thoughts on ATC reform? How can we make
the aviation industry better through ATC reform?
We will start with Mr. Tilden.
Mr. Tilden. Thank you, Congressman Davis. If I could, I
just wanted to support Chip Childs on the pilot training. I
think this is a real issue for our country.
Mr. Davis. It is.
Mr. Tilden. Alaska feels this issue as well. When I went to
Pacific Lutheran University with Congressman Larsen, I got
student loans that were guaranteed by the Federal Government. I
think if we could bring something like that to the pilot
profession, the mechanic profession, I think it would be really
beneficial and Alaska would certainly be supportive.
On ATC reform, I know it is a contentious issue. I know
that people feel differently. How we feel about this is that we
have actually had this--it actually isn't a technology problem
anymore. It is a technology deployment issue.
The technology has been proven, it has been in place for 21
years, and the speed is just not what it could be.
And I personally think it is a time--and I do respect the
diversity of opinion on this, but I personally think--flying is
about freedom. This is the greatest country in the world. We
invented flying here. Almost everything about flying was done
in this country.
I think it is a time for us to move forward and create
airspace that is the most modern and in a time of more and more
congestion is the most advanced in the world. And I think
safety will actually be enhanced if we say to the FAA, ``You
are responsible for making sure we are safe at every single
juncture,'' and separate the operation of the system into
another company or another organization that has whatever
oversight it needs to have, but has stability with funding, it
has stability with governance, and it has a singular focus to
give us the best airspace system in the world.
Mr. Davis. And what you are saying is the status quo is not
achieving any of those goals.
Mr. Tilden. The status quo--I personally believe that
demand is growing at a rate that is higher than technology
deployment. So the delays are getting worse and worse by the
year.
Mr. Davis. And costing taxpayers.
Mr. Tilden. Yes.
Mr. Davis. Thank you.
Mr. Childs.
Mr. Childs. Well, he is my partner, so I shouldn't probably
say much more than what he did. He did a great job.
The only thing I want to emphasize is that operating a
regional aircraft, we want to be very careful about how it is
funded. No matter what the reform is, you can get into a dots-
on-the-screen scenario, but we fundamentally, like we have
talked about, the volatility of our model is tight. And we just
want to make sure that it is a fair representation of the
economics within our model.
But we are 100 percent supportive of the direction that you
are going down with that. And I agree with Mr. Tilden on those
points as well.
Mr. Davis. All right.
Any additional points, Mr. Tilden, you want to make on ATC
reform----
Mr. Tilden. Not----
Mr. Davis [continuing]. Comparatively speaking to any other
countries?
Mr. Tilden. I think I made the point in my testimony. There
are different models in different countries, but most
industrialized countries in the world have moved to a separate
air traffic management organization, separate from the FAA or
the safety oversight, aviation safety oversight.
And I think the examples are mixed. There are some great
examples. There are examples that aren't so good. But there are
models out there for us to look at if we choose to.
Mr. Davis. All right. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. I would like to now recognize Mr. Tom Brady--
no, I am sorry, Mr. Capuano.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Nelson, I just want to kind of draw a big bold line on
this. The other day when I took a late flight home, 9 o'clock I
landed--actually, a little before 9. The 8-hour rest period,
last passenger gets off, flight attendant steps off the plane,
the 8-hour rest period starts, bang. A flight attendant has to
walk out to the sidewalk just like me, get a ride, usually from
a van, to a hotel--I am going home, they are going to a hotel--
check into the hotel, grab something to eat, and go to sleep.
So let's just assume, for the sake of discussion, that the
8-hour rest period starts at 9 p.m., let's assume they are
asleep by 11 p.m., which, of course, nobody I know that works a
9-to-5 job is asleep at 7 p.m., but let's just assume it for
the sake of discussion.
In order to get back to work by 5 a.m., which is the 8-hour
period, you have to do the same thing in reverse. You have to
wake up, grab a shower, check out of the hotel, have a little
something to eat, grab a ride back to the airport, get off that
shuttle, walk through security, walk down, and the 8-hour shift
starts the minute you step on that plane.
That means that has left you with--now, again, that
presumes you have had 2 hours from the end of your shift to the
time you are actually asleep. If it takes you 2 hours to do
that, it takes you 2 hours in the morning, that leaves you 4
hours to sleep. Now, as I understand it, pilots have 6. You
have 4.
How many flight attendants were lost on 9/11?
Ms. Nelson. Twenty-five.
Mr. Capuano. How many flight attendants were on the flight
with Sully Sullenberger when he landed in the Hudson?
Ms. Nelson. Three.
Mr. Capuano. Did they do their job?
Ms. Nelson. They did their job perfectly.
Mr. Capuano. And their job was a little bit more than
serving drinks and picking up after my trash. It was saving my
life.
Ms. Nelson. That is correct.
Mr. Capuano. I only do this--I know you know all these
answers and I know the people at the panel and I know the
people here know it, but I do it to make sure that people
understand, to the best of my ability, that flight attendants
are a lot more important than what we see on a regular basis.
I don't want to see a flight attendant in an emergency
situation. And when they ask me when I am sitting in the
emergency row if I am willing to help, and they say, you really
don't want me opening that door, that is a problem. And I want
a flight attendant there who is trained on how to help me.
So I actually don't think you are asking for much. I think
you are asking for ridiculously little. And I hope that
Congress can do what is long overdue to get this done.
Mr. Tilden, I would like to shift gears a little bit. I am
a big supporter of NextGen. I totally agree with everything you
said about trying to catch up in technology and try to make
things efficient. But does NextGen alone require a specific
flight path to make it work?
Mr. Tilden. No. No. I think NextGen is about----
Mr. Capuano. It allows more options.
Mr. Tilden [continuing]. A lot of different technologies to
shorten the travel time.
Mr. Capuano. As an executive of a growing airline, do you
ever concern yourself with the noise of the people who live
under these flight paths?
Mr. Tilden. Yes.
Mr. Capuano. I figured you would. You should, and I believe
that. So, therefore, there is nothing that you know about in
NextGen that would prohibit the FAA and my NATCA [National Air
traffic Controllers Association] people from changing the
flight paths to spread whatever noise is there. Noise is noise,
I get it. But there is no need to have a flight path
continuously going over one house and only one house. Is that a
fair statement?
Mr. Tilden. Yes. I think it is a fair statement.
Mr. Capuano. The reason I ask, because many of us have had
some trouble. The FAA has finally acquiesced to try to take a
look at it. I think we can have modern NextGen equipment,
saving you some money, saving me some time, and still concern
ourselves with the quality of life of people who live under
flight paths.
Mr. Tilden. I agree with you, sir.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you. That is really all I want to say.
Mr. Childs, would you agree with that?
Mr. Childs. I would agree with that, yes.
Mr. Capuano. And, Mr. Hete, would you agree with that?
Mr. Hete. I would agree with that.
Mr. Capuano. I am not going to ask you two guys, because
you don't own airlines. If you did, though, I know you would.
I guess I am just going to use the last 30 seconds I have
to also add my voice to the Norwegian thing. The Norwegian
thing is horrendous. It is an absolutely wrong decision and it
is heading in a direction exactly as you described, Ms. Nelson.
It is jeopardizing American jobs.
Mr. Tilden, you will not be able to compete if this goes
undone.
I also want to add one more thing. Mr. Tilden, what is your
largest airport that you service?
Mr. Tilden. Los Angeles.
Mr. Capuano. Los Angeles. If I start an airline tomorrow
and I wanted to fly to L.A., and California said, ``You know
something, Mike, we are going to give you, your new airline, $4
billion to be able to fly into L.A. so you don't have to pay
quite so much landing fee,'' do you think that would be fair?
Mr. Tilden. No. And to be fair, I wasn't asked. But Alaska
actually has not taken a position on the Norwegian Air
International.
Mr. Capuano. I am not asking you to take a position. I am
just kind of using you to like----
Mr. Tilden. No. And I said it earlier, but just to be
really clear, as a little airline ourselves, we are 6 percent,
5.5 or 6 percent of the industry now with Virgin America. At
every opportunity, we want to make the case that we want a
level playing field.
And the simple point I made with the Gulf Coast airlines is
that we are competing against airlines that can go into
companies and say, ``We are a one-stop shop, we can sell you
tickets all over the world.'' Alaska can't. And in a network
business, we need to build partnerships with others to have any
shot----
Mr. Capuano. And that is why I am not asking you to knock
your partners. That would be wrong.
Mr. Tilden. Gotcha.
Mr. Capuano. But fair is fair. And fair is a level playing
field, the Government not paying me to do what somebody else
already does.
Mr. Tilden. Yes, I agree.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Tilden.
Mr. Chairman, it looks like I am over. You are getting kind
of lax.
Mr. LoBiondo. You are always over.
Mr. Capuano. I yield back the remainder of the time I don't
have.
Mr. LoBiondo. Just for the record, you are always over.
Mr. Webster.
Mr. Webster. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Tilden, you mentioned constrained capacity in your
testimony. And I had a question about, are you satisfied with
the way you can obtain a gate slot at an airport, in general?
Do you think it is balanced?
Mr. Tilden. At most airports in our country, it is actually
a good system. The Government gives these airports money and,
as a consequence of receiving Federal money, they are required
to create access for airlines like Alaska that might want to
come into Chicago or Indianapolis or what have you.
There are a handful of highly constrained airports. And I
think smaller airlines like Alaska would say, ``No, we would
like more access to these airports, and if we had more access
we will bring our brand of service, different fares'' and so
forth.
So I think in the most congested, slot-controlled airports,
more access would be a good thing for competition and for
smaller airlines.
Mr. Webster. So how would you propose to remedy that?
Mr. Tilden. You know, I didn't sort of put a lot of thought
into this today, but in markets like JFK, as an example, I
think we got into there a couple of years ago with one red eye
flight. I think as we look to make changes in the flight
schedule at JFK, we might allocate a certain number of slots, a
certain number of landing rights and departure rights for
airlines that don't have capacity, airlines that will come in
and bring competition to the marketplace.
Mr. Webster. I have another question about cybersecurity.
There was another panel a while back, I don't remember exactly
when, and they downplayed cybersecurity in the flight industry.
And then, on the other hand, I was in another committee, and
they were talking about the fact that even Barbie dolls have
IPOs. And I am not sure why, maybe just because they can do it.
I don't know. But it seems like if that is open, maybe there is
a problem.
Do you see, or can you even talk about in a public forum,
what might be the problems in cybersecurity?
Mr. Tilden. I can speak to that. Are you talking about
cybersecurity with respect to airlines generally or with
respect to----
Mr. Webster. Yes. Well, the more specific you can get,
great.
Mr. Tilden. Yeah. No, I think it is a big, big concern for
every U.S. company. I think it is a particular concern for
airlines. You have seen airlines have had some outages, some
issues in the last 2, 3, 4 years. Alaska had an outage 5 years
ago that required us to shut down our operation for half a day.
I think folks are dealing with it. And it is one of these,
whatever, the bad guys are moving at a certain rate, and we are
trying to move as fast as we can.
At Alaska, I will tell you that we have quadrupled our IT
budget in the last 5 years. We have gone from roughly $50
million a year to roughly $200 million of spending on IT.
Cybersecurity, I would call that defensive. A lot of that
spending is defensive. It protects our operation the way it is
today, but it doesn't really add new features or functionality
or benefits for our customers.
Mr. Webster. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Carson.
Mr. Carson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hete, in your written testimony you note that ATSG
provides more and longer flight crew rest opportunities than
your passenger counterparts. Would you care to comment further?
And you noted your opposition to any new aircraft noise
restrictions. As you know, noise is a very contentious issue
for Members of Congress. What steps would your airline
subsidiaries be willing to reduce with regards to local
communities' exposure to aircraft noise?
Mr. Hete. Well, I think it would be, with the existing ATC
system, we have to follow prescribed flight paths to begin
with. So there is not much you can do in regard to controlling
noise other than operate the aircraft according to the
manufacturer's specifications and keep your engines as low a
turn rate as possible. So we don't have a lot of flexibility in
that regard today.
Our concern is more if you expand and go to a Next
Generation System, that it imposes more restrictions on us.
Since most of our flying is done in the off-hours during the
nighttime, since we service the express industry primarily,
that we have a larger exposure I think in that regard to the
time that people are sleeping. So it is a greater concern to us
than it would be for the passenger carriers who operate in
daylight hours.
As far as the crew rest times, as I said, our operations
are built around primarily a 5- or call it 5\1/2\-day-a-week
operation. Most flights are one flight into a hub and maybe a
shorter leg tagged onto it thereafter, and then the pilot is
off duty for a considerable period of time. If they fly to a
west coast, we have 36-hour layovers, for example, where they
get the additional rest period. So it is not as great a concern
for us, because of the limited number of flight legs that we do
fly in a given day.
Mr. Carson. Thank you.
Ms. Nelson, we have heard from U.S. regional airlines that
they are experiencing a growing pilot shortage, and this kind
of shortage is often attributed to the 2010 requirement that
airline first officers possess an airline transport
certificate. As you know, this requirement raised the training
prerequisite for first officers to 1,500 flight-hours.
As president of AFA, you have a vested interest in aviation
safety. Do you take a position on this issue and whether there
should be any rollback on minimum flight-hours for first
officers?
Ms. Nelson. The Association of Flight Attendants supports
the position of the Air Line Pilots Association and the Colgan
families who are here today, and we believe that industrial
issues should not inform safety issues in aviation.
Mr. Carson. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Westerman.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Nelson, could you elaborate a little bit more about
your concerns with voice calls on airplanes?
Ms. Nelson. Yes. We have incredible concerns with voice
calls on airplanes. We have concerns in many ways.
First and foremost, our members are charged with keeping
order in the cabin, and more and more we are having to
deescalate conflict. We are concerned about the conflict, that
this will increase as people are having to listen to very loud
business meetings or conversations with new boyfriends or
girlfriends or relationships that are ending. Whatever those
conversations may be, people don't want to hear it in the space
of the cabin where they are closer together than they have ever
been before.
But even more so, we have a concern with security. And if
terrorists are able to communicate in real time through voice
communications, Richard Reid's bomb likely would have gone off.
Flight attendants would not have been able to thwart that
effort. If we have voice calls allowed in the cabin, we will
not be able to see those who are intending to use this for ill
purposes. They will not stand out, they will blend in.
And so, for those reasons, we are adamantly opposed. And we
are also opposed, we believe, because we also are often the
strongest advocates for the passengers in our care, and they
are unanimously opposed to voice calls in the cabin.
Mr. Westerman. I believe you just addressed a question
about pilots, but what can be done from a policy standpoint to
encourage more young people to pursue aviation careers?
Mr. Hete. I think from an aviation career standpoint, a lot
of it is just awareness, for young people to be aware of what
the opportunities are in the aviation community. I know there
is a lot of focus on pilots, but we also operate an MRO,
maintenance, repair, and overhaul operation. And from a
technician standpoint, trained aircraft mechanics are in very
short supply as well, just because of lack of familiarity of
the opportunities there for young people to get into those
career fields.
Certainly from a pilot standpoint, the investment is
significantly greater than you would have for a mechanic, for
example. So anything that could be done to facilitate the
funding of those certainly would be of long-term benefit.
Mr. Westerman. And, Ms. Nelson, I saw a story recently
about--I think this actually happened several years ago, but it
was highlighting airline employees intervening in human
trafficking. There was a young girl, who I believe passed a
note in the bathroom, and found out she was being harassed or
trafficked.
Can you explain more about the progress of enhanced
training required by our 2016 bill to help flight attendants
detect human trafficking?
Ms. Nelson. I would like to thank this committee very much
for taking up that issue and mandating training for flight
attendants to recognize and report human trafficking.
The only issue is that there was not a process to implement
that training or specific requirements about what would be
contained in that training. And so we are working with our
airlines to implement those programs to the highest standards
possible, hopefully aligning with the Blue Lightning Initiative
of DHS and DOT.
And we are a little bit concerned that this is not moving
as quickly as it should. We have heard from flight attendants
over the years that they have seen something that just doesn't
look right or thought about it after the flight but didn't know
what to do at the time. So everyone needs to understand how to
recognize it, what to do, how to report it, and how to get it
to the proper authorities so that we can stop human trafficking
in our skies.
Mr. Westerman. I have got one final question, I guess more
for the airline companies. I live in a rural district where
what commercial airline service we got is essential air
service, and I get complaints from my constituents on the
quality of that service. So what can we do to get more--twin-
engine turboprops would be an improvement in some of these
airports or even jet service--through the Essential Air Service
program?
Mr. Childs. Well, I think a lot of it has to do, quite
candidly, with the economics and that type of stuff. I
mentioned earlier that the best thing for us is to make sure we
have got a very strong, ample supply of aviation professionals.
I think reassuring the confidence with manufacturers, airplane
manufacturers and that, so they continue to move technology in
the right direction is a great thing.
And more importantly, speak out to your carrier. I don't
know which location you are meeting with, but there are a lot
of great opportunities that are being left behind today
throughout the United States relative to essential air service,
great communities that deserve outstanding support. But some of
the things that we have talked about in my previous written and
oral testimony I think are very key elements to help us resolve
that.
Enhancing safety to making sure that we have got an R-ATP,
make sure there is an awareness like was discussed about how
good the aviation community is. We need more diversity within
it. And then we need some loan programs for pilots that help
them get to a very lucrative career, what is out there today.
All of that stuff will come back to small communities. But
we have got to get granular, more confidence in the regional
airline side to make sure that we get the right aviation
professionals in there to help even have that conversation.
Mr. Westerman. Thank you.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mrs. Napolitano.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Ms. Nelson, you detailed concerns about pilot pay. Can you
explain about flight attendants' pay and where you stand?
Ms. Nelson. Yes. Thank you very much for that question.
We have the same concerns about flight attendant pay in the
regional industry. In fact, flight attendant pay is lower than
the figures that were given today for pilots.
So, for example, actually sharing the panel here today, Mr.
Childs, SkyWest does a better job of paying flight attendants
in the regional industry. But across the board, on average,
flight attendants working on regional jets under the flag of
the mainline carriers and serving the same passengers are
making 45 percent less.
Mrs. Napolitano. Why?
Ms. Nelson. And that is concerning, because they are also
aviation first responders and last line of defense in aviation
security.
Mrs. Napolitano. Why are they getting less pay?
Ms. Nelson. Because of what has been described here today,
which is the volatility of the regional model that is very,
very tight in these capacity purchase agreements with the
mainline airlines. And those agreements have not built in
enough ability for these regional carriers to provide
sufficient pay to the people who are working for them.
Mesa Airlines is a bottom feeder on this, providing 20
percent less than the rest of the regional flight attendants as
well. We are in the middle of a strike vote on that and trying
to rectify that situation. But they also have very low work
rules that include only paying for schedules. So if a flight is
going from Chicago to LaGuardia and has to divert, has to hold
in the air, has to stay with those passengers for upwards of 6,
7 hours, depending upon what happens, they are still only paid
the 2 hours that they were originally scheduled for.
It is inhumane. It has got to change. And it is a problem
with the general structure of the agreements between the
mainline and the regional carriers, first and foremost.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you. But one of the other questions
that I had was the concern I have over subsidized foreign
airlines in the U.S. market. I was wondering whether they have
the same requirements for pilots and for the attendants,
because if they are subsidized, we don't subsidize that to the
size of what they do in foreign countries.
Would you have any comment about the concern this brings up
and the problem with any airline and how we could address it?
Ms. Nelson. We have concerns that, of course, we don't have
oversight over what those airlines are doing. So in some of
these countries it is outlawed for workers to even organize, to
bargain contracts, to band together, to beat back the
discriminatory practices that we have beat back over the years.
If they overtake our market, we will not be able to get
that back again. So for every route that the U.S. airlines have
to cede, those Gulf carriers are encroaching upon the U.S.
market, which is decreasing their ability to actually compete
with the network structures and ultimately will be choked out.
And we won't have any say over how those workers are treated or
what the safety standards are. We won't have any control over
the industry that is providing service for Americans.
Mrs. Napolitano. Well, I would like to ask you one question
since you brought up the attendants. Are the attendants and the
pilots given any mental health screenings? Because you deal
with a lot of crazy people sometimes. And I fly twice a week,
so I have seen it all, I have heard it all. Eighteen years of
it. Mental health is beginning to be a major problem that we
should have maybe training for the pilots and for the
attendants.
Ms. Nelson. So mental health is certainly an issue that we
deal with for our union. And having unions and having
professional pilots and flight attendants who are career
employees is very important. We can provide resources and
structures to be able to support people throughout their
careers.
So we have vibrant EAP programs where we address these
issues in the workplace immediately. Their peers understand
that they can report any concerns that they might have, get
people the help that they need sooner.
Mrs. Napolitano. But are they trained to recognize any of
the symptoms?
Ms. Nelson. Our EAP committees are trained to recognize
those symptoms, to report that. And all workers are advised in
unionized workplaces at U.S. carriers that they have the
ability to use these resources to their benefit, to report any
potential problems in a confidential atmosphere, to get help to
those employees, get them off the job while they need to
recover, and bring them back when they are healthy.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Rokita.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you, Chairman.
I thank the witnesses.
Mr. Tilden, you said you are a pilot. Are you current?
Mr. Tilden. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rokita. What do you fly?
Mr. Tilden. I actually bought a TBM now. I was in a Cessna
182 for a long time.
Mr. Rokita. Right. There we go. So general aviation for
sure.
Mr. Tilden. Yes.
Mr. Rokita. I appreciate that. I also appreciate, if I
understood your testimony to questions prior to that, a lot of
the congestion and capacity issues aren't just in the air,
right? You said that is at the airport, whether it is going to
the airport, marshalling issues. You know, we have that issue a
number of times trying to get to a gate.
Mr. Tilden. Yes.
Mr. Rokita. And, in fact, don't the airlines execute their
schedule such that you have departures and arrivals generally
coming together at the same time so you can facilitate the
movement of passengers, so you don't have to pay people at
extraneous hours if you don't have to, to make things more
efficient, which I appreciate, correct?
Mr. Tilden. Yes.
Mr. Rokita. So that contributes to capacity and constraints
and some things as well.
I also understood from your testimony--and I haven't really
heard this before, I think you said it very well--look, we are
looking for fast tracking of approaches.
Mr. Tilden. Right.
Mr. Rokita. I am happy to work with you on that. I think
that is a great idea. I am going to have you put up an approach
I picked from Miami just kind of randomly. I don't know if you
can read that. I don't know if we can get it any bigger.
You have seen this if you are instrument-rated. This is a
relatively simple approach. And you can see two-thirds of the
way down to the right the profile view of that approach. And
you see this is an ILS into 26-left at Miami, and you come down
that approach and starting at about 3,000 feet, and for the
next 6, 7 miles or so it is exactly what you are talking about.
Mr. Tilden. Correct.
Mr. Rokita. But I think what you are saying is that you
would like to see that line continue on for 100, 150 miles out
or whatever, so that you can idle the engines, which would help
with sound. You can hit your numbers, hit your speeds, true up
at the end if you have to, but otherwise, boom, you are in,
right?
Mr. Tilden. That is exactly right. So this is an ILS
approach. And an ILS has two radio beams. It has got a
localizer, which is the up/down--sorry, the lateral beam.
Mr. Rokita. I only got 5 minutes, so we are not going to do
a class now.
Mr. Tilden. OK. But what you want is to get rid of that and
have GPS a curved line from altitude down to the runway in.
Mr. Rokita. Sure, but not get rid of this. I don't like
that, because for some of us we use that still, because we are
not coming from 30,000 feet or 200 miles away.
Mr. Tilden. But it only extends 10 miles.
Mr. Rokita. Right. It is simple enough. I think we are on
the same point. We can get an approach for you, because we have
a GPS approach that I can put up right now that would show the
same thing. Within 2 or 3 years, we had GPS approaches plates
pop up all over the country. They got that done.
Mr. Tilden. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Rokita. I don't see why they can't get that done for
you, and I would like to work with you on that.
At the same time, I don't see why you would testify, why
you need to testify that that is the problem, that we need to
give away the national treasure that is our airspace, not even
lease or sell like we did with the Indiana toll road for $3.8
billion, but give away the national treasure that is our
airspace to facilitate that for you. I think there is just a
much simpler way.
And I would, Chairman, introduce, without opposition,
apparently, hopefully, Mr. DeFazio's poster board for the
record with unanimous consent, if I can have that. Whatever he
was testifying with, I would like that in the record.
Mr. LoBiondo. Without objection.

[The chart can be found on page 17.]

Mr. Rokita. Thank you.
Because you want to do all that Mr. DeFazio pointed out to
accomplish that line getting extended 100, 150 miles out, which
I completely agree with.
I think perhaps the bigger problem is maybe, not to put
words in your mouth, these are mine, that once you do that,
once you idle back and you set that course--and you could do
this very easily, very safely, and you are hitting your numbers
just like you say--you can't have anyone else get in your way,
right?
So if I am flying that approach coming in, not on your
timetable, but my own timetable, you can't, because it defeats
the purpose if you have to vector away, come back, idle back up
to hold an altitude, which is exactly what our ATC
professionals are there to do, to provide safety in an
environment where we all have a right to use the airspace. And
you, as a GA pilot, certainly in Alaska, know that we pay a gas
tax, we have a right to that airspace just like everyone else
for as much as we use of it.
Mr. Tilden. Right.
Mr. Rokita. And it works and it works very efficiently.
So at least on the approach plate aspect of this, count me
as a fan. Count me as someone who wants to get you there.
Because not only is it the sound, you are saving a lot of
money, because to run a turbine at a lower altitude is an
extremely much more amount of fuel than at a higher altitude
where they are designed to run.
Mr. Tilden. I think we calculate 100 gallons and 1 ton of
emissions per approach that is flown with this methodology.
Mr. Rokita. This is the issue. It is easily solvable. We
just did it with GPS approaches all over the country. We can
get there without destroying the ecosystem that is our national
airspace and where a lot of your future pilots for both you and
the regionals are going to come from.
I will shut up.
Mr. LoBiondo. Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This question is for Mr. Tilden, Mr. Childs, and Mr.
Leocha. And, Mr. Leocha, I would like for you to answer first,
followed by Mr. Tilden and Mr. Childs.
With respect to flight pricing data, is there a legal or
public interest requirement that requires that flight pricing
data be public information that can be displayed or published
by anybody, any entity, at any time; or, on the other hand, is
flight pricing data proprietary information protected by
intellectual property law, which enables the airline to control
which entities can display or publish their flight pricing
data?
Mr. Leocha?
Mr. Leocha. Thank you for the question.
The airlines are common carriers, and there is a lot of law
that says that pricing of common carriers is public
information. At the same time, airlines should be allowed to
operate and to sell their tickets through businesses of their
choice.
What we at Travelers United have been pushing for for years
is for the release of all of the pricing data, including
airfares and ancillary fees, so that we can then put together a
good shopping engine and IT professionals can put together
something which allows good comparison shopping.
We are not trying to take away the choice of an airline in
terms of who they would like to sell their tickets through, but
we are trying to find out how we can comparison shop and
understand what the final cost of the product is going to be.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Tilden.
Mr. Tilden. So on this subject, when we advertise a fare,
Seattle to Los Angeles, for example, we are required to include
all the Government fees and taxes in those fares as part of the
advertised price, and those fees and taxes can be 20 or 25
percent of the ticket price. So that is done. And if we try to
sell that fare over AlaskaAir.com or through a travel agent or
whatever third-party website it might be, those fares are all
represented.
I think where the industry pulls back is people that are
saying, you are required to give us extra information on--it
might be the charge for a bag or for a fruit and cheese tray,
for any ancillary. And here is the important part of this, is
these people all have a business model where they charge the
airlines for that.
And I think what we say is that that should be a commercial
transaction. If it is in our interest to distribute through a
travel agency that uses Sabre, then we should go negotiate that
transaction with the travel agency that uses Sabre and provide
the information.
But to be compelled to and then to have to pay the fee to
the global distribution service, I guess what we are saying is
we don't see the commercial value. We think that we will
actually have lower costs and lower fares for travel--and low
fares is something Alaska cares about a lot--through lower cost
and more direct distribution.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. All right. Thank you, Mr. Tilden.
Mr. Childs.
Mr. Childs. Yes, I would echo what Mr. Tilden said. We do
not, within our business model, in any way distribute any of
the sales of the tickets. We don't do any advertising, we don't
do any of that. We just make contracts with the major carriers
that fly from point A to point B. So for us, it would be not
necessarily part of our business model or I wouldn't be able to
have anything to say about it.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. All right. Thank you.
Ms. Nelson, in your written testimony, you mentioned that
the United States lags behind other countries in equalizing
rest regulations. As you noted, the committee included a
provision requiring a 10-hour rest between flight attendants'
duty days and Fatigue Risk Management Plans in last year's FAA
reauthorization.
How would these requirements help create equality with
other countries on flight attendant rest?
Ms. Nelson. Thank you very much for the question.
What ICAO has done is set standards that say that the
flight deck and the cabin crews should have equalized rest, and
has been very prescriptive about that and was very clear about
that in 2009.
What changed is when 117 went into place, FAR 117 for the
pilots, the minimum rest moved to 10 hours' minimum rest, and
the flight attendant rest regulations got left behind, even
though we had participated in at the same time fatigue studies
commissioned by Congress that concluded that flight attendants
needed more rest in order to avoid fatigue.
So including the 10 hours' minimum rest and a Fatigue Risk
Management Plan that will help flight attendants identify when
they are tired, how to avoid being tired, and how to stay
rested longer is critical to ensure that we do not have flight
attendants who are serving as aviation's first responders
fatigued in our aviation system.
It is a critical safety issue. And I want to thank the
committee again for making this a top priority. And I also want
to note that we have a leader in the industry at the table.
Alaska Airlines actually does better than this. So there are
some carriers who have negotiated better contracts, but we need
to raise the standard across the industry, because the 8 hours
that are in place today are simply not enough to avoid fatigue.
Mr. Johnson of Georgia. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
Mr. Leocha, how would you rate the performance of the DOT
consumer protection efforts?
Mr. Leocha. DOT's consumer protection efforts, when I first
came to Washington back in 2009, were excellent. We had several
big changes in terms of increasing the compensation for lost
luggage, delayed and damaged luggage. We had increases in the
denied boarding compensation. They began with the tarmac delay
rules. And we also have the Full Fare Advertising rule that
came into effect. And on top of that, the 24-hour rule, where
if you make a mistake you can go back and you have got up to 24
hours to cancel your flight.
Over the last 4 years, the Department of Transportation has
been doing an awful lot of studies and rulemakings, and I have
filed literally hundreds of pages of comments. However, nothing
has really changed.
So at this point, we are in a situation where the system is
operating. As you heard from my testimony, I still don't feel
that consumers can adequately comparison shop and to know what
the full price of the product that they are buying is. There is
no way today for anybody to say, ``I am traveling with my wife
and two kids, we are going to carry on four bags and check two
bags, and we are going from New York City to L.A.'' You cannot
get the total price, including checked bags, assigned seats,
and airfares. It doesn't exist. And that is something which we
need to get around to, and eventually we will, because it will
help everybody.
Competition is what makes these systems work. And without
competition, without having the pricing and the data available
to everyone, the system just won't change.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you.
For Mr. Tilden and Mr. Childs, Mr. Westerman touched on
this, and it may be purely economics, but I represent Atlantic
City Airport. We have a 10,000-foot runway. We were backup for
the shuttle when it was in operation. We have a new, very
modern terminal. We are in fairly close proximity to
Philadelphia, which is bursting at the seams with trying to
figure out how to expand.
And maybe it is just economics, but the South Jersey
Transportation Authority and actually the New York Port
Authority, which is now the operator for the airport, we are
just searching for, like, the same thing Mr. Westerman was
searching. Do you have any advice for an airport like ours of
how to attract additional?
Mr. Tilden. What we have seen on the west coast, what Mr.
Childs said, I think airports have had outreach efforts. They
come talk to airlines like Alaska. And I think when they work
with the airline and they commit that an airline brings in
service, we are going to try to get people on the flight, we
have done that in many cases, and often it works. Often the
community says, bring new air service to us. We bring the new
air service. They get people out, support the air service, and
it works. So that is a bit of advice I would have.
The other thing I would just add is the system is
fantastic. I mean, it works really, really well. But a lot of
the things we have been talking about today, it just costs
money to fly an airplane well and safely and pay people the way
you want to pay them and so forth.
So what you have seen--and Chip has been speaking to this--
is that the smallest airplane size you see has gone from 9
seats to 19 seats to 28 seats to now really the smallest
airplane you see much of at all is about a 50-seater. And I
don't know what to do about that. I don't have any bright, any
great--it just may be that to fly the way we want to fly and
need to fly, that is about the size that you are going to see
sort of commonly used.
To the other Congressman's question, in certain markets
where they are really remote, maybe essential air service with
some help from the Government is how you prop up service in
some of those locations.
Mr. LoBiondo. Anything different, Mr. Childs?
Mr. Childs. Yeah, I may sound like a broken record a little
bit here today, but the reality is, if there are not enough
pilots and the statistics that I read earlier are real, if you
are trying to get new service the way you are talking about, it
is very, very difficult unless we solve this pilot solution
through the means in which we have talked about, because that
enables you to have a conversation.
We talk about communities losing service. We talk about
communities getting service. A lot of this has to be solved by
this pilot situation that we need help with.
Mr. LoBiondo. OK.
Ms. Nelson, you were very articulate about the rest hour,
and at least some of us hope that becomes a reality. But in
addition to that, is there anything that we should be looking
at that would be on a top priority list for you that we have
not asked about that you think should be included or we should
be looking at?
Ms. Nelson. Thank you very much, Chairman LoBiondo.
Our top priority is the 10 hours with the Fatigue Risk
Management Plan. We also appreciate the work of this committee
and would continue to support some of the items that were in
last year's bill, which include a review of the evacuation
standards, no knives on planes, and I am trying to look for the
list of the rest.
But we would really implore this committee to continue with
the 10 hours in the Fatigue Risk Management Program and to take
very seriously your job with the oversight of the industry in
enforcing these trade agreements, enforcing these Open Skies
agreements, and addressing the issue of the flag-of-convenience
model in aviation. We believe that that is the top concern for
our members and we hope that that will be addressed this year.
Mr. LoBiondo. Very well.
Mr. DeFazio, do you have anything else.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hete, the Trump administration has recently put a hold
on an FAA rule to harmonize the United States with the ICAO
lithium battery transport requirements. ICAO determined that
the risk is such that there should be no commercial transport
of lithium batteries on passenger aircraft whatsoever. And then
secondly, they imposed requirements upon packaging and charge
and other things for freight transport. Do you support the ICAO
rules?
Mr. Hete. Yes, we do. Harmonization is key to us.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. Right. So I am hopeful that the Trump
administration will withdraw their delay in that rule. I mean,
what this said is: Well, we know we will have voluntary
compliance.
I am always concerned with voluntary compliance because
there is always some low-budget person out there saying: To
heck with that, I will take your stuff.
So you think if we set this floor we are going to be much
better off because everybody has to follow the same rules.
Mr. Hete. That is correct.
Mr. DeFazio. OK.
And then to Mr. Tilden or Mr. Childs, I would assume you
support the ICAO position that the commercial transport at this
point in time is too hazardous and would not want to see that,
again, someone is transporting commercially on passenger
aircraft.
Mr. Tilden. Yes.
Mr. DeFazio. OK.
Mr. Childs.
Mr. Childs. Yes.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. Good. Well, hopefully we can get that
straightened out with the administration. So--well, OK.
I had asked the question of Ms. Nelson. Your testimony was
great. And, I mean, one thing that came to my mind was, is if
we are contracting for pilots around the world, what standards
would they have been trained under and what number of hours
would they have. And then of course there is the additional
problem of the Malaysian flight that we still haven't found. So
I am not anxious to be having Malaysian pilots in the near
future.
And I have found, the staff found that ICAO says 200 hours
of flight time, or 150 if completed during training, is the
pilot standard. So when we start looking at this contract
model, it is likely that your people are going to be flying
overseas in complicated, large aircraft with someone who has
got 201 hours of time. That is great.
I do note in India, in fact, there were people who got
certificated who had never, ever even flown a simulator, let
alone a plane. It was a bit of a scandal, and they got their
certificates pulled, but it did happen.
So I just want to thank you for raising those issues. And I
don't think we should be asking U.S. airlines to compete with
countries that only require 200 hours to meet the minimum ICAO
standard. I would have a tremendous concern about that.
Would you, Mr. Leocha, have a concern in terms of consumer
protection of having people fly on planes with pilots with that
little experience?
Mr. Leocha. The international airline system as it is
running right now is probably the safest that it has ever been
in history, and if we keep doing what we are doing and we have
basically no fatal crashes for a long time, I think that we are
on the right track.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. That was a little equivocal. I would say
we still haven't found that Malaysian flight, so I have
concerns about chasing the cheapest labor around the world. I
have spent a lot of time on cruise line issues and domestic
maritime issues, and nobody wins in a race to the bottom, which
is where we have taken things, particularly with flags of
convenience.
There was a great ``60 Minutes'' piece about 15 years ago
on flags of convenience and what it means for passengers: rape,
murder, whatever. You would go to the Liberian courts if you
were on the high seas. A ship gets hijacked, call the Liberian
Navy. I do not want to see something like that happening to the
airline industry, and this model will take us in that
direction.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the time, and
yield back.
Mr. LoBiondo. Thank you, Mr. DeFazio.
I would like to thank our panelists here today. I think
this was very productive.
I would like to remind everybody we are looking for your
ideas,
[email protected]
.
And this hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
