- THE INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE'S RECORD RETENTION POLICIES: IMPROVING COMPLIANCE

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE'S RECORD RETENTION POLICIES: IMPROVING
COMPLIANCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 25, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-OS06

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

33-614                    WASHINGTON : 2019

COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS

KEVIN BRADY, Texas, Chairman

SAM JOHNSON, Texas                   RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
DEVIN NUNES, California              SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
PATRICK J. TIBERI, Ohio              JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
DAVID G. REICHERT, Washington        LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
PETER J. ROSKAM, Illinois            MIKE THOMPSON, California
VERN BUCHANAN, Florida               JOHN B. LARSON, Connecticut
ADRIAN SMITH, Nebraska               EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
LYNN JENKINS, Kansas                 RON KIND, Wisconsin
ERIK PAULSEN, Minnesota              BILL PASCRELL, JR., New Jersey
KENNY MARCHANT, Texas                JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
DIANE BLACK, Tennessee               DANNY DAVIS, Illinois
TOM REED, New York                   LINDA SANCHEZ, California
MIKE KELLY, Pennsylvania             BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
JIM RENACCI, Ohio                    TERRI SEWELL, Alabama
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania             SUZAN DELBENE, Washington
KRISTI NOEM, South Dakota            JUDY CHU, California
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina
JASON SMITH, Missouri
TOM RICE, South Carolina
DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan

David Stewart, Staff Director

Brandon Casey, Minority Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

VERN BUCHANAN, Florida, Chairman

DAVID SCHWEIKERT, Arizona            JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             JOSEPH CROWLEY, New York
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida              SUZAN DELBENE, Washington
MIKE BISHOP, Michigan                EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
PAT MEEHAN, Pennsylvania
GEORGE HOLDING, North Carolina

C O N T E N T S

__________

Page

Advisory of July 25, 2017 announcing the hearing.................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Gregory Kutz, Assistant Inspector General for Audit,
Management Services and Exempt Organizations, TIGTA............     5
Mr. Jeffrey Tribiano, Deputy Commissioner for Operations Support,
IRS............................................................    17
Mr. Edward Killen, Director of Privacy, Governmental Liaison, and
Disclosure, IRS................................................    17

THE INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE'S RECORD RETENTION POLICIES: IMPROVING
COMPLIANCE

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 25, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means,
Subcommittee on Oversight,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m. in
Room 1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Vern Buchanan
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[The Advisory announcing the hearing follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BUCHANAN. The Subcommittee will come to order.
Welcome to the Ways and Means Oversight Subcommittee hearing on
the IRS Record Retention Policies: Improving compliance. Last
year the IRS processed 244 million tax returns. Among them are
individuals, small businesses like my own, who must retain
their tax records in case the IRS ever wants to review them.
The IRS must also identify and retain records for defined
lengths of time in accordance with the Federal requirements.
These records may later be needed to respond to requests from
Congress, private citizens, or those bringing suit against the
IRS. All of these parties have a right to ask the IRS to
produce complete records, and the IRS has a responsibility to
provide those records.
However, TIGTA found that IRS policies do not comply
totally with all the Federal requirements, which ensure that
all records are readily retrievable and usable. Specifically,
the production of IRS emails currently relies on the IRS's
ability to search thousands of employee hard drives; or,
alternatively, each employee's ability and willingness to print
and file important emails. Neither system is sustainable nor
reliable enough to satisfy the voluminous records requests
received by the IRS.
The IRS has also changed its record retention policy three
times since 2013, creating confusion across the agency.
Additionally, the IRS has failed to setup a basic email system
capable of automatically archiving employee emails.
These issues ultimately reduce transparency, open the
agency to exposure to civil lawsuits, and inhibit Congressional
oversight of the IRS. They also create a double standard
whereby the IRS is not required to maintain basic records in
the same way that the average American citizen must.
No individual or small business could do the same and not
be subject to punitive actions by the IRS. Furthermore, this
issue has been raised repeatedly by Congress to the IRS for
years without a permanent solution.
So here we are today to discuss TIGTA's most recent
findings and the IRS's progress in addressing these concerns. I
believe Members on both sides of the aisle want to ensure IRS
has the authority and the resources it needs to administer the
Code. However, in return we need to see stronger efforts by the
IRS to ensure that records are properly retained and easily
retrievable. We would also like to see the IRS work to improve
how it procures and implements its IT system.
To that end, I look forward to hearing from the witnesses
today, and now I yield to the distinguished Ranking Member, Mr.
Lewis, for the purposes of an opening statement.
Mr. LEWIS. Good morning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for holding this hearing. I also would like to thank our
witnesses for being here today.
As the broader Ways and Means Committee discusses tax
reform, our Subcommittee will play a very important role in
improving the Internal Revenue Service.
Today's hearing will examine IRS policies to store,
archive, and produce records, including electronic mail. We
will also review the IRS's ability to respond to legal, Freedom
of Information Act or third party requests, including those
from Members of Congress.
In 2015, the agency received over 10,000 FOIA requests and
closed over 99 percent within an average of 23 business days.
The few requests that took longer than 20 business days
generally involved privacy or other legal issues that prevented
a timely response.
We all agree that Federal agencies must process and reply
to any request for relevant electronic and other records in a
timely manner. For any agency, including the IRS, information
technology is key to meeting this standard. This is one of the
many reasons that Congress must ensure that the agency's IT
systems are not only fully funded but also fully staffed.
Since 2010, Congress cut this agency's budget by almost $1
billion. That is a lot of money. That is a big cut. In the last
5 years the agency's IT budget was cut by $71 million, and the
IRS lost nearly 290 IT employees. Many of you heard me say it
many times and on different occasions that you cannot get blood
from a turnip.
Early this month, the Treasury Inspector General for Tax
Administration released a report on the IRS's electronic
records retention policy and IT systems. The TIGTA report made
five recommendations, and the IRS agreed with every single
recommendation and suggestion. As we move forward, we must
remember these lessons learned, and we must be mindful of the
IRS IT system needs.
Mr. Chairman, together we will begin a good, inclusive
process, and I hope that we can continue our strong bipartisan
work to improve the IRS. Again, I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
holding this hearing, and I look forward to the testimony of
our witnesses.
And I yield back.
Chairman BUCHANAN. Without objection, other Members'
opening statements will be made part of the record.
Today's witness panel includes three experts, Gregory Kutz,
Assistant Inspector General for Audit for Management Services
and Exempt Organizations at TIGTA; Jeffrey Tribiano, Deputy
Commissioner for Operations Support at the IRS; and Edward
Killen, Director of Privacy, Government Liaison, and Disclosure
at the IRS.
The Subcommittees have received your written statements,
and they will all be made part of the formal hearing record.
You have five minutes to deliver your remarks. We will begin
with you Mr. Kutz. You can begin when you are ready.

STATEMENT OF GREGORY KUTZ, ASSISTANT INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR
AUDIT, MANAGEMENT SERVICES AND EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS, TIGTA

Mr. KUTZ. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Lewis, and members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss
electronic records management.
Today's testimony highlights the results of our recently
issued report on this matter. My testimony has two parts. First
I will discuss our findings, and second, I will discuss our
recommendations.
First, the IRS is required by Federal law to retain and
produce records when requested through appropriate means.
However, the IRS has had challenges responding to several high-
profile requests from the Congress, the public, and the courts.
The loss or destruction of information resulting from this as a
result of inadequate systems and processes along with human
error.
Some key findings from our report include the current email
system does not meet Federal requirements for storing and
managing email messages. We reported last year that the IRS's
previous attempt to implement a new email system was
unsuccessful at a cost of at least $12 million. Electronics
records storage policies have changed repeatedly since May of
2013. The policy has changed from wipe and reuse information
technology, to save everything, to wipe and reuse equipment for
all but two parts of the IRS, to the current policy of refrain
from wiping the data from any hard drive. It is not surprising
that this has resulted in some confusion.
Storage of tens of thousands of laptops and hard drives at
dozens of locations across the country is not a sustainable
recordkeeping solution. And the interim policy for IRS
executives to archive their emails was not implemented
effectively.
Although many challenges remain, progress was made in
several areas during our audit. For example, IRS has developed
a new policy prohibiting the use of instant messaging for
official business, and requiring any instant messages that are
a Federal record to be retained. And improved policy for
preserving records for separated employees. In addition, the
IRS' most recent attempt to implement a new email system is
planned to be completed by the end of this fiscal year. We also
found that IRS closed over 70 percent of Freedom of Information
Act requests within 20 business days as required.
Moving on to my second point, as you mentioned, we made
five recommendations to the IRS to enhance its electronic
records management. These recommendations include:
implementation of enterprise email solutions that enable the
IRS to effectively organize and retain emails; develop an
accurate list of executives and ensure that their emails are
archived; enhance processes related to retention of records for
separated employees; and, ensure that FOIA policy is followed
by all employees responding to requests.
As Ranking Member Lewis mentioned, the IRS agreed with all
five of our recommendations and is taking action. TIGTA will
continue to monitor the progress of the IRS in enhancing its
electronic records management.
In conclusion, given that the IRS expects taxpayers to
retain records for years in support of their tax returns, IRS's
ability to do the same is essential to maintaining public
trust.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Lewis, that ends my
statement, and I look forward to all of your questions.
[[The prepared statement of Mr. Kutz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BUCHANAN. Thank you.
Mr. Tribiano, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY TRIBIANO, DEPUTY COMMISSIONER FOR
OPERATIONS SUPPORT, IRS; ACCOMPANIED BY EDWARD KILLEN, DIRECTOR
OF PRIVACY, GOVERNMENTAL LIAISON, AND DISCLOSURE, IRS

Mr. TRIBIANO. Good morning, Chairman Buchanan, Ranking
Member Lewis, and members of the Subcommittee. My name is Jeff
Tribiano, and I am the Deputy Commissioner for Operations
Support at the IRS. I appreciate this opportunity to testify
today.
In my position at the IRS I oversee internal operations,
which includes information technology, human capital, finance,
and privacy, Procurement, Planning, facilities, security,
enterprise risk, and the office of equity, diversity and
inclusion.
Joining me today from the IRS at the witness table is Mr.
Edward Killen, the IRS Chief Privacy Officer.
Over the years the IRS has worked closely with the National
Archives and Records Administration, NARA, to improve our
processes and protocols in regard to retention of Federal
records to make sure they are appropriate and work properly.
We recently have made several significant investments in
and important progress on a number of fronts to improve our
records management practices for email and to update our
existing records management policies, procedures, and
practices. Our work continues in this area.
In particular, we are well on our way to completing the
implementation of an enterprise-wide solution for the
preservation of electronic records of the agency. This will
bring us into compliance with the Office of Management and
Budget directive requiring all Federal agencies to have email
in an electronically accessible format.
More broadly, we are also taking a number of other actions
to improve records management. These include the following:
We have updated policy and procedure guidance on electronic
messaging usage and preservation. This includes guidance on the
preservations of instant messages.
We have enhanced our clearance procedures for employees who
leave the IRS, so we can identify and preserve Federal records
on separating employees before the employee departs.
We are in the process of upgrading our e-Discovery
capability to a modern, cloud-based set of tools. This will
allow more quickly and efficiently for us to meet our discovery
obligations in relation to litigation or governmental
investigations.
In the area of training, we recently released the first
annual Records Mandatory Briefing for all IRS employees and
managers. This course is designed to heighten an understanding
of records retention responsibilities.
And regarding the Freedom of Information Act, we are
upgrading the software used for the day-to-day management of
FOIA operations. Although the IRS already responds to more than
75 percent of FOIA requests within 20 days, this new system
will facilitate automation and improve our effectiveness and
efficiency in this area.
Taken together, we believe these efforts to improve
electronic records management are an important step forward.
They are not only bringing the IRS into compliance with NARA
standards and the OMB records management directive, but will
also greatly enhance our ability to timely respond to Congress,
the courts, and FOIA requests.
We also appreciate the Treasury Inspector General for Tax
Administration's recent review on our records retention
policies and procedures. We agree with all five recommendations
in the report, and we believe they are helpful in our efforts
to improve in this area. We have already made significant
progress toward completing action on the recommendations and
have implemented two of them. We are on track to complete all
of them by the end of this year.
That concludes my opening statement, and I am happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Messrs. Tribiano and Killen
follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman BUCHANAN. Thank you, and thank you for your
excellent testimony. We will now proceed to the question and
answer session. And in keeping with my past precedent, I'd like
to hold my questions until the end.
I now recognize the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Schweikert.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a handful
of things here, and I want to first wrap my head around a
couple of things I was seeing in the notes here.
Was there an attempt at an enterprise solution that, shall
we say, failed?
Mr. TRIBIANO. Yes, sir.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Why did it fail?
Mr. TRIBIANO. Back in 2015 we identified and procured a
hybrid cloud-based solution to implement the NARA requirements.
There was a procurement protest on the procurement that we
issued. GAO upheld the procurement protest so all work on the
program had to stop. We had to go to our plan B, which was an
on-premise based solution for the implementation, and that
caused a delay in the project.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Okay. So you were doing an enterprise
cloud-based automated capture backup system?
Mr. TRIBIANO. We were.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. That is what had won, and then there was a
procurement protest that stopped you from adoption?
Mr. TRIBIANO. There was a procurement protest, yes, sir,
and GAO upheld the protest, which means we all----
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. So you didn't rebid it?
Mr. TRIBIANO. We went out to a different solution and rebid
the second solution, yes, sir.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. And the second solution was in-house
retention.
Mr. TRIBIANO. It was an on-premise solution.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. And now you are doing----
Mr. TRIBIANO. An on-premise solution.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. On-premise solution that will be fully
automated--I mean, I am seeing a number in here of what was it
33,000 hard drives if I were to count everything that is
floating around out there, it is going to be able to
automatically back up and capture.
Mr. TRIBIANO. All of our electronic emails will be backed
up and captured on the on-premise solution, yes, sir.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. And direct messaging systems?
Mr. TRIBIANO. The instant messaging system, yes, sir. But
there is a piece of that. I mean, instant messaging according
to our policy, and Ed, Mr. Killen can explain this in more
detail, but it is not supposed to be used for a formalized
record. If it is, then that has to be copied into the system
and stored.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. But if it is used someone has to make that
decision to save it?
Mr. KILLEN. Yes, Congressman, that is correct.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. So you and I are working on something, and
we decide we are going to use the direct messaging system. Is
that how you refer to your system instead of instant?
Mr. KILLEN. Instant yes.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. I have to actually as the employee make a
decision, oh, I need to hit the button for this one to be
retained?
Mr. KILLEN. That is correct. We refer to that as our office
communicator system, and the employee would have to if a record
is created, and we have been very clear in IRS about
disseminating this guidance, but if a record is created the
employee does have the affirmative obligation to save that
record.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Wouldn't it be more elegant just to do a
constant capture model?
Mr. KILLEN. I think part of the context around instant
messaging is that we found that it is a tool that is effective
for collaborative dialogue, as our employees are working
various issues. So I think part of the challenge is that most
of the information associated with those instant messages would
really essentially be transitory. They would not be
authoritative records.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. So you are basically asking an employee to
say this is appropriate for retention, this isn't. I see a
human factor that creates a level of fragility. And, look, I
know we all have certain concerns of privacy and those things,
but it is still a government document even if it is transitory.
I am just surprised you haven't designed an automatic capture,
which is, you know, in today's price of storage, just capture
everything and just, you know, build search tools that are more
robust that may be easier in your life, but this is your area
of expertise.
I have been asked just because--and I only know a tiny bit
of it, so you are going to have to educate me here. Talk to me
about the Security Summit with some of our, shall we say, folks
in the private sector and what we are learning from their
technology and what we can learn to adopt?
Mr. KILLEN. I appreciate that question. The security summit
has been a great success story within IRS. As you know, one of
our challenges has been addressing identity theft and working
to protect taxpayers from that crime. And so, a couple of years
ago the IRS commissioner decided that this would really be an
opportunity for a public-private sector partnership to work
together with the State Departments of Revenue and also with
the private sector tax return preparer community in order to
defend ourselves holistically against this threat, and we
really refer to it as ``the tax ecosystem.''
And one of the things that we have found certainly is that
where there are weaknesses in any one of those links on the
chain it actually impacts others. So we decided that it would
be great if we could all work together to try to share lead
information, threat detection sort of information in an effort
to protect taxpayers.
Over the past couple years this has been tremendously
successful. We have to remain vigilant, but I am pleased to
report that the commissioner will be announcing later on today
that over the past 2 years we have seen a reduction in our
identity theft inventory of over 60 percent, and I think that
is in large part attributable to those efforts along with
others, as well.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Mr. Chairman, if there is a second round I
would love to do some more exploring of this. Thank you for
your patience.
Chairman BUCHANAN. I now recognize the Ranking Member from
Georgia, Mr. Lewis.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Deputy
Commissioner, has the IRS received additional funding to
implement the five recommendations? Did you get more money?
Mr. TRIBIANO. No, sir. The last increase that we had in
this area to be able to implement was--and we are really
appreciative for--is the $290 million that Congress
appropriated specifically for identity theft, cyber security
and customer service at our call centers.
Mr. LEWIS. How have IRS budget reductions in IT impacted
your operation? What more could you have done or accomplished
with more money?
Mr. TRIBIANO. Well, I appreciate that question. Our
infrastructure in the IRS is very unique. It is large. It is
complex. If you step back and look at all the stuff that
happens within that infrastructure, we process over 200 million
electronic returns a year within the IRS infrastructure. We
have two data centers that operate on a 24-hour, 7-day-a-week
basis.
We have over 187 million taxpayer accounts on the system.
We collect and process all the records for $3 trillion in tax
revenue. We process and release about $400 billion a year in
refunds through this system.
If you look at it from all the things that we support, we
have one of the world's largest audit and collection firms that
we have to support with 14,000 revenue agents and revenue
officers. We have one of the largest law firms that have unique
requirements within the IRS that we have to support from an IT
perspective. We also have and operate a large call center that
handles about 64 million calls a year. That comes out of our
IT.
We also have a large criminal investigation force that has
unique IT requirements that we have to support. We have also
processed, received, and digitalized over 80 million paper
records that come in with tax returns and correspondence within
the IT infrastructure. So all of that, all of that work, is
what we protect every year for filing season, and when we have
reduced funds we have to then reallocate resources to the areas
within that system that we believe need it just to maintain
filing season.
And what that does is it causes us to shift funds out of
development projects that we are working on or other areas
within the system itself to be able to fund the filing season
systems.
And what I would really like to do at some point is bring
up my CIO and maybe meet with the staffs or any Members of the
Committee and go through the complexities of the IT system.
Now, I will give you a few statistics on why it is
important. We have over 400 tailored applications in support of
our lines of business. We have over 2,000 individual COTS
products working across work station servers and mainframes. We
have over 14,000 physical and virtual servers that run the IRS.
We have over 7,700 databases that support the servers in the
mainframe environment, and we support over 82,000 desktops and
laptops throughout the agency.
So any time that we have to shift funds because we have a
lack of them to true up our filing season systems it makes the
other systems more vulnerable for down time, for longer times
of repair. We have to shift technical experts around. We have a
gapping in some of our technical expertise within it.
So we have to shift physical resources to the systems for
filing season, which takes them off-line for development and
production of new systems or upgrades. So it has an impact on
our ability to operate.
Mr. LEWIS. Mr. Assistant Inspector General, what is your
reaction to what has just been stated? I don't understand how
you can continue to function, the agency has been cut by more
than $1 billion in the past few years.
Mr. KUTZ. Certainly in the information technology area they
have had turnover, they have had a reduction in staff, and they
are thin in a lot of areas with expertise, and there are a
large number of people, 40 percent of the people, can retire by
2019, so they do have a human capital challenge within
information technology.
The topic of today's hearing I think is a combination of
systems, processes, and training of people involved in this. So
money is one factor, but so is management processes and in
human beings that are trained, and there are internal controls
in place to follow up to make sure that in this case records
are retained and preserved in the way they are supposed to.
Mr. LEWIS. Thank you very much. Thank you for being here.
Thank you for your testimony. I yield back.
Chairman BUCHANAN. Mrs. Walorski you are recognized.
Mrs. WALORSKI. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to our
witnesses for being here, as well. The General Services
Administration offers something called Blanket Purchase
Agreements or BPAs, that cover a wide range of supplies and
services but are generally designed to streamline the
procurement process by functioning as sort of a charge account
with trusted suppliers.
One such service covered under a BPA is what is called
cloud-based email as a service, which we touched on a second
ago, solutions. It is basically a fancy term for things like
email calendar contacts, collaboration services, such as
instant messenger, and to aid in record retention requirements,
archiving, and searchability.
This particular BPA allows an agency to pick from a range
of services from 14 different companies. To make it even
easier, the GSA even breaks down the services into this handy
grid to make it easy to see what is being offered and by whom,
correct?
Mr. TRIBIANO. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. WALORSKI. Okay. However, the TIGTA report on the IRS's
failed acquisition of an enterprise email system showed that
despite going through the BPA process, the IRS purchased items
that weren't on the BPA. They purchased something with a
similar name as the one on the BPA list, but it was a different
product. A company successfully challenged the purchase with
the GAO, and the IRS had to abandon the contacts and start
over.
Taxpayers spent $12 million on software that was never
used. Mr. Tribiano, can you walk us through how something like
this happens, and what you are going to do to prevent it from
happening again? Because basically what it boils down to is you
pick from something not on the list, taxpayers get stuck with a
$12 million bill, and this isn't used.
So what safeguards are in place from that experience to
say, oh, my gosh, we made a mistake, we are never going to do
this again. Because in my district to all the Hoosiers in the
state of Indiana, $12 million is a lot of money, especially for
something not used sitting on a shelf. So what safeguards are
in place now that weren't before?
Mr. TRIBIANO. Yes, ma'am. At that time that that was done
it was my understanding there was an assessment done on that
blanket purchase agreement, and that the products that we were
going to purchase off the blanket purchase agreement was
allowed within the range of products that were being offered.
It was only when the protest happened, I think----
Mrs. WALORSKI. The lawsuit? When the GAO came back and
basically said you purchased something that is not on this
list?
Mr. TRIBIANO. I don't remember--or read the language that
GAO said. I know that GAO came back to us and said we are
upholding the protest that was filed by a vendor. And then when
that happened we turned to what our plan B would be, which
would be the on-premise solution, and we went out then and
contracted for that.
So the safeguards that are in place is we have a mechanism
now within our procurement office that has a policy and process
in place that has a secondary view of any schedule that we go
to on blanket purchase agreements that allows us to have that
secondary sign off.
Mrs. WALORSKI. And have they caught anything? This new
group, have they been able to catch those same kinds of
actions? Have they been like the watch guard to make sure this
doesn't happen again? Has that been successful?
Mr. TRIBIANO. I think it has been successful. I have not
seen anything or when I talk with the chief procurement officer
I haven't seen anything that would stand out as a large item
that went through or was stopped. I am being briefed that it is
a successful process, and that a process that happened like
that in the past should not happen again within the IRS.
Mrs. WALORSKI. I appreciate it. And then, Mr. Kutz, do you
believe these actions are sufficient, these safeguards, that
they will be the net that catches this kind of cross confusion,
and especially to the tune of $12 million just with one action
alone?
Mr. KUTZ. Yeah. I mean, we and GAO, concluded that the
blanket purchase agreement, the cloud solution, was outside the
scope of the blanket purchase agreement. We, and GAO, both
believe that at this time. But we will see. I mean, they are
supposed to have their new email solution done by the end of
this fiscal year and whether they are there, we are going to be
doing work to follow up on that and determine whether it is
implemented effectively.
Mrs. WALORSKI. I appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman BUCHANAN. Ms. DelBene, you are recognized.
Ms. DELBENE. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thanks to all of you
for being with us this morning.
Mr. Kutz, in your testimony you state that there are many
security measures in place for documents that are pictured in
the photographs that are attached to the end of your report,
and that the vast majority of the items in the photographs are
generated from the replacement of aged equipment.
I wondered if you could talk to us about the reasons why an
electronic storage option wasn't used? So if you are phasing
out old equipment really the question is, why not store
documents in the cloud or in some other electronic format that
could be searched and secured?
Mr. KUTZ. Well, their email solution does not automatically
archive as everyone has talked about at the beginning here. So
they have been saving, and I mentioned they were changing the
policies in my opening statement. Well, the policy that has
resulted in the old technology and hard drives and other things
being at all these locations is that they are saving it now
because there are potentially Federal records on this
information.
And so I think we have an issue here of we are all talking
about going forward. Once IRS has processes to go forward, then
we have to deal with the going backward, and they have tens of
thousands of these devices at 50 something locations across the
country that they are going to have to deal with at some point.
Some of them they may be able to find records in, the other
ones the actual hard drive may not be matched to the person.
So I think when we talk today about the solutions, there is
the going forward solution, and then Congress is going to have
to work with IRS as to what to do with the issues going
backward, all these devices being stored around the country
that potentially have Federal records that shouldn't
necessarily be destroyed.
Ms. DELBENE. And right now they would be kind of just kept
in some printed form?
Mr. KUTZ. Well, it is growing. They are still keeping more
and more items. Now with the email solution going forward, that
should help to some extent, but right now the policy is backup
tapes are being kept, hard drives are being kept, et cetera,
indefinitely.
And, again, I think if we can fix the problems going
forward, then the question is what do we do looking backward to
eventually destroy this information because it is a storage
problem.
There are large rooms filled with old equipment and hard
drives and old laptop shells that are going to be there
indefinitely until a solution is determined.
Ms. DELBENE. And old systems that people may not know how
to access well over time?
Mr. KUTZ. Well, that is a separate issue, the old
technology with respect to--they have hardware aged, and then
they also have systems that they are trying to upgrade and
modernize.
Ms. DELBENE. Okay. I also wondered if any of you could
elaborate a bit on the role that HR and IT play in retaining
electronic records. There is a lot of talk about employees
printing records out and keeping them, but how are decisions
made to ensure that important information is backed up on a
hard drive, and what are you doing to make sure it is not just
maintained on a hard drive because that is also--if there is a
crash or anything you lose all of that information, so what is
being done there?
Mr. KILLEN. Thank you for the question. One of the
opportunities that we have as we are moving forward with our
new email solution is indeed to move away from that historical
reliance on hard drives and on people saving things on their
local machines because that is not an optimal way to preserve
and archive records. You have limitations in the way you can
search and produce documents when needed.
And so I think the good news is that the process that we
are currently implementing to move to our new email system will
address a significant aspect of that challenge because the
emails, and that is predominantly in most of these sort of
instances where authoritative records would lie, the email
record will be in the server.
There are requirements around what constitutes an
appropriate electronic recordkeeping system. That will ensure
that we are actively able to search, produce records as
appropriate. As we move away--and one of the benefits of this
is that we will no longer need the utilization of the hard
drives because it has been previously a storage issue, which is
why people were----
Ms. DELBENE. You are talking about email. What about other
documents? Aren't there documents outside of email that you
also would want to make sure are backed up?
Mr. KILLEN. Yes, ma'am. That is a fair question, as well.
And so it really is a combination of tools that will move us
into a better direction. It is the policies associated with
informing people that you should not be storing Federal records
on your hard drives because there is limited access to that.
So we are moving to collaborative sites, sharepoint sites,
where records should be and can be held but we will not have
the storage limitations and so that people have a place to put
those records.
The email solution we think will address a large segment of
it because think about it from a practical standpoint, a record
is of limited utility if you are the only one who has access to
it.
Most records that are created are actually being shared or
disseminated somewhere, so we think the email solution will
help some of that. For the remaining issues that we have, we
are formulating a plan to address that to make sure that we
have no gaps when we are done with this process because we do
want to get it right.
Ms. DELBENE. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman BUCHANAN. Mr. Holding, you are recognized.
Mr. HOLDING. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Killen, how many executives are at the IRS?
Mr. TRIBIANO. We have 251 SES executives. We have around
seven senior leaders. And we still have two members that will
be expiring shortly on the streamline critical pay.
Mr. HOLDING. So these are the individuals that I guess for
lack of a term of art are the critical decision makers within
the IRS, would that be kind of how you describe executives to
the IRS?
Mr. TRIBIANO. Yes, sir.
Mr. HOLDING. And I think as we pointed out, TIGTA reported
there has been an independent verification that confirmed the
email accounts of these executives are actually configured to
auto archive emails, so that was a finding.
And, you know, you are testifying today that changes have
been made, so are you able to say today that the emails from
those number of executives are being auto archived today, and
if not, what steps are you taking to ensure that they are being
auto archived?
Mr. KILLEN. What I am able to say today, sir, is that we
are actively implementing the solution that should address
that. And when I say that we are actively implementing it, I
mean that we are currently in flight in migrating all of our
IRS employees into the new email environment where all of their
emails will be saved and archived appropriately.
Chairman BUCHANAN. Excuse me, Mr. Killen, is your mike on?
Mr. KILLEN. The light is on, yes.
So we are actively migrating to that new email environment,
and when I say, ``active,'' meaning that we have literally
moved over already tens of thousands of IRS employees into the
new environment.
We think that for the most part all of our executives have
migrated over. That is important because the root cause of the
finding where some of our executive emails were not configured
properly was a part of an interim solution that we put in place
as a stop-gap measure on the path to our permanent solution
which we are executing again.
So the important thing about that is that was a manual
process. It depended upon people to configure their email
inboxes----
Mr. HOLDING. So the new platform that you were migrating to
will not be a manual process, it will be an auto archive? You
won't be able to switch it on or switch it off?
Mr. KILLEN. Correct, sir. It will be automatic and
systemic.
Mr. HOLDING. Which one of you would be able to address the
question of what forms of predictive statistical analysis is
the IRS using to combat fraud, abuse, and so forth?
Mr. TRIBIANO. I cannot speak to that, nor can Mr. Killen.
Mr. HOLDING. Most financial institutions when they are
looking for fraud or money laundering, compromised accounts,
they use forms of predictive statistical analysis that they run
all their data through, and that is the reason why you get the
call from your bank that says did you just charge this on your
credit card? It sets off red flags, and one would assume that
the IRS uses something similar to what financial institutions
would use to find that?
Mr. KUTZ. I would say that they do. I think they have a lot
of filters in place to prevent refunds from going out
improperly. And so that would be similar, I think, to what you
are talking about where credit card companies see indicators in
the data that lead them to call you or to cancel your
transactions to prevent you from making a transaction. But they
do try to filter up front before refunds are issued looking for
fraud indicators.
So if that is what you are talking about, they have quite a
bit of that, over 100 of those types of filters.
Mr. TRIBIANO. Thank you, and if that was where that
question----
Mr. HOLDING. That is some of it, but predictive statistical
analysis is something a little bit different, as well. You
know, it is an analysis of all the data that you have.
Are you aware of any software that the IRS buys from
outside vendors that provides, you know, these services, and
can you relate as to whether it has been effective for the IRS?
Do you use it if you do buy it?
Mr. TRIBIANO. We do purchase outside software to help with
some of our analysis work, and when we talk about return
filing, we have a robust system of filters to stop anti-fraud.
We also have a team of researchers within the IRS that do
research and apply analytics and statistics that can predict
and show patterns that are happening. I just can't speak to
what they are using and how they actually do that work. It
falls underneath another group that I am just not----
Mr. HOLDING. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman BUCHANAN. Mr. Curbelo, you are recognized.
Mr. CURBELO. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for this
hearing.
This hearing focuses on an issue that I think many of our
constituents are concerned about, which is government
competence. And last week we had, I think, a similar hearing on
Medicare fraud. I get a lot of questions back home from
Floridians who wonder why if credit card companies can be so
effective at preventing fraud, why the government seems to be
more focused on chasing fraud.
Well, here we are exploring a similar issue, whether the
government can be competent, can be trusted, whether we can
help restore the trust and confidence in our government and in
our institutions.
One of the issues that the report we are discussing raises
is the inability of PGLD to compel business units to respond to
requests for records and to document their search efforts.
Mr. Killen, is that still the case today?
Mr. KILLEN. We are working aggressively to improve our
Freedom of Information Act request process. I would note that
on the whole I think we do a good job of that, and we have 80
percent timeliness in responding to the FOIA requests that we
receive.
But one of the important aspects of FOIA is that you do
rely on the custodian who has the record in order to be able to
produce those records.
So what we are doing is that we are revising our
communication mechanisms. We are revising our search
memorandums to make it very clear what the responsibility of
the custodian is in performing an adequate search for those
records. We are revising our training. We are revising our
internal quality review process to ensure that we have a
quality process to ensure the efficacy of the search.
So we are taking a variety of tools. We are making new
investments and additional tools to help us locate responsive
documents. And so, this is really an area where we have been
intensely focused because document retention and production are
intrinsically linked. You have to have both working in concert
in order to be successful. We have got certainly work to do,
and we are committed to refining that and making improvements
where needed, so we appreciate the perspective of the IG in
identifying areas that we can improve upon, and we embrace
that.
And so this is an area that we are focused on, and we feel
like on the whole we do a good job, but we certainly have
opportunities for improvement, and so we are focused on that.
Mr. CURBELO. So you are confident that at the end of this
process that you are undertaking, you will be able to
effectively compel the agency to conduct these searches and to
document them?
Mr. KILLEN. I am. I am certainly confident that at the end
of this process we will have two things. First of all, we will
be in a materially better place than we have been historically.
And secondly, I am confident that we should be able to
improve the process that we currently have, and that is what we
are focused on. And I do think that we will be in a better
place.
When you look at some of the things that really routinely
cause us challenges and complications, and Mr. Lewis spoke to
it, it really is those very complicated requests we get.
Complicated by virtue of the fact that the responsive documents
could be hundreds or thousands or tens of thousands in some
instances, of pages.
And so the additional investments in our new recordkeeping
system, in our new FOIA and e-Discovery tool, should put us in
a better place. It is an area where we will have to remain
vigilant because it is complicated and nuanced, but we are
squarely focused on making improvements because we realize that
taxpayers have a right to request information of their
government, and we are committed to being able to provide that
information.
Mr. CURBELO. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Killen.
Mr. Tribiano, in the time, what is the agency doing to
cooperate with these efforts to make sure that we can get the
desired result?
Mr. TRIBIANO. Well, two of the things that Ed mentioned
were the actual training that is happening right now and the
ability of our new e-FOIA, e-Discovery systems. So once we get
our new email electronic records system in place where we can
search emails and have the ability to search all the email
records quickly, the other piece of that is having the tools to
be able to go out from the e-Discovery perspective and from a
FOIA perspective to get through the documents to be able to
redact whatever needs to be redacted and produce the documents
to go forward.
So we are putting in place the policies that wrap around
that to make sure that the information is flowing forward and
that we are able to access all the records and get them through
the process and if it is a FOIA request, getting to whoever
requested it. If it is a legal aspect, getting them to our
attorneys to go out.
Mr. CURBELO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman BUCHANAN. Mr. Kutz, let me ask you, there are a
lot of good findings and recommendations in the report from
everything that you have presented today. What are the top one
or two steps that the IRS has yet to complete that are critical
to beginning the IRS in terms of compliance?
Mr. KUTZ. I would say the electronic, the new email system
that they are supposed to have implemented. Apparently they are
starting to roll it out now. Having that done as quickly as
possible takes some of the human element out of it.
We talked about it that IRS relies on printing paper or
saving to a hard drive or something, if you take that out of
it, you are going to have a higher level of compliance.
And I think then once we get to the point as I mentioned
earlier going forward, something has to be done about going
backward and the tens of thousands of devices across the
country and all of the storage of that and what you are going
to do to deal with that because that is a major problem, and it
is something that I think--it is costly for them to keep it
like it is now.
So some solution to that, perhaps working with Congress on
that is going to be critical.
Chairman BUCHANAN. In terms of working with Congress, do
you have any suggestions or things that we could do to be more
helpful?
Mr. KUTZ. Well, today is a great example. I think your
oversight of this on a bipartisan basis is very important and
holding IRS accountable for the dollars they get, the promises
they have made, and making sure that they follow through on the
actions that they say they are going to take.
So certainly with respect to the email system, follow up to
see that they get it done at the end of the fiscal year,
whatever their plan is.
And then we are going to do work in the future AND we will
report back to you and IRS on the actual implementation of that
email system. That is something we have planned for fiscal
2018, and we are very hopeful that they will be successful, but
we will do the trust but verify with you.
Chairman BUCHANAN. Mr. Tribiano, you touched emails
questions which have been brought up. This concept of the
future state initiative, where are you in terms of that process
as it relates to emails?
Mr. TRIBIANO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We are on schedule
to have the new email on-premise solution that backs up
electronically all the emails from all the IRS employees,
taking the human element out of it. We are scheduled to have
that completed by the end of September. We have an end of
probably another 30 days after that for some work that has to
happen in order to take the old email system off-line and have
everything over there.
But what we are going to do beyond that before our partners
at TIGTA come in and take a look at what we are doing is we are
going to have two independent verifications and validations
done.
First we are going to go out while we are in flight in the
month of October and ask MITR, a Federally funded research and
development team, to come in and take a look at where we are
and make sure we met the requirements.
And then we are going to ask NARA to come over and take a
look at it and make sure we met all the NARA requirements, so
we can be confident that everything is backed up, everything is
moved over, everything is where it is supposed to be. And then
I know our partners at TIGTA will come in after that and take a
look and offer their opinions and suggestions about anything
else we can do to improve that.
Now, that is just the future state of where we are going
with the emails. You know, one of the issues, and my colleague
brought it up, is all the hard drives that we currently have
stored, and what are we going to do with those? Well, I tell
you, the majority of those hard drives were refreshers, meaning
we purchased a new laptop.
So we copied everything off of one hard drive onto the new
hard drive, which is now with an IRS employee. But we didn't
destroy the old hard drive because we are nervous about doing
anything that is going to remove any piece of digital
information, until we are sure that we have the new solution in
place. Then we will go through a systematic process to remove
the hard drives and laptops that were just refreshers in the
process. Get our disaster recovery tapes back into the cycle of
copying over, which is what they are supposed to be doing.
Chairman BUCHANAN. Let me touch on one point. You thought
you were going to have it in place by the end of September? We
are almost in August. In two months? This is a future
initiative? It seems like a lot of work in two months.
Mr. TRIBIANO. Well, we have been working on it, sir, since
we initiated the secondary to plan B procurement for the on-
premise solution. We did that in September of last year, and we
started the implementation process and testing of it in
January. Our first migration, the first people that started
moving over started happening in March.
So we were working through it systematically to be able to
make sure that we worked out the kinks on how employees would
be moved over. We have been in flight in that process and we
have a committed team of professionals working on it. We will
have it done by the end of September of this year.
Chairman BUCHANAN. Well, great. That is nice, because I
know they talked about September--to actually hit the target
around here is pretty tough, but good for you guys. Mr.
Schweikert, do you have another question?
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was hoping just
because I have the talent here to go just a couple side
questions that I have always been somewhat curious about.
You are a taxpayer. Your records burn up, something
horrible happens, like my house right now with the monsoon
leaking through my house. So I turn to the IRS and say, hey,
could I get copies of my last seven years of records? Tell me
the process.
Mr. TRIBIANO. Sir, I am not exactly familiar with how that
would happen. There is a process that taxpayers can go through
in order to receive information and get past records. There is
information out there on how to get transcripts in other forms.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. So where I am going with this is many of us
have great interest in highly secure methodologies where I can
actually use this to be able to access everything from my
college transcripts to my IRS records to my vaccination
records, those things, and look, you are all very smart, you
have all probably been tracking, you know, the double path
systems in regards to a distributive ledger.
My understanding is even just with a number of servers you
have throughout the IRS community, you could actually build
your own node network. And then build a world where, you know,
NIST, as you may know about 10 days ago published an encryption
agreement or document saying I could carry my medical records
on this, and here are the types of encryption they would
believe would be safe and uniform and could be commonly adopted
across platforms. The ability to have a biometric and a
password.
Could you imagine a world where myself as a taxpayer, could
log in with my thumbprint, my passcode, see my quarterly
payments, see my IRS records, see my documentation, see how
they relate to all my filings, and would that also change just
even the paperwork load you have when I am getting a loan, and
I have to document because I am an independent contractor, so I
have to have the IRS document my last couple years' worth of
income?
What type of visioning is going on at the agency to
understand this world of technology that is out there that
could make all of our lives much more efficient, much more
elegant? Where are you going with it?
Mr. TRIBIANO. That is a great question, and I know you guys
have been in discussions with the IRS about the IRS future
state about where we believe the IRS should go. It is very
similar to what you described.
It is offering the ability for taxpayers to proactively
interact with the IRS digitally, if that is their choice of
medium. We still have to offer walk-in centers, call centers
and so forth for those that want to communicate in different
means, but the majority of the public in the research we did
says they want to be able to communicate and work with the IRS
digitally like they would with a bank.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. Well, you are already doing the project,
and this ties into the discussion with the Security Summit. If
I use one of the package softwares on the TurboTax, the TaxCut,
whatever it may be, I can log in and see all my filings I have
done through them going back several years, correct?
So in some ways we already know it is being done on the
private side of the ledger. It would be an interesting elegance
that from the Security Summit and then the concepts that if we
are truly almost to a national standard for encryption using a
distributive ledger, and the fact that you have servers all up
and down the chain, you could actually become one of the great
node networks and control it.
Mr. TRIBIANO. Yes, sir. Everything that you described is
always doable. The concern I would bring up from my side of the
house, not from the service and enforcement side, from my side,
is that infrastructure.
As we transition to whatever that future state looks like,
however we are going to interact with the taxpayers, however we
are going to do that work, I have to still deliver a successful
filing season. That is what we talk about with the things that
could be done to help us. It is to true up our current state of
systems and protect the current filing season as we do the
development towards that future.
Mr. SCHWEIKERT. And, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, where
this thought moves through my mind if we are truly going to
deliver a tax reform that is much more elegant and simple also
at the same time delivering a methodology where American
taxpayers have a more elegant way to use their base technology
to see their relationship, see their filing, see their history,
it is sort of a unified theory of simplicity and technology,
and with that I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman BUCHANAN. Thank you. And let me just close on one
other thought because obviously all of you have been in this
space for a long time.
Our goal is as a Committee on a bipartisan basis to try to
produce an IRS reform bill by tax filing day next year. Maybe
it is ambitious, but that is our goal. So we would like to get
your best thoughts and ideas as we move toward that.
It has been 20 years. We want to try to be helpful in terms
of the agency being more productive and effective long-term. So
that is the idea of a lot of these hearings, and we are going
to be doing more of them. Any thoughts or ideas you have on
that? I like the idea we talked about the Future State because
my mind says being in business for a long time I am very big on
planning and kind of thinking about where we need to be in the
next 10 or 20 years or five or 10 years down the road.
Okay. I would like to thank our witnesses for appearing
before us today. Please be advised Members have two weeks to
submit written questions to be answered later in writing. Those
questions and your answers will be made part of the formal
hearing record. With that the Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:57 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
