- HONORING OUR NATION'S VETERANS: EXAMINING THE VETERANS CEMETERY GRANTS PROGRAM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HONORING OUR NATION'S VETERANS:
EXAMINING THE VETERANS CEMETERY
GRANTS PROGRAM

=======================================================================

FIELD HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DISABILITY ASSISTANCE AND MEMORIAL AFFAIRS

of the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 14, 2012
FIELD HEARING HELD IN PRESTON, MINNESOTA

__________

Serial No. 112-60

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-586                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

CLIFF STEARNS, Florida               BOB FILNER, California, Ranking
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               CORRINE BROWN, Florida
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida            SILVESTRE REYES, Texas
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
BILL FLORES, Texas                   BRUCE L. BRALEY, Iowa
BILL JOHNSON, Ohio                   JERRY McNERNEY, California
JEFF DENHAM, California              JOE DONNELLY, Indiana
JON RUNYAN, New Jersey               TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               JOHN BARROW, Georgia
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          RUSS CARNAHAN, Missouri
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas
MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada
ROBERT L. TURNER, New York

Helen W. Tolar, Staff Director and Chief Counsel

______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DISABILITY ASSISTANCE AND MEMORIAL AFFAIRS

JON RUNYAN, New Jersey, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               JERRY McNERNEY, California,
ANN MARIE BUERKLE, New York          Ranking
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          JOHN BARROW, Georgia
ROBERT L. TURNER, New York           MICHAEL H. MICHAUD, Maine
TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

__________

May 14, 2012

______

Page
Honoring Our Nation's Veterans: Examining the Veterans Cemetery
Grants Program.................................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Chairman Jon Runyan..............................................     1
Prepared statement of Chairman Runyan........................    33
Hon. Timothy J. Walz, Democratic Member..........................     2

______

WITNESSES

Steve O'Connor, Past State Commander, Veterans of Foreign Wars...     5
Prepared statement of Mr. O'Connor...........................    34
Lucinda Barth, Sergeant, MN Army National Guard Operation Iraqi
Freedom and Operations Enduring Freedom........................     5
Prepared statement of Sergeant Barth.........................    34
Nathan Pike, County Veteran Service Officer Olmsted County.......     6
Prepared statement of Mr. Pike...............................    35
Chuck Amunrud, Commissioner, Fillmore County.....................    11
Prepared statement of Mr. Amunrud............................    36
Karen Brown, County Coordinator, Fillmore County.................    12
Prepared statement of Ms. Brown..............................    37
Jon Martin, Solid Waste Administrator, Fillmore County...........    14
Prepared statement of Mr. Martin.............................    38
The Honorable Jeremy Miller, Senator, Minnesota Legislature......    19
Prepared statement of Hon. Miller............................    39
David Swantek, Cemetery Director, Minnesota Department of
Veterans Affairs...............................................    20
Prepared statement of Mr. Swantek............................    39
Glenn Powers, Deputy Under Secretary for Field Programs, National
Cemetery Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs...    25
Prepared statement of Mr. Powers.............................    41

Accompanied by:

Joshua de Leon, Director of Veterans Cemetery Grants Service,
National Cemetery Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs......................................................    25

______

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

The Honorable Gregory Davids, Representative, Speaker Pro
Tempore, Minnesota Legislature.................................    44

HONORING OUR NATION'S VETERANS:
EXAMINING THE VETERANS CEMETERY
GRANTS PROGRAM

----------

MONDAY, MAY 14, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Subcommittee on Disability
Assistance and Memorial Affairs,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:00 p.m., in
the Fillmore County Courthouse Board Room, 101 Fillmore Street
West, Preston, Minnesota, Hon. Jon Runyan (Chairman of the
Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Runyan and Walz.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JON RUNYAN

Mr. Runyan. Good afternoon, everybody. Usually when we hold
these Subcommittee hearings, we're still in Washington, but
it's great to be here today. I'm happy to be here with all of
you in the Fillmore County courthouse in the district of my
colleague and good friend, Tim Walz. I'd like to personally
thank you for having me and also attending the field here back
in my district a few weeks back and everyone else for joining
us here today.
Although we are far away from the normal hearing room in
Washington, D.C. and the Hill and the great cameras of C-SPAN,
this is still an official Congressional oversight hearing of
the House Veterans' Affairs Committee, and therefore the
hearing rules and hearing conduct will apply. Therefore, I will
respectfully request that everyone be courteous to our
witnesses and remain silent until the hearing is formally
adjourned.
In chairing the Subcommittee on Disability Assistance and
Memorial Affairs, I've had the opportunity to work on many
issues that affect our Nation's veterans, whether they are in
my home district or here in Minnesota or wherever else across
the Nation.
From working on these issues, I've learned firsthand that a
veteran's final resting place is a subject of the utmost
importance, not just for those who have served our country, but
also their families and loved ones. As our veterans' population
continues to age and we wind down from two overseas conflicts,
the placement of our national and state veterans' cemeteries
becomes increasingly important.
Accordingly, we are here today to talk about the Veterans'
Cemetery Grants Program and the possibility of placing a new
veterans' cemetery right here in Fillmore County. It is my
understanding that the need for a cemetery exists and a
suitable location has already been determined. I look forward
to hearing more from the citizens of Fillmore County as well as
the VA in today's testimony.
It is my hope that by bringing all the parties together
here today, we can make progress in evaluating the Veterans'
Cemetery Grants Program and ultimately to serve the needs of
our veterans as best we can.
As I am sure many of you are aware, cemeteries established
under the grant program must conform to the standards and
guidelines pertaining to site selection, planning, and
construction as prescribed by the VA. These cemeteries must be
operated solely for the burial service of members who died on
active duty, veterans and their eligible spouses and dependent
children. Further, any cemetery assisted by a VA grant must be
maintained and operated according to the operational standards
and measures of the National Cemetery Administration.
So we are here today to examine this process, not from afar
in Washington, but right here in Fillmore County, where this
program has a chance to make a direct impact.
Currently there are approximately 45,000 veterans in
southern Minnesota who could be eligible for burial in a
veterans' cemetery. It is my understanding that the VA is aware
of this need for a veterans' cemetery in this area, and I hope
through our efforts here today we are able to accomplish this
goal of ensuring that this need is fulfilled.
Before jumping ahead to the specific steps of how to ensure
the establishment of a new veterans' cemetery, I would like to
welcome our witnesses here today who will be speaking in detail
on the need for a cemetery here in Fillmore County and the
steps that have been taken thus far.
Again, I am delighted to be with all of you here today, and
I now yield to my colleague and distinguished gentleman from
Minnesota, my good friend Tim Walz, for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Jon Runyan appears on p. 33.]

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TIM WALZ, DEMOCRATIC MEMBER

Mr. Walz. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to
all of you for being here today. I'd especially like to thank
the Chairman for his service to veterans. As I often say when
the frustration levels with government get high, I wish people
could actually watch how we do things in the Veterans' Affairs
Committee. The sole purpose of honoring that commitment that
our servicemembers have made in making sure that we, as a
nation, a grateful nation, follow through with everything from
the benefits and the health care to that dignified burial, that
says there's a grateful nation that will always remember.
So, Chairman, I welcome you out here. It was a great chance
for me to get up into New Jersey, and we oftentimes talk about
rural issues of access, but the Chairman's district goes from
Philadelphia out to the Jersey Shore. And while geographically
it was fewer miles from Philadelphia where I was at to where we
held the hearing, it actually took longer than it did for him
to drive from Minneapolis down here. And I think those are
issues that we have veterans stretched across this country, and
I'm grateful to have him come out here and what I believe is
the way it should be done--serving veterans. We have a
collaborative effort from our local elected officials who have
done heroic work and done what I think is visionary type of
collaboration building to our veterans' service officers, to
our state representatives, and now we're going to talk about
the role of the Federal Government in terms of the cemetery
grant program to make that happen. So it's these types of
hearings, I think the Chairman was exactly right coming out of
Washington and doing it out here, a way to make the connection
to how this is supposed to work.
We have an issue of how do we care and how do we bury our
veterans. How do we make sure we do it in a cost-effective
manner and make that happen, and you're proving ways to do
that. So this hearing is going to be a way to make sure we get
this project finished, get it over the line. I think there's a
lot of my colleagues who will come in and talk to me about
this. They want to learn from you, the lessons learned of how
to make this happen, and I think that's what we can learn to
take back and make a difference on things.
This is a follow-up hearing on a hearing that the Chairman
had on March 8th in the DAMA Subcommittee that was titled,
``Honoring America's Fallen Heroes'', an update on our national
cemeteries, which focused on the larger issues of the National
Cemetery Administration. This is meant for you to talk to us
about the local issues of making it happen, but we've seen that
there are some issues with making things work. And there have
been some issues of misidentification of grave markers and some
of those cross into DoD responsibility at Arlington National
Cemetery and others, but as a nation they are simply
unacceptable. And while we do many, many, many things right,
and I've said it time and time again, with our veterans it's a
zero sum game. If one veteran or spouse is not served to the
utmost diligence and the standards that we set, then we have
failed them, and we need to continue to strive for that. I want
to make sure, and I'm going to make a little bit of it here,
some of the audits and the things that were happening.
We're going to hear from our witnesses on the public
private partnership, but we're also going to hear from the VA.
We want to hear what they're doing or intending here on the
work that I did from my constituents regarding whether there
were mistakes related to grave site markers in the National
Cemetery Administration. The National Cemetery Administration
reports it made 249 mistakes out of 1.5 million grave sites,
which when you look at it, that's just about Six Sigma of
accuracy, but that's not good enough. We have to figure out how
we do that better. We deserve the best for them.
The VA in St. Paul has a workload of 91,000 cases, and it
takes them upwards of a year to process benefits for burial
claims. We had a lunch today with some of our county veterans
service officers, and one of them brought Carol, who lost her
husband last week and buried him on Saturday. There is the
potential here that she'll receive a bill from the funeral home
and wait a year for her earned veteran benefit for her husband
who died with a service-connected disability. That is simply
unacceptable, and what we have to do is piece these things all
together to make sure that, one, the veteran and their spouses
are served correctly. And two is that we're good stewards of
the taxpayer dollars.
I can tell you that I'm confident our folks at the VA and
everyone in this room's overall and number one mission is to
make sure we serve our veterans to the best of our ability, but
we need to take advantage of best practices. We need to learn
from things that didn't go right. We need to continue to lean
forward. And I think today's hearing and listening to our
witnesses we're going to hear in a minute will give us some
great ideas to go back.
I have a colleague from California who served quite a few
terms in the State Assembly in California, now is a member of
Congress, has told me he's been working for quite some time to
figure out how to get a state veterans' cemetery near where he
thinks it needs to be in his district. And so I hope I learn
some things from you. I hope we bring back some fixes for folks
and once again do our job of providing for veterans.
So with that, I'm going to yield back to my good friend,
the Chairman of the Committee, and look forward to your
testimony.
Mr. Runyan. I thank the gentleman, and I just want to be
conscious of everybody's time, and we are in a little bit of a
tight time frame here so we're going to try to keep the
questions timely and effective. I know we had somewhat of a
problem with some people in----
Mr. Walz. He was referring to me specifically, I think.
Mr. Runyan. No, but I just know everybody is on a time
schedule so we'll get started.
Today we're joined by a long list of people, and I'm going
to run through the list of everyone testifying, and then we'll
start the testimony in one minute. But today we are joined by
Steve O'Connor, the Past State Commander of the Veterans of
Foreign Wars. We're also joined by Lucy Barth, a veteran of
Operation Iraqi Freedom; Nathan Pike, County Service Officer
from Olmsted County; Chuck Amunrud, the Fillmore County
Commissioner; Karen Brown, Fillmore County Coordinator; Jon
Martin, Fillmore County Solid Waste Administrator; The
Honorable Jeremy Miller, Minnesota State Senator; David
Swantek, the Cemetery Director for the Minnesota Department of
Veterans Affairs; and Glenn Powers, Deputy Under Secretary for
Field Operations at the National Cemetery Administration, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs, who is accompanied by Joshua de
Leon, the Director of Veterans' Cemetery Grant Service at the
National Cemetery Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs.
Just to remind you, each of you will have five minutes to
summarize your testimony, but I know some of your testimonies
weren't that lengthy, as I've already read them, so I
appreciate that, any time you can spare. And with that being
said, your full and written statements will be made part of the
hearing record and, Mr. O'Connor, we will begin with you for
your oral testimony.

STATEMENTS OF STEVE O'CONNOR, PAST STATE COMMANDER, VETERANS OF
FOREIGN WARS; LUCINDA BARTH, SERGEANT, MN ARMY NATIONAL GUARD,
OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM AND OPERATION ENDURING FREEDOM; NATHAN
PIKE, COUNTY VETERAN SERVICE OFFICER, OLMSTED COUNTY

STATEMENT OF STEVE O'CONNOR

Mr. O'Connor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Congressman Walz,
for the opportunity to testify on this important issue
pertaining to our country's veterans and the veterans of
southeast Minnesota.
For the record, my name is Stephen J. O'Connor. I'm a Past
State Commander for the Veterans of Foreign Wars, Department of
Minnesota, a retired Army officer and service-connected Viet
Nam veteran.
The Veterans' Cemetery Grant Program provides an
opportunity for the Federal, state, and local governments, in
this case Fillmore County, to work together to provide area
veterans a final resting place honoring their service to their
country.
I feel certain that the construction of a state veterans'
cemetery in southeast Minnesota would not be a possibility if
it were not for the commitment and willingness of the Fillmore
County Commissioners to work with local veterans'
organizations, the state legislature, and the Minnesota
Department of Veterans Affairs and local communities to
identify and develop a suitable site. Fillmore County along
with surrounding municipalities have always stood firmly in
support of the men and women who have served this Nation. They
participate in the County Veterans' Service Officers Program,
which offers assistance to veterans reestablishing themselves
in civilian life and have donated 155 acres of county property
as a final resting place for those heroes who have answered the
last call. The local branches of government have partnered with
both veterans and private and public entities to provide for
its veterans.
As a veteran, I'm extremely pleased that there will be a
cemetery where I can be interred with my comrades. Although
there will be comrades from many different wars, from many
different eras, we all share an experience that can never be
explained to the protected and doesn't need to be explained to
the warrior. It is fitting that there should be a hallowed
place designated for our final rest.
Thank you. That ends my testimony, and I will be pleased to
answer any questions the Committee may have.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Mr. O'Connor.
[The prepared statement of Steve O'Connor appears on p.
34.]
Mr. Runyan. Ms. Barth, you're now recognized.

STATEMENT OF LUCINDA BARTH

Sergeant Barth. Thank you for this opportunity to testify
on behalf of the veterans from the surrounding area.
My name is Lucinda Barth. I'm a Sergeant with the Minnesota
National Guard and a veteran of Operation Iraqi Freedom and
Operation Enduring Freedom. I'm also a service-connected
veteran.
It's approximately 140 miles to the Veterans' Affairs
National Cemetery located at Fort Snelling in Minneapolis. The
state veterans' cemetery is located 236 miles in Little Falls,
Minnesota. These cemeteries are a great distance to travel for
a veteran that would like to be interred in a veterans'
cemetery, not to mention the inconvenience to a loved one who
would have to endure--sorry, to visit the site of their loved
one. I believe that if the Department of Veterans Affairs would
approve the grant for the cemetery here in Fillmore County,
that the surrounding veterans and their families will want
their loved ones memorialized at that cemetery.
I have traveled the world and seen many beautiful places.
None of it compares to the beauty that we have right here in
Fillmore County, especially in Preston. It's not only
beautiful, but it's serene. I believe that this is the ideal
location for a cemetery where we want our veterans and families
to feel their loved one is at peace.
I have been told on several occasions that it takes a
special kind of person to join the Armed Forces and to fight
for this country. Whether we joined during the--or were told to
join during the Viet Nam area or joined when it became all
volunteer, we still have--we are still that special kind of
person. Preston would provide a final resting place that those
veterans so honorably deserve to have.
I strongly encourage you to go back to DC and vote in favor
for Fillmore County to be the final resting place for so many
veterans in this area. They deserve to have a place that will
bring them and their families the peace that they need after
the loss of a dear loved one. I know that Preston can bring
that peace to so many families.
Thank you for this opportunity again, and I will answer any
questions you may have.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Ms. Barth.
[The prepared statement of Lucinda Barth appears on p. 34.]
Mr. Runyan. Nathan Pike, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF NATHAN PIKE

Mr. Pike. I've been here before. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
and the rest of the Committee. I'd like to thank the
Subcommittee for the opportunity to testify on behalf of over
23,000 veterans and their families in southeast Minnesota, and
that includes the following eight counties that I got that
number from, which is Fillmore, Olmsted, Mower, Dodge, Goodhue,
Wabasha, Winona, and Houston counties. This is an excellent
opportunity to testify on the important issue of gaining a
veterans' cemetery in Fillmore County.
My name is Nathan Pike, and I am a veteran of the active
Army and a retired Army National Guard noncommissioned officer
with over 21 years of service. I served two tours of duty in
support of KFOR operations in Kosovo and a tour as an embedded
trainer to the Afghan National Army in 2005. I am also a
service-connected disabled veteran.
In the spring of 2010, I applied and received the job of
Fillmore County Veterans' Service Officer. In the summer of
2011 I started that position in Olmsted County. I am a current
resident of Fillmore County residing in Spring Valley. As a
CVSO, my job is to provide local assistance--to provide
assistance to local veterans and their families through the
Department of Veterans Affairs benefits, state veteran
benefits, and anything remotely related to veteran issues and
concerns for the veterans and their families of Olmsted County,
Minnesota.
The first point I would like to address is it is my sincere
belief and that of many of our other veterans, including many
in this room, that the Department of Veterans Affairs holds the
responsibility of caring for the servicemember upon discharge
to grave, and if need be, assisting the surviving widow/widower
with benefits should they be eligible for said benefits. The VA
can easily serve the veterans of southeast Minnesota with a
veterans' cemetery specifically located in Fillmore County. The
Fillmore County Board of Commissioners has graciously
authorized the donation of land for this project. The excellent
support is evident within the veteran service organizations of
Fillmore County, which includes the Fillmore County Council of
the American Legion, the oldest legion county council in the
Nation, as well as unanimous support from the people and towns
in Fillmore County. Even southeast Minnesota's largest print
media, the Rochester Post-Bulletin, has endorsed the idea of a
veterans' cemetery in Fillmore County. Providing a veterans'
cemetery in Fillmore County has the potential of serving over
23,626 veterans and eligible family members for the benefit and
aid of burial in a veterans' cemetery. I researched that number
from the American Community Survey from 2010 and that just
includes the eight counties that I mentioned, not counties
further west. The Committee should also take into account that
even with the Iraq war winding down and being done, there will
be more veterans returning to southeast Minnesota, most notably
the return of the Minnesota Army National Guard First Brigade
of the Red Bull Division.
The second point I want to quickly address is the veterans'
cemetery is an excellent opportunity for work. It will provide
economic stimulus to Fillmore County. Whether the work is
provided through local contractors or otherwise, there will be
a need for workers to have access to local businesses in a
variety of ways. After the cemetery is completed, there will be
an added benefit of jobs providing an active cemetery and
possibly employ up to a dozen people.
Here are my final thoughts, I'll reiterate my two points,
why a veterans' cemetery in Fillmore County. The first is that
the Department of Veterans Affairs has a responsibility of
caring for veterans and their families from discharge to death.
The veterans' cemetery would be well-suited for a final resting
place for our Nation's veterans. The land is free, and there
will be economic stimulus to a rural county that is in need of
such stimulus. I can tell that while working as the Fillmore
County Veterans' Service Officer, I knew of three families that
are patiently waiting for the creation of this cemetery so they
can bury their loved ones here, and of course this is my end-
of-life plan as well as a final resting place, should this come
up.
Again, thank you for this opportunity to discuss this
important issue, the veterans' cemetery for Fillmore County,
Minnesota.
If you have any questions, I'll gladly answer them. Thank
you, Committee, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Nathan Pike appears on p. 35.]
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Mr. Pike. And all three of you,
thank you for your service to our country. We appreciate it. My
first question is for Mr. O'Connor. Obviously we're here today
telling a story and the need that we have here, but from your
opinion, can you explain what the opportunity to be buried in a
veterans' cemetery means to you and your former comrades.
Mr. O'Connor. Well, for me specifically, a little personal
matter, I was 3 years ago diagnosed with lung cancer from Agent
Orange. I'm in pretty good shape now, but if you're a betting
man, you can bet that I'm going to be gone in the next 2 years
because there's a 25 percent chance of survival at 5 years. I
made my life serving this country and serving with people, you
know, my comrades here, and there's no greater honor than to be
placed beside them. And that's something that wouldn't happen
if we don't have a cemetery in this area because my wife and
family are not going to go to Minneapolis or to Little Falls,
you know, other than just to inter me there. So for me and for
the people I know, the people that serve in our organization,
you know, it means that we can be, as I said in my testimony,
we can be with our comrades. We can be recognized for our
service. And I hope that answers your question, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you. And it does because it is truly, I
know--it's a special, unique thing that all of you volunteered
to do and serve the country. And it is truly--to have a final
resting place with your other comrades, it is an honor.
The next question is for Mr. Pike. Why do you believe the
County Board of Commissioners donated this land, besides the
fact that there was a need here? Were there other underlying
issues that needed to be addressed to honor our fallen?
Mr. Pike. To the best of my knowledge, Mr. Chairman, is
that this was done wholeheartedly just to honor veterans.
There's empty land that's just sitting there. I think they
might be collecting minimal rent for farming. And I believe one
of the Commissioners or Ms. Brown would be able to better
answer that. But I truly believe that in their heart of hearts
as Fillmore County Commissioners, that they looked for a good
idea, to say we have an opportunity to take care of our
veterans and honor them with a final resting place, and other
counties around this area did not have the land available that
Fillmore County has.
Mr. Runyan. And going back, you were talking a little bit
about the impact that it will have on the community, on the
local economy. Can you expand on that a little bit? I was
talking to a gentleman upstairs about that and he said you
would be walking down a path next to the river and looking up
on the hillside and seeing that. It is something to come and
see, to honor those who have served. Can you kind of explain
how we draw in and actually can, not only honor veterans, but
also benefit the community?
Mr. Pike. The bottom line is after the completion of the
cemetery, surrounding families would come to this area to visit
their loved ones on the important days of like Memorial Day,
Veterans' Day, Independence Day, and they would stop and either
get flowers at a local flower shop, they'd stop at a gas
station, spend some money on gas, get a Coke, go out to eat,
they would see this. They would see the other things that
Fillmore County has to offer with trout fishing or biking or
anything else. But I do truly believe that with the cemetery
here, it will draw people in. And if they have to drive a
distance, say, from Steele County or Freeborn County, which is
about an hour away, they will probably want to stop and get
something, whether it's gas or flowers and pay respects to
their loved ones that way.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you.
Mr. Pike. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Runyan. Ms. Barth, just quickly, not to press you too
hard. I know you're a little bit nervous. But just talking
about, as you mentioned in your opening statement, talking
about distance and location, what is your opinion on why this
is the perfect location for this cemetery?
Sergeant Barth. It's--I'm sorry, I'm really nervous.
Mr. Runyan. Don't worry about it.
Sergeant Barth. The cemetery would be within a reasonable
distance from their loved ones, and there's so many veterans in
this surrounding area that really need a place that they can
memorialize their loved ones. And just to refer back to--you
know, I've been around the world and I've seen, you know, I've
seen places, but Preston is--the beauty here, the river, the
trees, the green. It's just every time I come home from being--
whether it was in Iraq or Afghanistan, you become in awe of the
beauty that's around here, and it's just a very peaceful place
to live. And it's a peaceful place where the loved ones that,
you know, when they bury their loved ones, they know that are
going to be at peace. And it's a place that they can come and
visit them and be at peace themselves with the passing of their
loved one.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you for that. And with that, I'll yield
to the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr. Walz.
Mr. Walz. Sergeant Barth, well said, that was exactly
beautiful, and I appreciate that. Often with my colleagues,
they hear me talk about southern Minnesota and I can see them
roll their eyes and go, oh, Walz represents Mayberry, every
town in Mayberry, in Preston, in Fillmore County. So in every
sense of this, there is a sense of home, and I think when you
serve your Nation, that sense of home is felt here. I felt that
sense of home with Congressman Runyan's constituents in New
Jersey, and it doesn't all look like Jersey Shore, I can tell
you, on the show.
Mr. Runyan. Which I do represent.
Mr. Walz. He tells me they are all transplants from Queens.
But that sentiment is very true. I've listened to all of you,
and I can tell you, Steve, I'm not a betting man but we're not
doing that burial for quite some years to come. But I do share
that with you, as a fellow servicemember, I think there's
something to be said about this. I always tell the story of
when I went out to Walter Reed and visited one of our wounded
warriors who came back and was a Marine, Sergeant Leonard. They
introduced me, said this is Congressman Walz from the VA
Committee, he's a retired Sergeant Major. And he never missed a
beat. He said, ``Oh, I'm sorry about that.'' I'm like thinking,
oh, he's a Marine, he's going to get under my skin. I said,
``What are you sorry about?'' And he said, ``I'm sorry you took
the demotion to Congress, Sergeant Major.''
I thought it was very interesting, though, the sentiment
about that shared comradery that is hard to understand if you
haven't been there. But to watch a community, I couldn't be
prouder of this community. I think what we understood when I
talked to the Chairman and the Committee staff about coming out
here, I think we've got a model that can work in other places.
I think what the County Commissioners have done and what our
State Representatives and Senators have done in collaborating,
and I'd like to mention, I think he's in the room somewhere,
our Commissioner of Veterans' Affairs, Larry Shellito, is here
today. Is General Shellito around? There he is in the back
(indicating). The General was the Adjunct General of Minnesota
and my commander, in full disclosure, at one point.
But this is collaborating together today, and I have a
couple questions for you guys. This is an issue we always
struggle with because as a nation, Chairman Runyan and myself
and the 433 other Representatives there, we're trying to
struggle with a limited amount of resources, trying to deliver
the best quality of care, trying to make sure we prioritize, as
all government entities do, that we're prioritizing our
veterans first. One of the issues that we continue to struggle
with is this mandate of having 80,000 veterans in a 75-mile
radius. This is somewhat of a challenge for rural areas. And
while the VA has made exceptions, as we were just discussing in
eight states, to reduce that number down, other states like
Wyoming and Idaho and other places, what ends up happening is
that's why you have a state like Minnesota with a fairly equal
distribution of population, that it might not meet those
mandates. And so I guess I ask each of you, how do we--and I
want to be very clear, Nathan, the numbers you gave, we also
get to include my colleague, Mr. Braley down in Iowa, and his
constituents, and Mr. Kind over in Wisconsin, about
collectively coming together on this. Do you think we need to
look at those numbers again, this 80,000 number, or do you
think that makes sense? I'm troubled by areas that are more
rural, how we serve our population.
Mr. Pike. I believe, Congressman, they may need to be
looked at again, and they may likely lower that number to
50,000 honestly, and that might better suit areas like the
Midwest or in places less, like Wyoming and South Dakota,
Montana, and that.
Mr. Walz. I never get the feeling from my constituents that
they're not willing to make sure we lay our veterans to rest. I
think what they're unwilling to say are my tax dollars going to
something that they should go to. So I always think that we
have to consider how this goes, but it's very difficult in
hearing the stories from my colleagues on the difficulty of
getting a cemetery. It is really challenging, as our folks that
are going to testify later from the VA are going to tell you.
They are trying to deliver, but these are regulations that we
set up to make sure that we guard those dollars.
Mr. Pike. Maybe we should change the regulations,
Congressman, and let's not forget that because of the veterans
we have an operating democracy and a republic. The only reason
we're sitting here is because of those who are shouldering a
rifle in our defense right now overseas on our behalf and not
in this country. That's the biggest statement I can say is
don't forget we exist and have the freedoms and opportunities.
We have free elections because there's somebody there standing
on a wall. There's somebody standing on a line overseas
shouldering a rifle.
Mr. Walz. Would the three of you think that we can get this
thing done, collectively get this thing done, but are we
already moving on to the next one where there's a need for
more.
Mr. Pike. I believe there will be a need for more, points
west or even in northeast Minnesota.
Mr. Walz. Do you think this is the model to make that
happen.
Mr. Pike. I believe so, Mr. Congressman, yes, sir.
Mr. Walz. Okay. I will go back to the Chairman.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, gentlemen, and I thank each of you
for your testimony and thank you all for your service, and with
that, you are excused, and we'll welcome the second panel to
the table.
Mr. Walz. Thank you all.
Mr. Runyan. Our second panel consists of Chuck Amunrud, the
Fillmore County Commissioner; Karen Brown, Fillmore County
Coordinator; and Jon Martin, Fillmore County Solid Waste
Administrator. Each of you will have five minutes to summarize
your testimony, and your full written statements will be made
part of the hearing record. And, Mr. Amunrud, you are up first.
Thank you for your testimony.

STATEMENTS OF CHUCK AMUNRUD, COMMISSIONER, FILLMORE COUNTY;
KAREN BROWN, COUNTY COORDINATOR, FILLMORE COUNTY; AND JON
MARTIN, SOLID WASTE ADMINISTRATOR, FILLMORE COUNTY

STATEMENT OF CHUCK AMUNRUD

Mr. Amunrud. Thank you, Chairman Runyan, Mr. Walz. Just for
the record, my last name is a Norwegian name. It's Amunrud. My
great-grandfather took the E out and put the U in so he could
get his mail on Sunday in church.
Mr. Walz. My staffer's name is Kjeseth, which starts with a
K, and I'll never understand that, so I'm with you, Chuck.
Mr. Amunrud. I first want to say thank you to the Committee
for taking time to come to our beautiful Fillmore County. It is
indeed an honor to be invited to testify on behalf of Fillmore
County.
My name is Charles Amunrud, and I am a Fillmore County
Commissioner representing the Third District.
I am also a 60 percent disabled veteran, enlisting in the
United States Air Force from 1968 to 1972. I do get emotional
when I talk about it.
My statement will mention the local collaborative efforts
of our State Legislature, the State Department of Veterans
Affairs, the Fillmore County Board, and our local veterans'
groups, reasons for Fillmore County Board's decision to donate
land for a veterans' cemetery.
The board was approached in 2009 by our then State Senator
Sharon Erickson-Ropes, who at that time served on the State
Senate Veterans' Committee, wanting to find land that would be
suitable for a new veterans' cemetery in the southeast part of
our state. The Fillmore County Board suggested that they would
consider giving up a portion of land the county owned next to
Preston that consisted of approximately 245 acres.
In November of 2009, the then current State Commissioner of
Veterans' Affairs, Michael Puglisi, and staff visited the
Fillmore County Board to discuss the possibility that our
proposed site could be suitable and the need to do preliminary
work on the site. We discussed the need to amend then the
current state statute. The statute had set aside funding to
acquire land and design for two new cemeteries in southwest and
northeast Minnesota. We now needed the state legislature to
amend the law to include southeast Minnesota for land
acquisition and design.
During the 2010 session, State House Representative Greg
Davids, who still represents our district, and the then State
Senator Sharon Erickson-Ropes both were crucial in getting the
law changed to include southeast Minnesota.
During this time frame, the Fillmore County Board was
visited by our local veterans' groups who presented resolutions
of support urging us to gift the land needed as a way of paying
honor to our veterans from our citizens. The board agreed.
We then learned that we were not done at the state
legislature. The new law would again need to be amended to
include southeast Minnesota due to language in the original law
as part of a bonding bill. It needed another hearing.
In 2011, our new State Senator, Jeremy Miller, along with
State Representative Greg Davids, proposed legislation that
passed into law making Fillmore County a priority in funding
for design to construct a new state veterans' cemetery. Our
entire region is in support knowing that families will benefit
from having their loved ones buried closer to home. New jobs
due to construction and the ongoing operations will have a
long-term benefit to our local communities.
Finally, I want to say thank you to the Subcommittee on
Disability Assistance and Memorial Affairs, the Minnesota State
Legislature, the Minnesota Department of Veterans Affairs, to
my fellow county board members, two of which are here,
Commissioner Duane Bakke and Commissioner Tom Kaase, if you
would stand, (applause) in a very positive collaborative effort
to benefit our past, current, and future veterans, I'll be
happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Chuck Amunrud appears on p. 36.]
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Mr. Amunrud. With that, Ms. Brown,
you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF KAREN BROWN

Ms. Brown. Good afternoon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Congressman Walz. We're very honored to have you in Fillmore
County this afternoon, and we welcome you.
My name is Karen Brown, and I serve as the Fillmore County
Coordinator. Part of my position is to serve as Clerk of the
Board of County Commissioners. Since this is a special project
for the board, I've supported their efforts in working with all
parties that have contributed effort and expertise related to
this project for a successful collaboration.
The grant process, as Commissioner Amunrud stated, began in
actually 2008 when there was the legislative session that
directed us to identify any potential site for a new veterans'
cemetery in southern Minnesota. Subsequently a document
produced by Mr. David Swantek, the Cemetery Director of
Minnesota State Veterans' Cemetery of Little Falls, which
identified an underserved veteran population in southeast
Minnesota. This report was reported or was presented to the
board in 2010. The board began having conversations at that
point about a possible transfer of the county land known as the
county farm for use as a cemetery. This incredibly beautiful
proposed site features scenic bluff lands, gentle valleys, and
the Root River and would seem to be a perfect use for this
land. Including populations of veterans in Iowa and Wisconsin,
an estimated total of 40,000 veterans live within 75 miles of
this proposed site.
After conversations about where the land transfer was
considered by the board, the next step in the local process was
to assess the wishes of the people. With land values
increasing, the members of the board wanted to make sure that
there was support before any transfer decisions were made. All
veteran service groups and municipalities in the county were
contacted and asked about their opinions about the cemetery.
The result was unanimous. Fillmore County veteran organizations
and city officials whole-heartedly supported the proposal with
30 resolutions of support on file. In addition, community
support has been great. Commissioners to my knowledge have not
heard opposition to this project.
In February 2010, the consensus of the board was to begin
the process to move forward with the transfer of land. The 2011
Legislature in special session enacted legislation which
supported the proposal. Further, the legislation included
language asking for a priority designation by the Commissioner,
since the land was proposed to be donated in southeast
Minnesota. Following that legislation, collaborative
discussions have occurred with all levels of government,
countless documents have been submitted, field assessments have
been completed, and land records have been reviewed in
preparation for the cemetery site approval.
Throughout this process, all of those involved have been
very cooperative in providing support for the project. The
County Board made the land available, and municipalities
supported the donation. Minnesota Veterans' Affairs officials
have been most helpful in answering our questions and by
providing information. Our Minnesota Senators and
Representatives have passed the enabling legislation and are
aware of the state's ongoing responsibilities for a cemetery in
Fillmore County. Last but not least, Federal officials have
been essential in this partnership of governments by funding
the Veterans' Cemetery Grants Program.
The keys to an effective process seem to be the following:
Willingness for local elected officials to donate the
significant amount of land.
Willingness for local elected Minnesota Representatives and
Senators to carry and support the legislation.
Willingness of State of Minnesota agencies to work together
in a cooperative manner to come to agreement to finalize these
agreements, the transaction.
And willingness of the Federal Government to provide grant
funding to finance the construction of the cemetery.
And finally, willingness of the State of Minnesota to fund
the ongoing operation and maintenance of the cemetery.
If I might end on a personal note, I would like to add that
I've been married to a Viet Nam vet for 42 years in March. Much
has changed for the better since he came home. He was
discharged from the Navy in `69. As you know, that was not a
popular war. There were very few thank you's when those
veterans came home.
Today due to national efforts by the Veterans' Affairs and
other veterans' advocacy groups to promote support of military
personnel and veterans, all of that has changed. Veterans now
returning from their tours of duty are welcomed back as heroes,
as they should be. Now there are often welcome home events with
bands playing, veterans' groups at the airport, families and
friends waving flags, and the media capturing it all for the
evening news. That is a good thing and a tribute to the VA and
the American people to recognize a job well done.
In closing, I would like to say that I feel the national
grant process works well, and if successful, will benefit our
county for many years to come. I will take any questions. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Karen Brown appears on p. 37.]
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Ms. Brown. Mr. Martin is now
recognized.

STATEMENT OF JON MARTIN

Mr. Martin. Good afternoon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Subcommittee members for inviting me to speak to you on the
importance of the veterans' cemetery in Fillmore County and to
give you some background on the land that Fillmore County is in
the process of donating for this purpose.
Let me start by expressing my desire for this cemetery to
become a reality in the very near future. This is an asset that
is needed for the veterans in the southeast corner of Minnesota
and also the veterans in Iowa and Wisconsin. With the travel
time to either Minneapolis or Little Falls, the time it takes
to register and walk to the grave site and then pay your
respects, it takes most of the day. This process can be very
exhausting and may be a cause for loved ones to not visit as
much as they would like.
Now, some basic information on me. I started with Fillmore
County in January of 1996 as a Transfer Station Attendant and
held that job for a little over 2 years. In 1998, I was
appointed to my present position of Solid Waste Administrator/
Resource Recovery Center Manager by the Fillmore County Board
of Commissioners. One of my charges there, Mr. Amunrud, likes
to call me the gatekeeper of the county farm.
Over the course of my employment with Fillmore County, I
have been involved with the land that's called the Fillmore
County Farm. This is a piece of property that had a couple of
old farmsteads on it that were combined into one parcel. This
property was purchased by Fillmore County to build a transfer
station when the only solid waste landfill in Fillmore County
closed. Over the course of the years, a building was built to
house the Source Separated Composting Facility and the
Recycling Center. Later on, a new building was built with state
grant money to allow the composting operation to be moved under
cover and produce a better-finished product. A household
hazardous waste building was added to allow for the collection,
sorting, packaging, and shipping of hazardous waste to a
licensed shipper for proper disposal. Composting was
discontinued in the year 2000 due to a number of reasons, and
the recycling center was changed to a single-stream collection
system where recyclables are shipped out for processing and
marketing. The recycling center and the composting building
have now been repurposed for use by the Fillmore County Highway
Department for a maintenance shop and a sand and salt shed.
Fillmore County was involved in a program in the early
`90's that required the planting of trees on some of the
farmland. Fillmore County planted a mix of red and white pines
and some walnut trees. These areas have now grown into
beautiful spots to walk through and are a haven for all kinds
of wildlife.
Speaking of wildlife, Fillmore County allowed hunting on
the farm up until last year. With the cemetery moving forward
and the need for soil borings, the artifact discovery process,
wetland surveying, and the need for people to be out there
doing their jobs, Fillmore County decided to close the farm to
hunting. Many, many people used the farm for hunting. Some
drove a long way because there was not land available for them
to hunt on near home. Every fall I would have a list of 30 to
40 people that would ask to hunt there. Everyone was supposed
to ask permission to hunt and were given a list of rules to
follow. This worked out well for the most part. When Fillmore
County decided to close the farm to hunting, very few people
were upset when I told them the reason for closing was to
facilitate the process of getting a veterans' cemetery here.
In closing, I would like to reinforce to you the support
that I have received from hunters that used the farm, hikers
that enjoyed walks through it, people that use the transfer
station and recycling facility, fishermen and boaters that use
the river, and the many people and veterans that I talk to on a
daily basis that want to make this veterans' cemetery a reality
in Fillmore County.
Thank you for your time and your consideration of this
project.
[The prepared statement of Jon Martin appears on p. 38.]
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Mr. Martin. I appreciated all of
your testimony. Mr. Amunrud, thank you for your service. Ms.
Brown, tell your husband thank you for his service. And thank
you both for testifying about the collaborative efforts between
the state and the state legislature and the state VA and the
County Board. At this time, have these groups had any
interaction with the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs?
Mr. Amunrud. These groups, the State Department of Veterans
Affairs and the U.S., have had relations. They've had contact.
In fact, we've had I think this is the second visit from
Washington out to look at the site. They find it spectacular,
and they are quite excited.
Mr. Runyan. That was my next question, how that interaction
has been perceived and how it's going forward.
Mr. Amunrud. Yes, and we really, really appreciate that
because, you know, when you get collaboration from the top----
Mr. Runyan. The Federal Government.
Mr. Amunrud. The Federal Government all the way down to the
local citizen and it's all smiles, it's all great, everybody
wants to see this happen, and we've had absolutely no
dissension on any of this. It's all been very good, and I
appreciate it. In fact, the State Department of Veterans
Affairs has worked very hard internally to help us make this
happen, and I want to thank them. I know they will be up to
testify.
Mr. Runyan. And I want to go there because we're here
obviously to, as Congressman Walz said, to make this a model
and learn from this experience. We know we don't live in a
perfect world, so I think Mr. Martin made a comment about maybe
even some people disagreeing with it, but to learn these
lessons--Ms. Brown said there was no opposition to it, but
there had to be one or two people here and there, and could you
give us some examples of that.
Mr. Martin. Just some of the people that were not
necessarily from the area, but they would--they've been hunting
on the farm for years and years and years. They call up and we
have to inform them this year that we have closed the farm to
hunting. You know, right away, well, what am I going to do now?
I don't understand what happens in New Jersey, but hunting is a
pretty big deal down here in the southeastern part in
Minnesota. And when you close a piece of ground for people to
hunt on, some of them get upset. There's no doubt about it. But
when you tell them that this is why we're closing it, give them
a reason other than, well, we don't want you hunting there
anymore, somebody wounded a deer and left it lay, things like
that, you tell them it's going for a veterans' cemetery. We're
going to have people up there that are doing the wetland
surveys, doing the artifacts discovery, surveying, soil
borings, stuff like that, they understand. They say that's a
great thing. They will find someplace else to hunt. Whether
they did or not, that I couldn't say, but they were okay with
it after you explained it to them.
Mr. Runyan. There are hunters in New Jersey, by the way.
I'm actually fortunate enough to own a nice parcel of land, 23
acres, and I have a couple of people that ask to hunt on my
property all the time.
Mr. Martin. And people that don't ask.
Mr. Runyan. Very true. Therefore it must be posted all the
time. Maybe for Mr. Amunrud, you had a glowing testimony, but
again, where can the process be improved?
Mr. Amunrud. Well, Mr. Chairman, Congressman Walz, you
mentioned this number, a mandated number. It doesn't seem to
make sense for the Midwest. It just doesn't. And I could see it
possibly in more denser population areas, but when you start to
spread out, I think that's where you could make your
improvement, if you could massage that number, you know. I
don't know what that number would be, but 80,000 seems just
really out there. And that would be one thing I could say.
One of the positives, I always try to think of positives,
is that people sitting in this room today is testament to our
collaborative efforts. And I want to thank you and your
committee for taking the time to have the field hearing here
where we could meet and talk with you folks. I'm so pleased
with the State of Minnesota, the Department of Veterans
Affairs, and I'm pleased with the visits from Washington that
have been very fruitful and they were very kind, and the
community accepted and welcomed them here. And I think they
felt welcomed as well, and I hope everybody else does feel
welcome.
Improvements? I think we've done just about everything we
could, and I believe we've done a good job. And I think the
government has done a good job. It's in your rules. If you ask
me, if there's going to be an improvement, it would be
somewhere in your numbers. That's all I have, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Runyan. I appreciate it. With that, I will yield to Mr.
Walz.
Mr. Walz. Again, thank you all. I can't tell you how proud
I am to have a small piece in this. I often say I stand on the
shoulders of giants, and it's no more true than today of the
folks who have done the hard work. But I think the lesson here,
and we often talk in our Committee about this and why I think
it's so healthy, is the idea when these things are functioning
correctly with communications out there, when it is
collaborative, and when the best interests of all of our
taxpayers as well as those things that we have responsibilities
to deliver, like care of our veterans, is put on the
forefront--the things that we can achieve are unlimited. So I
can tell you this is one of the reasons we wanted to do this,
to take a look at this project, to hear this. You've inspired
others. So now we're in the southwest talking about it down in
Pipestone and other areas. So you start to see what's happening
is people want to know how we can replicate this. And I guess
maybe in your testimony you explained this, but I think and I'm
convinced that on almost anything you do, building that
consensus and collaboration locally, allowing people to have a
say on what's gone in on this is certainly the right way. Now,
obviously if this were a solid waste generator or something, we
may have a little more--or a tire burner, I wasn't going to
bring it up. But since we all know where that goes, it's truly
about the same process, about getting out there and
communicating to them.
So I guess maybe I'm hearing from you is that would be your
suggestion to other communities because you really have
inspired others. And I think you recognize--I think maybe you
do, this group does anyway, how far this has reached out to
folks not just in Minnesota, but as I said, our colleagues in
Congress want to know how we do this, how we make this happen,
and how we collaborate together. It's very encouraging for us
to hear that you're getting positive responses on things, that
people are coming out.
Now, we just this morning, as I said, were discussing the
other side of things. There may be some problems in delivering
the benefits to those people once we try and inter them in this
cemetery. Now, that's another issue we'll continue to improve
upon. But from your perspective, if these other communities
were going to try and make the case for this and they think
that the numbers are approaching where they need to be in terms
of veterans, what would your suggestions to them be? How do you
start? How do you go do this, to get a cemetery? Go ahead.
Mr. Amunrud. Congressman Walz, if I could respond, I
believe it would be essential for continuing to make an
investment, and that would include a donation as an honorary. I
really do. It's not very often----
Mr. Walz. You think this land contribution pushed this
forward? Would we have been able to get this land elsewhere,
would there have been money to buy it.
Mr. Amunrud. Not really, sir. A limited amount of money
from the state legislature was set aside.
Mr. Walz. The community leader or if we have a private
donor? That way, it would be the other way.
Mr. Amunrud. Correct. That's right. Yes.
Mr. Walz. Do you think that's true, Ms. Brown?
Ms. Brown. I definitely agree. I commend the board on their
foresight and to gather the community support to do the
transfer because land values in southeast Minnesota are quite
high. So it was not an easy decision for the board to make. But
they did, went through the process. They talked to the
veterans' group. They talked to the communities. They talked to
their constituents and had a thoughtful process to come to that
decision to make this donation, and therefore had the support
of the community and the county to do so.
Mr. Walz. Once that decision was made, you speak of the
process and, Chuck, you said it worked pretty smoothly to go
through. Is the process laid out clearly? I mean, it's a
wonderful testament to these legislators where we passed from
one legislator to Senator Miller, who continued on that legacy
and got it done. Is it laid out there how to do this, or were
you kind of writing the rules as you went along?
Ms. Brown. I think they had the political savvy to know
what was needed to be done. Their consummate connections to
their constituents and those local connections are what made it
work. They have a very open process here at the county board.
There's a lot of discussions. Our wonderful local newspapers
are very good about reporting what the proceedings are from the
county board. So there's continual information being given out
to the people in the county and the contacts were made. So it's
nothing written down. It was just a process to not move too
quickly but to gauge the support.
Mr. Walz. What's left to get this thing done? What has to
happen until we start laying those warriors to rest with the
honor they deserve?
Mr. Amunrud. Presently, Mr. Walz, Mr. Chairman, we are in a
quiet title action for a little bit of right of way in the
front from the Department of Transportation. There was some
issue with the recorded deed that we decided to take care of
during the quiet title action. And after that is finished, and
we're nearing that now, we should be done with that here in the
next couple of weeks. And then it begins the process of getting
the site design done. We were trying to get our grant in before
the June deadline. Of course we won't be able to make it until
next year, so we're past the deadline. Yeah, it's designed
and----
Mr. Walz. Why is June the deadline?
Mr. Amunrud. Perhaps later Mr. Swantek, the Little Falls
Cemetery Director, there's a grants program that has a deadline
for submitting designs and the site to be approved, and I
believe it's sometime in June your fiscal year ends. I'm not
sure. He could better answer.
Mr. Walz. I'll ask him some of the specifics, but the
process you mentioned is not too cumbersome, it's fair?
Mr. Amunrud. Oh, the process is more than fair, and they
have been right at our side. They've kept us informed, they
have asked for information, and we've provided it. And we've
asked them for information, and they were more than willing to
provide it. It's been a great process. Yes, they can answer
that part. But really now all we need do is begin digging.
Mr. Walz. If I could be the devil's advocate in this, what
if--what happens if we don't get the grant.
Mr. Amunrud. You'll have a lot of disappointed people. And
I'm not only saying Minnesota, but we're talking western
Wisconsin, northeast Iowa. They have all known--this is known.
This has been out there for 3 years, going on 4.
Mr. Walz. I think that's right.
Mr. Amunrud. And we've done everything we could possible,
our legislature again, the State Department of Veterans
Affairs, the planners from Stantec Corporation that are
involved in the planning process.
Mr. Walz. I'll ask when Senator Miller gets up here, I know
he gets these letters from constituents who are waiting and you
know these stories, that's why I said the June deadline. I
would like to think maybe we could have multiple times to get
things in so that we can continue to move. It might be an issue
that if we're getting there and all our ducks are in order, the
idea that a couple of weeks may make us wait an entire another
year, does that make sense to you?
Mr. Martin. No, it does not. There should be a variance
process or something that you can go through.
Mr. Walz. That's the reason I asked about that. We'll ask
that question coming up here.
Mr. Amunrud. I would appreciate that.
Mr. Walz. I guess back to the Chairman.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, gentlemen, and thank all of you for
your testimony. And with that, you're now excused.
Mr. Amunrud. Thank you. It's been a pleasure.
Mr. Runyan. I'd like to welcome the third panel up here.
This third panel consists of The Honorable Jeremy Miller,
Minnesota State Senator, and David Swantek, the Cemetery
Director at the Minnesota Department of Veterans Affairs. Each
of you will have five minutes to summarize your testimony and
your full written statements will be made part of the hearing
record. Senator Miller, you may begin.

STATEMENTS OF THE HON. JEREMY MILLER, SENATOR, MINNESOTA
LEGISLATURE; AND DAVID SWANTEK, CEMETERY DIRECTOR, MINNESOTA
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JEREMY MILLER

Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the
Committee. It feels a little different being on this side of
the testimony today.
I'd like to begin by thanking all of you for being here
today in Preston, Minnesota, here in Fillmore County. It's a
great honor to have you.
Over the past couple years, it has been my honor to work
closely with Representative Greg Davids, local officials from
Fillmore County, local veterans' organizations, the Minnesota
Department of Veterans Affairs, and several other officials
here in Fillmore County to designate southeastern Minnesota as
a location for a new veterans' cemetery. I'd also like to
thank, publicly thank, former State Senator Sharon Erickson-
Ropes for her work on this issue.
The many veterans in our aging population have created the
need for additional cemetery space, and the National Cemetery
Association concluded in 2008 that southern Minnesota was
outside a recommended 75-mile service area for the state's two
existing veterans' cemeteries at Fort Snelling in Minneapolis
and in Little Falls in central Minnesota.
More than 30,000 veterans live within 50 miles of this
site, and it would mean a tremendous amount to them and their
families to know that this nearby spot will be their final
resting place. I am proud to be part of honoring our veterans
in this way.
Again, I'd like to extend my most sincere thanks to the
House Committee on Veterans' Affairs for holding this public
hearing, and all those who have been involved in helping us
make the tremendous progress in this issue before us. And,
Congressman Walz, I have to say that you're absolutely right,
the local officials, the members of the Fillmore County Board
and all the staff have absolutely energized and enthused people
about this issue, and they've done the heavy lifting on this.
[The prepared statement of Jeremy Miller appears on p. 39.]
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Senator Miller. Mr. Swantek, you're
now recognized.

STATEMENT OF DAVID SWANTEK

Mr. Swantek. Chairman Runyan, Congressman Walz, for the
record my name is David Swantek. I work for the Minnesota
Department of Veterans Affairs, and I am the lead point of
contact for the establishment of three proposed new state
veterans' cemeteries in the state of Minnesota.
It is a tremendous honor to be before you today in Preston,
Minnesota for this hearing honoring our Nation's veterans,
examining the Veterans' Cemetery Grants Program.
It was 150 years ago President Abraham Lincoln promised a
war-torn nation that those that had borne the battle would be
honored and not forgotten. A system of national cemeteries was
the product of that promise. These national shrines remain
today, a daily reminder to the tremendous cost of freedom and
democracy, which we as American citizens have enjoyed since
1776.
It has been my deep privilege for the past 20 years to work
with the families of American heroes, our veterans, during the
greatest times of need. As a cemetery caretaker at the Oregon
Trail State Veterans' Cemetery in my home state of Wyoming and
for the past 16 years as the Director of the Minnesota State
Veterans' Cemetery in Little Falls, Minnesota, I have been a
direct witness on a daily basis to the profound gratitude that
veterans' families experience knowing their loved ones rest
with honor in perpetuity next to their comrades in arms. The
State of Minnesota is proud to provide this honor to those who
seek our services, and we are committed to expanding access to
this earned benefit throughout our great state.
In 1985, the Minnesota State Legislature passed legislation
authorizing a state veterans' cemetery in Minnesota. The
location was undetermined and the state had no formal plans to
construct a state veterans' cemetery. In 1986, two World War II
veterans from central Minnesota discovered the authorizing
legislation from the previous year and were determined to have
a state veterans' cemetery constructed in central Minnesota. As
members of a local DAV chapter, these veterans identified a
parcel of property, raised the funds necessary to purchase the
property, and donated the site to the State of Minnesota to be
used for a new state veterans' cemetery. Due to a lack of
development funds, the State of Minnesota did not pursue the
development of a cemetery and instead returned the donated land
back to the local DAV chapter in 1989. Undeterred, this local
group of veterans organized an association and began soliciting
development funds from state veterans' service organizations,
local businesses, and individual donors. This group of
dedicated veterans built a ground swell of support in the
legislature and ultimately with former Governor Arne Carlson.
Outside the control of the state, in 1994 a decision was
made to begin operating burials of veterans at the cemetery in
Little Falls. While understandable from the perspective of a
dedicated group of veterans, it was detrimental to the early
development of the cemetery in Little Falls.
In 1995, the State of Minnesota was awarded its first grant
from NCA. At the time, the grant program was a 50 percent
matching grant, requiring the state to provide 50 percent of
the costs for construction.
In 1999, Congress authorized NCA to begin providing up to
100 percent of the development costs to construct, expand, or
improve state veterans' cemeteries, and the State of Minnesota
applied for a second grant from NCA in 2001 for our cemetery in
Little Falls. Last July the cemetery in Little Falls was
recognized by the State Veterans' Grants Program for excellence
of appearance. Only four of 86 state veterans' cemeteries in
operation have been awarded this honor. And I'm especially
proud of this recognition, given our humble beginnings and
difficult circumstances under which the cemetery in Little
Falls was established.
In 2007, Governor Tim Pawlenty announced that the state
would construct an additional state veterans' cemetery in
northeast Minnesota.
And during the 2008 legislative session, it was necessary
to amend the authorizing legislation to allow the state to
operate additional cemeteries in Minnesota.
In 2009, we reported to the state legislature that the
areas of southeast and southwest Minnesota also had population
centers that would support the construction of new state
veterans' cemeteries in southern Minnesota.
In 2010, we provided information to Fillmore County about
the requirements of a suitable site in this area, and they were
supportive and offered a donation of the 155 acres that we're
talking about today. It required, as has been mentioned in
earlier testimony, that there was some necessary amendments to
the language in the state legislature for the authorization of
a cemetery in southeast Minnesota. And I'm happy today to
report that we've made significant progress in doing site
suitability work, environmental and cultural assessment, soil
borings, grading analysis, and other requirements that are
necessary to construct a state veterans' cemetery.
Since 1994, the state committed to provide our Nation's
heroes with a final resting place which commemorates and honors
their sacrifice and service to our country.
Because of the cooperation of state, Federal, and local
officials, I'm confident that in the near future we will gather
again to dedicate a new national shrine in Fillmore County to
honor our American heroes. I'll be happy to take your
questions.
[The prepared statement of David Swantek appears on p. 39.]
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Mr. Swantek. With that, I'll start
the first round of questions. Going back to what we asked the
panel earlier as to lessons learned, and Congressman Walz made
an example out of this, Senator Miller, can you further explain
the legislative efforts that went into this, the new veterans'
cemetery and that process?
Mr. Miller. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of
the Committee. We had to make some language changes basically
first to designate southern Minnesota and then later to give
Fillmore County a priority for a veterans' cemetery. I can't
say enough again about the local officials here in Fillmore
County. They really have done the heavy lifting. I can't say
enough about the Minnesota Veterans' Affairs and their
department. It has just been an honor and a privilege to work
with them. And this proves that although government sometimes
works slowly, that it does work, and it's been an honor and a
privilege to work again with these folks.
Mr. Runyan. The next question is for Mr. Swantek. Given
your experience with the cemeteries here in Minnesota, what is
your overall impression of the Veterans' Cemetery Grants
process?
Mr. Swantek. Well, I've been involved with the grants
program for a lot of years. We've had a couple multimillion
dollar projects in Little Falls. I find the grants office to be
very easy to work with, very responsive to questions that we
might have regarding design, the submittal process that's
required in their office. And, you know, over the years they've
had different directors in that office out there, and we
continue to find that they are hiring very capable individuals,
and our experience in Minnesota has been very positive with
that office.
Mr. Runyan. You said in your testimony that it can be
difficult to find a site and obviously you said as directors
move through, sometimes it is difficult. So from your
experience, what are the things that you look for as we use
this as a model? What are the things you use in looking for a
site?
Mr. Swantek. Mr. Chairman, we have an extensive list of
site standards, everything from aesthetics to environmental
concerns, cultural concerns. A mistake a lot of people make in
other areas of the state when we've gone and looked at
potential cemetery properties is you walk out on a site, just
like here in Fillmore County, and aesthetically it's
magnificent. I've looked at pieces of property in Duluth for a
cemetery that we've proposed up there that are some of the most
impressive pieces of property I've ever stepped foot on
overlooking Lake Superior. But we're concerned also with what
the development potential is ten feet below the surface. Our
day-to-day operation is a cemetery, and so what may look very
beautiful, may not work for a cemetery. So the process of
almost seeing it as maybe a subdivision or some kind of
community development project is more how you have to look at
it from the perspective of aesthetics and a long other list of
criteria. And to find a local government partner like Fillmore
County to step forward, to donate a suitable piece of property
has been key. We've been looking for property in Duluth since
2008, and while we've had cooperation from the county
government in St. Louis County, we've just not been able to
produce a suitable site up there, which is a frustration for
the veterans community in northeast Minnesota.
Mr. Runyan. Was it hard, in your mind, to move this site
into the suitable site category?
Mr. Swantek. Mr. Chairman, no. When we did some of the
initial studies, there were no significant red flags that came
about. We've done environmental work. We've done cultural work.
We've done wetland delineation on the property. Fillmore
County, not knowing maybe fully what we expected for a cemetery
site, offered up as close to a perfect donation for a cemetery
site as possible.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you very much. With that, I will yield to
Mr. Walz.
Mr. Walz. Well, thank you both indeed for your testimony.
And, Senator Miller, I want to thank you for your work on this,
along with Representative Davids. I'd also like to note your
graciousness to former Senator Ropes. It honors the democracy,
and I'm very appreciative of that, so thank you for that upon
delivering for our veterans and making that the highest
priority.
Senator, we're hearing this again, to try and, you know, we
want to make sure that we're working on metrics, the number of
veterans. You heard the numbers that I was giving from the VA's
requirements. But I would also make the argument that there
needs to be some variance in that based on geographic location.
How important is this local collaborative effort in helping you
make the case that you made to your colleagues to pass this and
move it into Mr. Swantek's court, and basically of us moving
into the next step? Again, I'm trying to look for these other
communities, what they can do to make this work?
Mr. Miller. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Congressman
Walz. In this scenario, Fillmore County made it easy. They made
it easy for us because they donated the land, a prime piece of
property in a beautiful part of the state. So we certainly can
use this as an example. It's extremely important for the
constituents here in southeastern Minnesota as well as in
Wisconsin and Iowa. It's not just a Minnesota thing. It is
regional, and that's very important. But we can truly use this
as a model, and maybe there's a way that we can encourage other
communities to donate the land as well because it's worked very
well. We know that money is tight at the Federal level. It's
tight at the state level. It's tight at the local level. So
anything we can do to encourage collaborative effort for our
local units of government to work together with us at the state
level and you folks at the Federal level, it will be extremely
helpful.
Mr. Walz. Well, I think that public/private partnership is
the key. My fear is to watch somebody on a, if you will, and
not an oversimplification, but on a bureaucratic line say,
well, you don't have 80,000, a better location would be here
when there is no community involvement, there has been no
effort of collaboration, and now all of a sudden we're just
picking a spot where we say this would be a better geographic
spot to meet our requirements of 80,000 veterans. And maybe to
you, Mr. Swantek, is that something that can happen? Would you
anticipate that could be an outcome of saying you simply don't
have the volume of veterans, and we would feel if you moved
closer towards Olmsted County or something, whatever, I just
fear that when you've got a community, you've got by, and
you've got the collaboration built, you've got the resources
being compiled, could it happen, though, that would be the case
of where they would choose to make this based on the metric of
veterans.
Mr. Swantek. Mr. Chairman, Congressman Walz, I believe
those--the veteran population centers when you get down under
80,000 is the perfect example of where a state veterans'
cemetery comes in and provides a cemetery in the locations that
don't meet that Federal criteria. If you look at the three
projects that we have competing on the priority list for state
cemetery construction funding, this project in southeast
Minnesota has about 50,000 veterans. Our other two projects are
down in the 20,000 range, but yet they compete very high on the
state cemetery priority list. So if you can find a state, and I
talk to colleagues of mine in other states, they do not have
the support of their state legislature like we do in Minnesota.
Mr. Walz. That's just making it harder. Is that why they're
coming to me and saying this, so I have this in my
questionnaire for Senator Miller, we set the priorities, we
have a Federal grant process, it's going to be important to
make this happen? But Senator Miller knows his constituents
well, he knows this area well, and the case to make is if the
state can make the case for this cemetery, that should be an
overriding factor on the grant process to say we need to
deliver because the Senator, the Representatives, the County
Commissioners, everyone else has done their work, now we need
to take the case. Because I think one of the fears is now all
of a sudden the Federal Government's going to trump this whole
decision-making, and that's very frustrating. So I think at
this point it's worked the way it's supposed to, would that be
fair to say?
Mr. Swantek. Mr. Chairman, Congressman Walz, absolutely.
The process has worked, I don't want to say flawlessly, but
worked very well in the State of Minnesota in my experience.
Mr. Walz. Mr. Swantek, and my time is running out, but I
just want to follow up on this, do you think there's any reason
why we couldn't have multiple entry dates to try and get the
grants.
Mr. Swantek. Mr. Chairman and Congressman Walz, it's a date
that runs up against the end of the Federal fiscal year. So
there are multiple dates along the way that we can submit
design plans to the grants office. If we miss a deadline on May
15th, we just get right into the cycle. It doesn't mean we have
to wait until May 15th the following year. We can make that
submit along May 17th. It's just that we won't get funded from
this cemetery, from the National Cemetery Administration,
until----
Mr. Walz. In September, that's wishful thinking--the
process is so frustrating. I understand exactly what you're
saying. The process is that is somewhat of an arbitrary date
anyway as the appropriation process works its way out. I guess
maybe I'm more like some of these veterans, I don't know how
many years I can wait type of attitude on this. I think when it
comes to serving our veterans, that this is one that my
patience is--I'm so short fused on. I want to get it done as
quickly as possible. And I think, yes, it's only a year, yes,
we're in the process, yes, they'll get the grant, but that's
slower time to get this thing built. So I appreciate your
understanding that and that we can go forward, but if there's
anything we can do to speed that up, I would certainly
appreciate it. I'll go back to Chairman Runyan for more
questions.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, gentlemen. I thank you, gentlemen,
for your testimony, and you're now excused, and we'll welcome
the fourth panel up.
The fourth panel consists of Glenn Powers, Deputy Under
Secretary for Field Operations of the National Cemetery
Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. He's
accompanied by Joshua de Leon, the Director of Veterans
Cemetery Grants Service at the National Cemetery
Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs.

STATEMENT OF GLENN POWERS, DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY FOR FIELD
PROGRAMS, NATIONAL CEMETERY ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS; ACCOMPANIED BY JOSHUA DE LEON, DIRECTOR OF
VETERANS CEMETERY GRANTS SERVICE, NATIONAL CEMETERY
ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

Mr. Powers. Thank you, Chairman Runyan and Representative
Walz. I appreciate the opportunity to speak today regarding the
efforts taken by the VA, Congress, and the State of Minnesota
to honor our Nation's veterans with a specific focus on the
Veterans' Cemetery Grants Program. I would like to submit my
written statement for the record.
Mr. Runyan. The complete written statement will be entered
into the hearing record.
Mr. Powers. It is an honor to be here in Preston to be a
part of the discussion on how to meet the burial needs of
veterans in the state. I'm joined by Mr. Joshua de Leon, the
Director of the Veterans Cemetery Grants Program.
Previously you heard from David Swantek, Director of the
State of Minnesota, Little Falls Veterans' Cemetery. The VA has
worked closely with Mr. Swantek on various successful grants
for that cemetery. We continue to work with him in our review
and processing of a grant application request for funding for a
state cemetery in Fillmore County.
I would also like to acknowledge the many representatives
from various local veteran service organizations and the many
local veterans here today. The VA seeks to ensure that eligible
veterans and their loved ones are provided a burial option in a
national, state, or tribal veterans' cemetery. The National
Cemetery Administration managed the system of 131 VA national
cemeteries in 39 states and in Puerto Rico. The Veterans'
Cemetery Grants Program, which was authorized by Congress in
1978, provides a critical partnership with the states in
ensuring grant funding is available to establish state, tribal,
and U.S. territory veteran cemeteries. Grant-funded cemeteries
provide a burial option in places where veterans are not fully
served by the VA National Cemetery. For Minnesota veterans,
Fort Snelling National Cemetery, located over 115 miles or 2
hours away from Preston, serves veterans in the Minneapolis-St.
Paul area. It is the fourth busiest cemetery in our nationwide
system. Minnesota veterans are also served by the Minnesota
State Veterans' Cemetery near Little Falls. This is close to 4
hours from Preston, with VA and the state playing important
roles in supporting and administering grant applications. VA
may fund up to 100 percent of development costs for projects to
establish, expand, improve, and maintain a state, tribal, or
U.S. territory veterans' cemetery.
Since 1978, VA has awarded over 275 grants totaling more
than 482 million dollars to 86 veterans' cemeteries. State and
tribal organizations are responsible for acquiring the land and
maintaining the cemeteries once they become operational. These
federally funded cemeteries must operate solely for the
interment of eligible veterans and their eligible spouses and
dependents. They are required to conform to VA prescribed
standards and guidelines for site selection, planning,
construction, appearance, and operations. They are to meet the
same national shrine standards as our VA national cemeteries.
VA awards grants based on processes and implementing
regulations. These are designed to ensure a fair and equitable
grant administration that benefits the greatest number of
veterans. Applicants are ranked on a priority list based upon
the size of the veteran population to be served and the type of
grant, either to expand an existing cemetery, to keep it open,
or to establish a new cemetery. The state or tribal
organization must pass legislation authorizing the project and
providing the necessary architectural and engineering funds to
allow the project to be developed. One hundred percent of these
costs are reimbursable following the grant award.
We are pleased to work with the State of Minnesota on their
plans to continue to ensure more veterans will have access to a
burial option. The State of Minnesota has applied for a VA
grant to expand and improve the Minnesota State Veterans'
Cemetery in Little Falls. This grant is included as part of the
department's current year, fiscal year 2012 operating plan. The
proposed Minnesota State Veterans' Cemetery in Fillmore County
would be a critical need in providing an estimated 50,000
additional veterans with a burial option within 75 miles of
their residences. Mr. de Leon and I walked the proposed site
today which the county generously plans to donate for the
proposed state cemetery. The VA will continue to work with the
State of Minnesota for the fiscal year 2013 prioritization
process.
I appreciate the Subcommittee's continued interest in
improving access to burial options for veterans, and I'm
available to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of Glenn Powers appears on p. 41.]&
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Mr. Powers. Can I have a status
update on the proposed site including, where we're at in the
process? Have you had any discussions at that level?
Mr. Powers. I'm going to defer to Mr. de Leon. Obviously we
had status updates with Mr. Swantek today when we walked the
site.
Mr. de Leon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Congressman Walz.
First off, I just want to talk about the overall relationship
with the State of Minnesota and Mr. Swantek and Mr. Shellito.
We are very proud to have them as state partners. We also have
a very long history dating back to 1995 with the Little Falls
State Veterans' Cemetery in Minnesota. I also want to point out
in terms of this overall package, it's a very good package.
We'd love to see this happen in terms of what Mr. Powers
mentioned, over 50,000 veterans. Just to clarify, we're not
limited by the 80,000 specials for national cemeteries on the
state cemetery program. So that said, there are four programs
in the priority list for FY `12 for the State of Minnesota.
Three of those four were opted to be deferred by the State of
Minnesota. But three of those four are new establishment
projects, all 50,000 and as Mr. Swantek mentioned, 20,000 each
in terms of the unserved veteran population. So in terms of
again the State of Minnesota and our partnership, we're very
proud of that and would love to see these projects go through.
That said, in terms of overall status with the Preston,
Minnesota, MN 10-05 project, the project was to establish a new
establishment of the preapplication submitted on June 29, 2010.
A grant opportunity letter was sent to the State of Minnesota
on October 1st of 2011, just last year. On October 12, 2011,
the land for the proposed cemetery was walked by a project
manager from my office as well as members of Mr. Swantek and
other members from the State Department of Veterans Affairs in
Minnesota. The State of Minnesota accepted the grant
opportunity on October 15, 2011. The process that was in play
at the time from the--from October 15th through about
February--or I'm sorry, the January time frame was site
suitability determination, which is basically on the shoulders
of Minnesota State to complete the suitability determination.
That work was in progress. The project was deferred on February
16th of 2012. From that point, the deferral, the deferral
project for our program are automatically placed in the next
cycle for priority list, so this project would automatically be
a preapplication. It would basically be a default
preapplication submission for the FY `13 priority list process.
The other thing I want to point out in terms of whether
this project places, again talking about the threshold of
80,000 and 50,000, that not being necessarily a threshold for
our program. That said, the way the Veterans' Cemetery Grants
Program priority list was in Minnesota, southeast site in
Preston, the proposed project ranked number 11 out of 104
projects for FY `12 in terms of our priority list. That is very
high, okay? In terms of the priority grouping, so as referenced
in our written testimony, there are four priority groups. All
of the new establishments are placed in priority group two. In
terms of priority group two, this ranked the highest in terms
of unserved veteran population. So we're very confident in this
project and are very--again, it's an open process on an annual
basis. We're confident that it should fare well in FY `13.
Mr. Runyan. Thanks for that. That answered most of the
questions I had for you. But going back and again trying to use
this as a platform for other states to do similar things, are
there any other factors that are taken into consideration
before a grant is approved other than the steps that you've
outlined? For example, if the cemetery meets all of this
criteria, is the proposal automatically approved?
Mr. de Leon. I'm sorry, sir, can you clarify the question?
Mr. Runyan. If you meet all the criteria, are you
automatically approved, or is it constantly having to go
through the process over and over.
Mr. de Leon. Sure. Thank you, sir, for the question. In
terms of the completion of the criteria for the grants process,
again, it's on an annual basis. Mr. Swantek had mentioned a May
15th deadline. Also in addition to site suitability, since this
work is going to be contracted out for development construction
work, I think one of the other gentlemen in the earlier panels
mentioned that there's construction planning that goes on, and
the process actually has to go out to bid. So some of this in
terms of the deferral, I think the State of Minnesota actually
graciously deferred the project, seeing how many steps were
required to actually meet the deadline. It wasn't necessarily
the deadline. The process was open, and the state actually
deferred based upon where it landed in the planning process.
Mr. Runyan. And in your dealing with that, how long on
average does the grant program application process usually
take?
Mr. de Leon. Let's say the site suitability went through
and the earlier mentioned title action was not an actual issue,
if everything had gone and as you had mentioned, full
completion of criteria for the grant program, sir, all grant
applications would have been viewed by July 15th for
completion, with the completion of all the criteria. From that
point in time, the secretary of the VA then reviews and
approves by 30 September of that same year the grant package,
and probably less than a week later grant award letters are
sent out notifying the state of the grant award, with work
being able to begin immediately.
Mr. Runyan. So in your experience, has this project taken
any more or any less time than average.
Mr. de Leon. Sir, in terms of new establishments, you know,
we typically have, from what I've seen, various issues that
come into play. Deferrals are relatively common for new
establishments. Site acquisition is tough for any state.
There's also resource issues involved with planning. I
mentioned some of the other, you know, contract processes that
are in play, getting available vendors to participate and come
in with the state guidelines, which we defer to the states in
terms of their process. But in terms of how this ranks with
other projects that are deferrals, I would say this is
basically par for the course. I mean, this is common for new
establishment projects. Again, in terms of once these issues
are worked out, our process works by an annual cycle, within
one cycle, one fiscal year cycle.
Mr. Runyan. Just one last question, not to get too far into
the weeds, but obviously a lot of the burden of proof is put on
the state to come to you. Does the program itself challenge any
of their--whether they are geological or water surveys, all
that kind of stuff, or do you leave it all up to them, or do
you come in and duplicate those surveys? Being stewards of the
taxpayers' money, is it a dual process there?
Mr. de Leon. Yes, sir, and it's a good question, thank you.
It's actually a very fine line we walk. We talk about
optimizing taxpayer dollars, including the right to any of the
following court regulations, court and Federal regulations, and
in our case that's project 39, which we try to use as C. That
said, on my staff I have project managers who are actually
landscape architects. When I mentioned that we walked the site
after the opportunity letter went out in October, within a week
after the letter went out, my staff actually flew out here and
did the site walkthrough. We want to see these projects go
through. I'm a veteran myself, Mr. Powers is a veteran, and
we're proud to serve in this capacity, and we would like to see
these projects go through.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, Mr. de Leon. I'll yield to Mr. Walz.
Mr. Walz. Thank you, Chairman. It's a nice segue, and I
wanted to thank you both for that. I wanted to thank you for
choosing your professional lives to serve our veterans'
interment. This is an incredibly important part of that
process. I would argue it's a very important part of our
country, of how we take care of those willing to serve. So
thank you for that. And it's very helpful for me to hear you
lay these things out, this criteria, and I'm glad to hear
because I think the word was more maybe anecdote than anything,
those concentration numbers were seen as more of a priority
than they are. But what I'm hearing from you is the whole
package, the whole proposal, you may not have a concentration
of 60,000 or 80,000, it may be 20,000. But if that's in the
right area and the state comes through with the proper
proposal, they are going to be viewed with the same favorable
eye as another one. That's very helpful. Any chance, I know
this is the chance you take again as you said this project was
11 out of 104. The first ten were additions to the existing
facility, priority one, which you have to keep those going?
Mr. de Leon. Yes, sir.
Mr. Walz. So they were the first of the new constructions,
first on the list of new construction. I guess we face the
possibility that there could have been others coming in this
year that would do that, but my take is, of those 104, how many
will be funded?
Mr. de Leon. Of the 104 served, Federal RFY total priority
list fell in about half of that list. So in terms of our
priority groups, for FY `12 our approved budget, and again
thank you for your support in terms of the Subcommittee. We
were able to fund all priority one--priority group one, two,
and three and a good portion of our priority group four
projects with our FY `12 budget, sir.
Mr. Walz. That was my next question on that. Are there
adequate resources, consistently approving adequate dollars
into this program to make sure we care for our veterans, and I
understand this is a question that goes all the way to the
secretary's level when he makes his budget, but is that--in
your opinion, are we getting there.
Mr. de Leon. Sir, again, thank you for the question. We
appreciate the Committee's continued support for the Veterans'
Cemetery Grants Program. We work closely with the state and
also the tribes to make sure we're meeting their needs based on
our annual appropriations and our priority list. And in FY `12,
if that's any indication, we were able to successfully fund
priority groups one, two, and three projects, which are our
highest priority projects through FY `12.
Mr. Walz. That's great. In what you've heard today from the
folks in here, starting with the local veterans who came back
and made the case to this, to the County Commissioners who made
this layout, to the State Representatives who spanned election
cycles and parties to still continue to get this done, you said
on time-wise it's about par for the course, but is this the
proper approach to this, in your opinion, with the State of
Minnesota's input from the Veterans' Affairs? You guys see this
all over the country. You get to see a 50,000-foot view of
everybody doing this. Is this the proper way to approach this?
Mr. Powers. Sir, from everything I've seen, it is. I mean,
you need community support. Once that cemetery is built, that
community support has to stay there. In order for that cemetery
to function as sacred ground, the people there have to know
that it's sacred ground. The community revolves around that
cemetery. We see that in our larger cemeteries and our smaller
cemeteries. And if I may, the question of adequate support, I'd
just like to comment that in 2004 in terms of our criteria of
how many veterans were served, NCA considered 75 percent of our
Nation's veterans were served with a cemetery at the
appropriate distance. Because of this fabric of our national
cemeteries, our State Cemetery Grants Program, we are at 90
percent, and by 2015 our strategic goal is to achieve 95
percent. So these are overlapping things. That's why when you
talk about 80,000 here, that's the criteria for the national
cemetery. But then when we come down to the state cemetery
grants program, any state cemetery, any state legislature can
put their applications in.
Mr. Walz. So we really have given more control back to the
local states, given back control to the local regions to make
these with support from the Federal Government.
Mr. Powers. We give them that ability. Actually we look at
that window. They operate in below the 80,000 mark, come up
with, you know, obviously the criteria does place some emphasis
on concentration of population, and that's why this particular
cemetery with 51,000 veterans, I think some people mentioned
earlier in testimony 26,000. I think they were only looking
within the Minnesota boundaries, but you've got Wisconsin and
Iowa there too. So this one, although there are no guarantees
when that slate comes up for fiscal year 2013, you've got a
large concentration of 50,000 veterans. That achieves our
strategic goals because when we lay out strategic goals in NCA
for serving veterans, the states are our partners in how we do
that.
Mr. Walz. So you say if Chairman Runyan and myself go back
and we talk to our colleagues and in our districts also, other
places here, kind of lit a fire under a lot of folks to see
some potential, if we go talk to our colleagues on this, we can
lay out this collaborative effort, this nature of getting those
partnerships of making sure that your application stresses all
of those things, plus those commitments, and that will ensure
they've got a better chance to get this off and funded.
Mr. Powers. It's all about collaboration, and Mr. Swantek
has long been part of our fabric. He goes to our training
activities. Our engineers visit his cemetery that's been in
operation to advise, assist, whatever we can do. It's all part
of the team.
Mr. Walz. And I might add, it feels like I spent a lot of
my life up at Camp Ripley, and I can tell you that that
facility is second to none. And that cemetery is a real sense
of pride. A lot of veterans go through those gates right down
the road to Ripley. A lot of veterans have gone through there
as they got deployed then and left for elsewhere, and that
cemetery is certainly part of the fabric, so I thank you both
for that. I yield back to Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you, gentlemen. I thank both of you for
your service to this country's cause on both fronts. Thank you
both. And with that, that completes our oversight hearing
today. In closing, I want to say to Minnesota veterans and all
veterans, that the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs and my
Subcommittee will continue to listen to your needs and work to
fix several issues that we discussed here today.
Congressman Walz, I want to thank you for inviting me here
to your district today and helping make this important hearing
possible. It's been a pleasure having you serve as my Ranking
Member at this hearing. And I know veterans and the
Subcommittee benefit greatly from your dedication and your
military service. Thank you for that. Do you have any closing
remarks?
Mr. Walz. Just again, thank you, Chairman, for coming out,
the commitment, and I hope for all of you--you're a great
example for all of us. I see that that spirit of collaboration
and stewardship of taxpayer dollars, as well as fulfilling our
moral obligation to our veterans is alive and well. I would
like--and I think Mr. Powers really hit on this, and I can
assure you it may not show up as a tangible in the application
for this, but this community understands this. They understand
that this will transform Preston into already a very special
place, but it will be hallowed ground and that peace, you can
feel it amongst the people. You can feel the sense of pride. So
I think that's why the sense of urgency to get this done, to
show what's possible, and to honor those veterans is so strong.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, thank you for all the hard work you
do and hopefully you got a little taste of southern Minnesota.
So with that, I yield back.
Mr. Runyan. Thank you very much. I ask unanimous consent
that all members have five legislative days in which to revise
and extend their remarks. Hearing no objections, so ordered.
Once again, it's been my pleasure to be with you all here
today, and I thank all the esteemed witnesses for their
testimony, and my good friend Mr. Walz for inviting me and
being present here today. With that being said, this hearing is
now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:48 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Prepared Statement of Hon. Jon Runyan, Chairman
Good morning. Usually when we hold our DAMA Subcommittee hearings,
we are sitting in Washington. Today, I am honored and happy to be here
with all of you at the Fillmore County Courthouse, in the District of
my colleague and good friend, the Honorable Timothy Walz.
I would like to personally thank Mr. Walz for inviting me to his
district, and I'd like to thank everyone for being with us today.
Although we are far away from our normal hearing room on the Hill
and the CSPAN cameras, this is still an official Congressional
oversight hearing of the House Veterans Affairs Committee, and
therefore hearing rules of hearing conduct apply.
Therefore, I would respectfully request that everyone be courteous
to our witnesses and remain silent until the hearing is formally
adjourned.
In Chairing the Subcommittee on Disability Assistance and Memorial
Affairs, I have had the opportunity to work on many issues that affect
our Nation's veterans, whether they are in my home district of New
Jersey, here in Minnesota, or elsewhere across the Nation.
From working on these issues, I have learned firsthand that a
veteran's final resting place is a subject of the utmost importance,
not just to those who have served our country, but also to their
families and loved ones.
As our veteran population continues to age, and as we wind down two
overseas conflicts, the placement of our national and state veterans'
cemeteries becomes increasingly important.
Accordingly, we are here today to talk about the Veterans' Cemetery
Grants Program and the possibility of placing a new veterans cemetery
right here in Fillmore County.
It is my understanding that the need for a veterans' cemetery
exists and a suitable location has already been determined. I look
forward to hearing more from the citizens of Fillmore County, as well
as the VA, in today's testimony.
It is my hope that by bringing all parties together here today, we
can make progress in evaluating the Veterans' Cemetery Grants Program
and, ultimately, to serve the needs of our veterans as best we can.
As I'm sure many of you are aware, cemeteries established under the
grant program must conform to the standards and guidelines pertaining
to site selection, planning, and construction, as prescribed by VA.
These cemeteries must be operated solely for the burial of
servicemembers who die on active duty, veterans, and their eligible
spouses and dependent children. Further, any cemetery assisted by a VA
grant must be maintained and operated according to the operational
standards and measures of the National Cemetery Administration.
So, we are here today to examine this process, not from afar in
Washington DC, but right here in Fillmore County where this program has
a chance to make a direct impact.
Currently, there are approximately 45,000 veterans in southern
Minnesota who would be eligible for burial in a veterans' cemetery. It
is my understanding that VA is aware of the need for a veterans'
cemetery in this area, and I hope that through our efforts here today,
we are able to accomplish this goal of ensuring that this need is
fulfilled.
Before jumping ahead to the specific steps of how ensure the
establishment of a new veterans' cemetery, I'd like to welcome our
witnesses here today who will be speaking in detail on the need for a
cemetery here in Fillmore County, and the steps that have been taken
thus far.
Again, I am delighted to be with you today and I will now yield to
the gentleman from Minnesota, and my good friend, the Honorable Tim
Walz.

Prepared Statement of Steve O'Connor, Past State Commander, Veterans of
Foreign Wars
MR. CHAIRMAN, MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE; THANK YOU FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO TESTIFY ON THIS IMPORTANT ISSUE PERTAINING TO OUR
COUNTRY'S VETERANS AND THE VETERANS OF SOUTHEAST MINNESOTA.
FOR THE RECORD MY NAME IS STEPHEN J. O'CONNOR. I AM A PAST STATE
COMMANDER OF THE VETERANS OF FOREIGN WARS DEPARTMENT OF MINNESOTA, A
RETIRED ARMY OFFICER AND A SERVICE CONNECTED VIET NAM VETERAN.
THE VETERANS CEMETERY GRANT PROGRAM PROVIDES AN OPPORTUNITY FOR THE
FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, IN THIS CASE FILLMORE COUNTY, TO
WORK TOGETHER TO PROVIDE AREA VETERANS A FINAL RESTING PLACE HONORING
THEIR SERVICE TO THEIR COUNTRY.
I FEEL CERTAIN THAT THE CONSTRUCTION OF A STATE VETERANS CEMETERY
IN SOUTHEASTERN MINNESOTA WOULD NOT BE A POSSIBILITY IF IT WERE NOT FOR
THE COMMITMENT AND WILLINGNESS OF THE FILLMORE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS TO
WORK WITH LOCAL VETERANS ORGANIZATIONS, THE STATE LEGISLATURE, THE
MINNESOTA DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS AND LOCAL COMMUNITIES TO
IDENTIFY AND DEVELOP A SUITABLE SITE. FILLMORE COUNTY ALONG WITH THE
SURROUNDING MUNICIPALITIES HAVE ALWAYS STOOD FIRMLY IN SUPPORT OF THE
MEN AND WOMEN WHO HAVE SERVED THIS NATION. THEY PARTICIPATE IN THE
COUNTY VETERANS SERVICE OFFICER PROGRAM, WHICH OFFERS ASSISTANCE TO
VETERANS REESTABLISHING THEMSELVES IN CIVILIAN LIFE AND HAVE DONATED
155 ACRES OF COUNTY PROPERTY AS A FINAL RESTING PLACE FOR THOSE HEROES
WHO HAVE ANSWERED THE LAST CALL. THE LOCAL BRANCHES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE
PARTNERED WITH BOTH PRIVATE AND PUBLIC ENTITIES TO PROVIDE FOR ITS
VETERANS.
AS A VETERAN, I AM EXTREMELY PLEASED THAT THERE WILL BE A CEMETERY
WHERE I CAN BE INTERRED WITH MY COMRADES. ALTHOUGH THERE WILL BE
COMRADES FROM MANY DIFFERENT WARS, FROM MANY DIFFERENT ERAS, WE ALL
SHARE AN EXPERIENCE THAT CAN NEVER BE EXPLAINED TO THE PROTECTED AND
DOESN'T NEED TO BE EXPLAINED TO THE WARRIOR. IT IS FITTING THAT THERE
SHOULD BE A HALLOWED PLACE DESIGNATED FOR OUR ETERNAL REST.
THANK YOU AND THAT ENDS MY TESTIMONY. I WILL BE PLEASED TO ANSWER
ANY QUESTIONS THE COMMITTEE MAY HAVE.

Prepared Statement of Lucinda Barth, Sergeant, MN Army National Guard
Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom
Thank you for this opportunity to testify on behalf of Veterans
from the surrounding area. I take great pride in representing them here
today as I testify in front of the Veterans Affairs Subcommittee.
My name is Lucinda Barth. I am a Sergeant in the Minnesota National
Guard and a veteran of Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring
Freedom. I am also a service-connected disabled veteran.
It is approximately 140 miles to the Veterans Affairs national
cemetery located at Fort Snelling in Minneapolis, Minnesota. The state
veterans' cemetery located in Little Falls, Minnesota is 236 miles.
These cemeteries are a great distance to travel for a veteran that
would like to be interred in a Veterans' cemetery. Not to mention the
inconvenience a loved one would have to endure to visit the site of
their loved one. I believe that if the Department of Veterans Affairs
would approve the grant for this cemetery here in Fillmore County that
the surrounding veterans and their families will want their loved ones
memorialized at that cemetery.
The number of veterans in the Minnesota, Iowa, and Wisconsin area
that this cemetery would serve is well over 43,000 veterans; each and
every one of these veterans deserve to have the right to choose to be
interred in veteran cemetery within a reasonable distance from their
loved ones. This cemetery will give those veterans and their families
the opportunity they didn't think was possible before.
I have traveled the world and seen some beautiful places; none of
it compares to the beauty that we have right here in Fillmore County,
in Preston. It's not only beautiful but it's serene; I believe that
this is an ideal location for a cemetery where we want our veterans'
families to feel that their loved one is at peace.
I have been told on several occasions that it takes a special kind
of person to join the Armed Forces to fight for this country. Whether
they were told to join during the Vietnam era or joined when it became
an all volunteer military; we are all still that special kind of
person. Preston would provide that special final resting place that
those veterans so honorably deserve to have.
I strongly encourage for you to go back to Washington DC and vote
in favor for Fillmore County to be the final resting place for so many
veterans in the surrounding area. They deserve to have a place that
will bring them and their families the peace that they need after the
loss of a dear loved one. I know that Preston can bring that peace to
so many families.
Again thank you for this wonderful opportunity to voice my opinion
on this
matter.

Prepared Statement of Nathan Pike, County Veteran Service Officer
Olmsted County
First off, I would like to thank the Subcommittee for the
opportunity to testify on behalf of over twenty-three thousand veterans
and their families of southeast Minnesota which includes the following
eight counties: Fillmore, Olmsted, Mower, Dodge, Goodhue, Wabasha,
Winona and Houston. This is an excellent opportunity to testify on the
important issues of gaining a veterans cemetery in Fillmore County.
My name is Nathan D. Pike. I am a veteran of the active Army and a
retired Minnesota Army National Guard non-commissioned officer with
over twenty-one years of service. I served two tours of duty in support
of the KFOR operations in Kosovo and a tour as an embedded trainer to
the Afghan National Army in 2005. I am also a service-connected
disabled veteran.
In the spring of 2010 I applied and received the job of Fillmore
County Veteran Service Officer. In the summer of 2011 I started the
position of County Veteran Service Officer in Olmsted County. I am a
current resident of Fillmore County residing in Spring Valley. As a
CVSO my job is to provide assistance to local veterans and their
families with Department of Veterans Affairs benefits, state veteran
benefits and anything remotely related to veteran issues and concerns
for the veterans and their families of Olmsted County, Minnesota.
My first point I would like to address; it is my belief and that of
many other veterans, that the Department of Veterans Affairs holds the
responsibility of caring for the servicemember upon discharge (veteran)
to grave, and if need be, assisting the surviving widow/widower with
benefits should they (surviving family members) be eligible for said VA
benefits. The VA can easily serve the veterans of southeast Minnesota
with a veteran's cemetery to be specifically located in Fillmore
County. The Fillmore County Board of Commissioners has graciously
authorized the donation of land for this project. The excellent support
is evident within the veteran service organizations of Fillmore County
which includes the Fillmore County Council of the American Legion (the
oldest Legion county council in the Nation) as well as unanimous
support from the people and towns of Fillmore County. Even southeast
Minnesota's largest print media Rochester Post Bulletin has endorsed
the idea of a veteran's cemetery in Fillmore County. Providing a
veterans cemetery in Fillmore County has the potential of serving over
23,626 veterans and eligible family members for the benefit of burial
in a veteran cemetery. I researched the number of veterans from the
American Community Survey from 2010 which provided the current and most
relevant data that I could find concerning veteran population in
southeast Minnesota. The Committee should also take into account that
even with the Iraq War done there will be more veterans returning to
southeast Minnesota; most notably the return of Minnesota's Army
National Guard First Brigade of the 34th ``Red Bull'' Infantry Division
from their deployment in Iraq and Kuwait making the returning soldiers
to be considered as veterans. Between the eight counties of southeast
Minnesota that I have mentioned, there are two Infantry companies and
two support companies all of the Minnesota Army National Guard, and
Reserve units which has two company sized units in the Rochester area.
The second point for a veterans' cemetery in Fillmore County that
should be addressed is that there is an opportunity for work through
the construction process of said cemetery which in turn would provide
some economic stimulus to Fillmore County. Whether the work is provided
through local contractors or otherwise there will be a need for the
workers to have access to local businesses for a variety of needs.
After the cemetery is completed there would be the added benefit of
jobs provided by having an active cemetery that could possibly employ
up to a dozen people. A good, economic, unintended consequence with the
addition of the cemetery there will be the many visitors that would be
expected to visit during special holidays such as Memorial Day,
Independence Day and Veterans Day. The visitors in turn would spend
money in the local economy as they are travelling through Fillmore
County.
Here are my final thoughts to reiterate my two my points of why a
veteran's cemetery in Fillmore County, Minnesota, the first is that the
Department of Veterans Affairs has the responsibility of caring for
veterans and their families from discharge to death. The veterans'
cemetery would well be suited for a final resting place for our
Nation's veterans. The land is free and there would be economic
stimulus to a rural county that is need of such stimulus. I can tell
that while working as the Fillmore County veteran service officer I
knew of three families that are patiently waiting for the creation of
the proposed site so they can bury the cremated remains of the veteran
loved ones; and finally the veteran cemetery is in my own end-of-life
plans for a final resting place.
Again thank you for this opportunity to discuss the important issue
of a veterans' cemetery for Fillmore County, Minnesota.
If you have any questions I will kindly answer them.

Prepared Statement of Chuck Amunrud, Commissioner, Fillmore County
I FIRST WANT TO SAY THANK YOU TO THE COMMITTEE FOR TAKING TIME TO
COME TO OUR BEAUTIFUL FILLMORE COUNTY. IT IS INDEED AN HONOR TO BE
INVITED TO TESTIFY ON BEHALF OF FILLMORE COUNTY.
MY NAME IS CHARLES (CHUCK) AMUNRUD AND I AM A FILLMORE COUNTY
COMMISSIONER REPRESENTING THE THIRD DISTRICT.
I AM ALSO A 60 percent DISABLED VETERAN. ENLISTING IN THE UNITED
STATES AIR FORCE FROM 1968 TO 1972.
MY STATEMENT WILL MENTION THE LOCAL COLLABORATIVE EFFORTS OF OUR
STATE LEGISLATURE, THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, THE
FILLMORE COUNTY BOARD, AND OUR LOCAL VETERANS GROUPS. REASONS FOR
FILLMORE COUNTIES BOARD DECISION TO DONATE LAND FOR A VETERANS
CEMETERY.
THE BOARD WAS APPROACHED IN 2009 BY OUR THEN STATE SENATOR SHARON
ERICKSON-ROPES, WHO AT THAT TIME SERVED ON THE STATE SENATE VETERANS
COMMITTEE. WANTING TO FIND LAND THAT WOULD BE SUITABLE FOR A NEW
VETERANS CEMETERY IN THE SOUTH EAST PART OF OUR STATE. THE FILLMORE
COUNTY BOARD SUGGESTED THAT THEY WOULD CONSIDER GIVING UP A PORTION OF
LAND, THE COUNTY OWNED NEXT TO PRESTON THAT CONSISTED OF APPROXIMATELY
245 ACRES.
IN NOVEMBER 2009, THE THEN CURRENT STATE COMMISSIONER OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS MICHAEL PUGLIESI AND STAFF VISITED THE FILLMORE COUNTY BOARD TO
DISCUSS THE POSSIBILITY THAT OUR PROPOSED SITE COULD BE SUITABLE. AND
THE NEED TO DO PRELIMINARY WORK ON THE SITE. WE DISCUSSED THE NEED TO
AMEND THEN THE CURRENT STATE STATUTE. THE STATUTE HAD SET ASIDE FUNDING
TO ACQUIRE LAND AND DESIGN FOR TWO NEW CEMETERIES IN SOUTHWEST AND
NORTHEAST MINNESOTA. WE NOW NEEDED THE STATE LEGISLATURE TO AMEND THE
LAW TO INCLUDE SOUTHEAST MINNESOTA FOR LAND ACQUISITION AND DESIGN.
DURING THE 2010 SESSION, STATE HOUSE REPRESENTATIVE GREG DAVIDS WHO
STILL REPRESENTS OUR DISTRICT AND THE THEN STATE SENATOR SHARON
ERICKSON-ROPES BOTH WERE CRUCIAL IN GETTING THE LAW CHANGED TO INCLUDE
SOUTHEAST MINNESOTA.
DURING THIS TIME FRAME THE FILLMORE COUNTY BOARD WAS VISITED BY OUR
LOCAL VETERANS GROUPS WHO PRESENTED RESOLUTIONS OF SUPPORT URGING US TO
GIFT THE LAND NEEDED AS A WAY OF PAYING HONOR TO VETERANS FROM OUR
CITIZENS. THE BOARD AGREED.
WE THEN LEARNED THAT WE WERE NOT DONE AT THE STATE LEGISLATURE. THE
NEW LAW WOULD AGAIN NEED TO BE AMENDED TO INCLUDE SOUTHEAST MINNESOTA
DUE TO LANGUAGE IN THE ORIGINAL LAW AS PART OF A BONDING BILL.
IN 2011 OUR NEW STATE SENATOR JEREMY MILLER ALONG WITH STATE HOUSE
REPRESENTATIVE GREG DAVIDS PROPOSED LEGISLATION THAT PASSED INTO LAW
MAKING FILLMORE COUNTY A PRIORITY IN FUNDING FOR DESIGN TO CONSTRUCT A
NEW STATE VETERANS CEMETERY. OUR ENTIRE REGION IS IN SUPPORT KNOWING
THAT FAMILIES WILL BENEFIT FROM HAVING THEIR LOVED ONES BURIED CLOSER
TO HOME. NEW JOBS DUE TO CONSTRUCTION AND THE ONGOING OPERATIONS WILL
HAVE A LONG TERM BENEFIT TO OUR LOCAL COMMUNITIES.
I WANT TO THANK THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON DISABILITY ASSISTANCE AND
MEMORIAL AFFAIRS, THE MINNESOTA LEGISLATURE, THE MINNESOTA DEPARTMENT
OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, TO MY FELLOW COUNTY BOARD MEMBERS IN A VERY
POSITIVE COLLABORATIVE EFFORT TO BENEFIT OUR PAST CURRENT AND FUTURE
VETERANS.
I WILL DO MY BEST TO ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS.

Prepared Statement of Karen Brown, County Coordinator, Fillmore County
Good afternoon distinguished Members of the House Committee on
Veterans' Affairs, Subcommittee on Disability Assistance and Memorial
Affairs. Fillmore County is honored to have all of you in our community
today and welcome you to our county.
My name is Karen Brown and I serve as the Fillmore County
Coordinator. Part of my position description is to serve as clerk of
the Board of County Commissioners. Since this is a special project for
the Board, I have supported their efforts in working with all parties
that have contributed effort and expertise related to this project for
a successful collaboration.
The grant process began in Fillmore County following a directive
from the 2008 MN Legislative Session to identify any potential site for
new State Veteran Cemeteries in southern Minnesota. Subsequently a
document was produced by Mr. David P. Swantek, Cemetery Director, MN
State Veterans Cemetery, of Little Falls, which identified an
``underserved veteran population in southeast Minnesota''. This report
was presented to the Board in 2010. The Fillmore County Board of
Commissioners began having conversations about a possible transfer of
county owned land known as the ``County Farm'' for use as a veterans'
cemetery. This incredibly beautiful proposed site features scenic bluff
lands, gentle valleys and the Root River and would seem to be a perfect
use for this land. Including populations of veterans in Iowa and
Wisconsin, an estimated total of 40,000 veterans live within 75 miles
of this proposed site.
After conversations where the land transfer was considered by the
Board, the next step in the local process was to assess the wishes of
the people in Fillmore County. With land values increasing, the members
of the Board wanted to make sure that there was support before any
transfer decisions were made. All veteran service groups and
municipalities in the county were contacted and asked about their
opinions about the cemetery. The result was unanimous: Fillmore County
veteran organizations and city officials whole heartedly supported the
proposal with thirty (30) resolutions of support on file. In addition,
community support has been great--commissioners have not heard
opposition to this project.
In February of 2010, the consensus of the Fillmore County Board of
Commissioners was to begin the process to move toward the transfer of
land to be used for a veterans' cemetery. The 2011 legislature, in
special session, enacted legislation that supported the proposal.
Further, the legislation included language asking for a priority
designation by the Commissioner since the land was proposed to be
donated by Fillmore County for a veterans' cemetery in southeast
Minnesota. Following that legislation, collaborative discussions have
occurred with all levels of government, countless documents have been
submitted, field assessments have been completed, and land records have
been reviewed in preparation for cemetery site approval.
Throughout the process, all of those involved have been very
cooperative in providing support for the project. The County Board made
the land available and municipalities supported the donation. MN
Veterans Affairs officials have been most helpful in answering our
questions and by providing information. Our MN Senators and
Representatives have passed the enabling legislation and are aware of
the State's on-going responsibilities for a veterans' cemetery in
Fillmore County. Last but not least, Federal officials have been
essential in this partnership of governments by funding the Veterans
Cemetery Grants Program.
The keys to an effective process seem to be the following:

Willingness for the local elected officials on the
Fillmore County Board to donate a significant amount of land to make
the proposal more desirable for a better priority designation

Willingness for local elected MN Representatives and
Senators to carry and support legislation for the initial costs for
assessment and evaluation of the site

Willingness of State of MN agencies to work together in a
cooperative manner to come to agreement to finalize the transaction

Willingness of the Federal Government to provide grant
funding to finance the construction of the cemetery, and

Willingness of the State of MN to fund the on-going
operation/maintenance of the cemetery

If I might end on a personal note, I would like to add that I have
been married to a Viet Nam veteran for 42 years in March. Much has
changed for the better for veterans since my husband was discharged
from the Navy in 1969. As you know Viet Nam was an unpopular war so
there were very few thank you comments when he returned.
Today due to national efforts by the Veterans' Affairs and other
veterans' advocacy groups to promote support of military personnel and
veterans, all of that has changed. Veterans now returning from their
tours of duty are welcomed back as heroes, as they should be. Now there
are often big welcome home events with bands playing, veteran groups at
the airport, families and friends waving flags and the media capturing
it all for the evening news. That is a good thing and a tribute to the
VA and the American people to recognize a job well done.
In closing, I would like to say that I feel the national grant
process works well and if we are successful, this cemetery will benefit
our County for many years and in many ways. This collaborative effort
is the ultimate thank you to our military personnel to provide them
with a final resting place that is near their families and friends and
will forever acknowledge their service to our country.
Thank you for your attention and I would be happy to answer any
questions that you might have.

Prepared Statement of Jon Martin, Solid Waste Administrator, Fillmore
County
Good afternoon. Thank you for inviting me to speak to you on the
importance of a veteran's cemetery in Fillmore County and to give you
some background on the land that Fillmore County is in the process of
donating for this purpose.
Let me start by expressing my desire for this cemetery to become a
reality in the very near future. This is an asset that is needed for
the veterans in the southeast corner of Minnesota and also the veterans
in Iowa and Wisconsin. With the travel time to either Minneapolis or
Little Falls, the time it takes to register and walk to the grave site
and then pay your respects, it may take most of the day. This process
can be very exhausting and may be a cause for them not visiting as much
as they would like.
Now some basic information on me. I started With Fillmore County in
January of 1996 as a Transfer Station Attendant and held that job for a
little over 2 years. In 1998, I was appointed to my present position of
Solid Waste Administrator/Resource Recovery Center Manager by the
Fillmore County Board of Commissioners.
Over the course of my employment with Fillmore County, I have been
involved with the land called the Fillmore County Farm. This is a piece
of property that had a couple of old farmsteads on it that were
combined into one parcel. This property was purchased by Fillmore
County to build a transfer station when the only solid waste landfill
in the county closed. Over the course of years, a building was built to
house the Source Separated Composting Facility and the Recycling
Center. Later on, a new building was built with state grant money to
allow the composting operation to be moved under cover and produce a
better finished material. A Household Hazardous Waste building was
added to allow for the collection, sorting, packaging and shipping of
hazardous waste to a licensed shipper for proper disposal. Composting
was discontinued in year 2000 due to a number of reasons, and the
recycling center was changed to a single stream collection system where
recyclables are shipped out for processing and marketing. The recycling
center and the composting building have now been repurposed for use by
the Fillmore County Highway Department for a maintenance shop and a
sand and salt shed.
Fillmore County was involved in a program in the early 1990's that
required the planting of trees on some of the farmland. Fillmore County
planted a mix of red and white pines and some walnut trees. These areas
have now grown into beautiful spots to walk through and area haven for
all kinds of wildlife.
Speaking of wildlife, Fillmore County allowed hunting on the farm
up until last year. With the cemetery moving forward and the need for
soil borings, the artifact discovery process, wetland surveying, and
the need for people to be there doing their jobs, Fillmore County
decided to close the farm to hunting. Many, many people used the farm
for hunting. Some drove a long way because there was not land available
for them to hunt on near home. Every fall, I would have a list of 30-40
people that would ask to hunt there. Everyone was supposed to ask
permission to hunt and were given a list of rules to follow. This
worked out well for the most part. When Fillmore County decided to
close the farm to hunting, very few people were upset when I told them
the reason for closing it was to facilitate the process of getting a
veteran's cemetery here.
In closing, I would like to reinforce to you the support that I
have received by hunters that used the farm, hikers that enjoyed walks
through it, people that use the transfer station and the recycling
facility, fishermen and boaters that use the river, and the many people
and veterans that I talk to on a daily basis that want to make this
veteran's cemetery a reality in Fillmore County.
Thank you for your time and your consideration for this project.
Do you have any questions for me?

Prepared Statement of Hon. Jeremy Miller, Senator, Minnesota
Legislature
I would like to begin by thanking the House Committee on Veterans'
Affairs for holding a public hearing in Preston, Minnesota, regarding
the National Veterans Cemetery in Fillmore County.
Over the past couple years it has been my honor to work closely
with Representative Greg Davids, local officials from Fillmore County,
local veterans organizations, the Minnesota Department of Veterans
Affairs and several others to designate Fillmore County in southeastern
Minnesota as a location for a new veterans cemetery.
The many veterans in our populations have created the need for
additional cemetery space, and the National Cemetery Association
concluded in 2008 that southern Minnesota was outside a recommended 75-
mile service area for the state's two existing veterans cemeteries, at
Fort Snelling in Minneapolis and in Little Falls in central Minnesota.
More than 30,000 veterans live within 50 miles of this site, and it
will mean a tremendous amount to them and their families to know that
this nearby spot will be their final resting place. I am proud to be
part of honoring our veterans in this way.
Again, I would like to extend my most sincere thanks to the House
Committee on Veterans' Affairs for holding this public hearing and all
who have been involved in helping us make the tremendous progress to
get to where we are today.

Prepared Statement of David Swantek, Cemetery Director, Minnesota
Department of Veterans Affairs
Chairman Runyan and Congressman Walz:
It is a tremendous honor to be before you today in Preston MN for
this hearing: ``Honoring our Nation's Veterans: Examining the Veterans
Cemetery Grants Program''.
150 years ago, President Abraham Lincoln promised a war torn nation
that those that had borne the battle would be honored and not
forgotten. A system of National Cemeteries was the product of that
promise. These national shrines remain today, a daily reminder to the
tremendous cost of freedom and democracy which we as American citizens
have enjoyed since 1776.
It has been my deep privilege for the past 20 years to work with
the families of American Heroes, our veterans, during their greatest
times of need. As a cemetery caretaker at the Oregon Trail State
Veterans Cemetery in my home state of Wyoming and for the past 16 years
as the Director of the Minnesota State Veterans Cemetery in Little
Falls, MN I have been a direct witness on a daily basis to the profound
gratitude that veterans families experience knowing their loved ones
rest with honor in perpetuity next to their Comrades in Arms. The State
of Minnesota is proud to provide this honor to those who seek our
services and we are committed to expanding access to this earned
benefit throughout our great State.
AUTHORIZING LEGISLATION
In 1985, the Minnesota State Legislature passed legislation
authorizing a State Veterans Cemetery in Minnesota. The location was
undetermined and the State had no formal plans to construct a State
Veterans Cemetery. In 1986, two WWII veterans from central Minnesota
discovered the authorizing legislation from the previous year and were
determined to have a State Veterans Cemetery constructed in central
Minnesota. As members of a local DAV Chapter, these veterans identified
a parcel of property, raised the funds necessary to purchase the
property and donated the site to the State of Minnesota to be used for
a new State Veterans Cemetery. Due to a lack of development funds, the
State of Minnesota did not pursue development of a cemetery and instead
returned the donated land back to the local DAV Chapter in 1989.
Undeterred, this local group of veterans organized an association and
began soliciting development funds from Veterans Service Organizations,
local businesses and individual donors. This group of dedicated
veterans built a ground swell of support in the Legislature and
ultimately with former Governor Arne Carlson. Governor Carlson signed
into law the establishment of the Minnesota State Veterans Cemetery and
the State would once again take ownership of the site near Little Falls
on September 1, 1994.
Outside the control of the State, a decision was made in the summer
of 1994 to start burying veterans on-site in Little Falls prior to the
State taking ownership of the cemetery property. While understandable
from the perspective of a dedicated group of veterans who had years
earlier witnessed their donation of property to the State produce no
cemetery, this decision was detrimental to the early development of a
State Veterans Cemetery in Little Falls.
VETERANS CEMETERY GRANT
Even though the State of Minnesota had inherited an operational
State Veterans Cemetery in the fall of 1994 and resources originally
intended for development of a new cemetery had to be redirected towards
operational needs, plans moved forward to seek financial assistance
from the National Cemetery Administration (NCA) for development of the
Little Falls cemetery.
In 1995, the State of Minnesota was awarded its first grant from
NCA. At that time the grant program was a 50 percent matching grant,
requiring the State to provide 50 percent of the costs for
construction.
In 1999, Congress authorized NCA to begin providing up to 100
percent of the development costs to construct, expand or improve State
Veterans Cemeteries and the State of Minnesota applied for a second
grant from NCA in 2001 for our cemetery in Little Falls. This project
provided for the major development that had been badly needed since
1994 and constructed the major infrastructure that has allowed our
cemetery in Little Falls to become what it is today. Last July the
cemetery in Little Falls was recognized by the Veterans Cemetery Grants
Program for ``Excellence of Appearance''. Only 4 of the 86 State
Veterans Cemeteries in operation have been honored with this award. I
am especially proud of this recognition given our humble beginnings and
the difficult circumstances under which the cemetery in Little Falls
was established.
EXPANDING AN EARNED BENEFIT
In 2007, Governor Tim Pawlenty, announced as part of his veterans
initiatives for the upcoming Legislative session, that the State would
construct a new State Veterans Cemetery in northeastern Minnesota near
Duluth. A grant pre-application was submitted to the Veterans Cemetery
Grants Program for construction of a new State Veterans Cemetery and a
search for suitable cemetery property began.
During the 2008 Legislative session it was necessary to amend the
authorizing Legislation from 1985 to allow the State to operate more
than one State Veterans Cemetery. The proposed expansion of the State's
Veterans Cemetery program was supported in both the State House and
State Senate. The veterans committee in the State Senate asked for a
report on other potential locations, particularly in southern
Minnesota, for a new State Veterans Cemetery.
In 2009, we reported to the veterans committee that locations in
both southwestern and southeastern Minnesota had veteran populations
that would support the construction of new State Veterans Cemeteries.
By the end of the 2009 Legislative session, the MN Department of
Veterans Affairs (MDVA), was successful in securing a $1.5M
appropriation to be used for the design of two new State Veterans
Cemeteries in northeastern MN and southwestern MN. Following the
session a pre-application for construction of a second new State
Veterans Cemetery in southwestern MN was submitted to the Veterans
Cemetery Grants Program. During this time we continued to search for
suitable property in both northeastern and southwestern Minnesota. We
worked with our State's Department of Natural Resources, local county
government officials in both regions and potential private land donors.
Though we have had several leads and viewed multiple properties,
suitable cemetery sites have proved difficult to find.
MOTIVATED LOCAL PARTNER
In 2010, MDVA was asked to present information to the Fillmore
County Commissioners on the potential for a new State Veterans Cemetery
in southeastern MN. The requirements of a suitable site for
constructing a State Veterans Cemetery were discussed and Fillmore
County expressed their interest in donating property to the State for
the construction of a cemetery. While MDVA was interested in the offer
from Fillmore County, the Legislature had not authorized a new State
Veterans Cemetery in southeastern MN. During the summer of 2010 the
Fillmore County Commissioners and County Administrator visited our
current State Veterans Cemetery in Little Falls. The visit provided an
opportunity for the County to see how a State Veterans Cemetery
operates and what a new cemetery in Fillmore County could mean for
veterans in southeastern MN. I believe that visit solidified the
County's commitment to doing everything possible to make a new State
Veterans Cemetery in Fillmore County a reality.
In 2011, MDVA successfully worked with Representative Greg Davids
and Senator Jeremy Miller to once again amend authorizing Legislation
to allow the Department to pursue construction of a new State Veterans
Cemetery in southeastern MN, along with a creative fiscal amendment
providing for cemetery design without the requirement for any
additional appropriated funds. After passage of this Legislation, in
the summer of 2011, MDVA submitted a third pre-application for the
construction of a new State Veterans Cemetery to the Veterans Cemetery
Grants Program.
Today I'm happy to report that significant site suitability
assessment including environmental and cultural assessment, soil
borings and grading analysis has been completed and the proposed
property appears to meet the suitability requirements for constructing
a new State Veterans Cemetery.
CONCLUSION
Since 1994, when the State of Minnesota committed to provide our
Nation's Heroes with a final resting place which commemorates and
honors their sacrifice and service to our country, we have found
inspired partners and supporters at every turn. From the two central
Minnesota WWII veterans who wanted to see a State Veterans Cemetery
built in the State of Minnesota and spent years raising funds and
soliciting local and political support, to Members of Congress at the
end of the last century who changed Federal law to allow NCA to provide
States with the construction funding necessary to construct, expand or
improve State Veterans Cemeteries in sparsely populated locations in
rural America, to state legislators in Minnesota whose support of
veterans issues across our State positively impacts the lives of our
veterans, to the National Cemetery Administration whose support of
State Veterans Cemeteries provides veterans with a burial option close
to their homes, and local governments like Fillmore County who have the
commitment and determination to do all they can to provide their part
in continuing the promise made by President Lincoln 150 years ago.
Because of this cooperation, from Federal, State and Local partners
I am confident that in the near future, we will gather again to
dedicate a new national shrine in Fillmore County honoring our American
Heroes.

Prepared Statement of Glenn Powers, Deputy Under Secretary for Field
Programs, National Cemetery Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, and Members of the Subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the critical
contribution of the Veterans Cemetery Grants Program (VCGP) to the
mission of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) National Cemetery
Administration (NCA). I know that meeting the burial needs of veterans
and their families is an issue of great interest to Minnesota veterans.
Ensuring Access to a Burial Option for our Veterans
NCA's statutory mission under title 38, United States Code, is to
provide burial and memorialization for eligible veterans and their
eligible spouses and dependents, and to maintain those places of burial
as national shrines. VA considers reasonable access to a burial option
to mean that a first interment option (whether for casketed remains or
cremated remains, either in-ground or in columbaria) in a national,
State, or Tribal veterans cemetery is available within 75 miles of the
veteran's place of residence.
To provide this level of access to our Nation's veterans, VA
administers a nationwide system of 131 national cemeteries in 39 States
and Puerto Rico, as well as 33 soldiers' lots and monument sites. In
Minneapolis, Minnesota, VA operates Ft. Snelling National Cemetery,
which is one of VA's most active cemeteries.
In addition to the federally-administered nationwide system, VA
administers the Veterans Cemetery Grants Program (VCGP), which
establishes a critical partnership by awarding grant funds to States
and Tribes to provide a burial option to our Nation's veterans. The
program, established in 1978 by Congress under Public Law 95-476,
awards grants for cemetery projects to serve the needs of veterans
unlikely to be served by an existing national cemetery. VA may fund up
to 100 percent of development costs for projects to establish, expand,
improve and maintain a State, Tribal or U.S. Territory veterans
cemetery. These federally-funded cemeteries must operate solely for the
interment of eligible veterans and their eligible spouses and
dependents, and they are required to conform to VA-prescribed standards
and guidelines for site selection, planning, construction, appearance,
and operations.
Since 1978, VCGP has awarded over 275 grants, totaling more than
$482 million to establish, expand or improve 86 veterans cemeteries in
41 States, Guam, and Saipan. In Fiscal Year (FY) 2011, these cemeteries
conducted 29,491 burials for veterans and family members, representing
about 20 percent of all veteran cemetery burials in the United States.
Administration of the Veteran Cemetery Grant Program
The VCGP grant processes and implementing regulations are designed
to ensure fair and equitable grant administration to benefit the
greatest number of veterans. In order for VA to give the highest
consideration to a pre-application, and before a project may be awarded
a grant, the State or Tribal Organization must pass legislation
authorizing the project and providing the necessary architectural/
engineering (A/E) funds to allow the project to be developed. One
hundred percent of allowable A/E costs will be reimbursed following
grant award. This legislation and funding action will ensure that the
pre-application receives the highest ``Priority List'' ranking.
Annually, VCGP uses veteran population data, confirmation of
legislation and funding action, as well as the grant type to prioritize
completed applications into a ``Priority List.'' VA categorizes each
application in one of four priority groups:

Priority 1 projects are gravesite expansion or
improvement projects that are needed to continue service at an existing
veterans cemetery that will deplete available gravesites within 4
years. This includes phased development of currently undeveloped land.

Priority 2 projects are new cemetery establishment
projects.

Priority 3 projects are planned phased gravesite
development projects that will deplete available gravesites after 4
years.

Priority 4 projects are for other improvements to
cemetery infrastructure, such as building expansion and upgrades to
roads and irrigation systems that are not directly related to the
development of new gravesites. This includes operation and maintenance
projects that address NCA's national shrine standards of appearance.

This simple and open process ensures that grants are provided to
fund projects that will improve or maintain access to a burial option.
As Congress appropriates the VCGP budget on an annual basis, grant
opportunity letters are sent by VA for all projects on the ``Priority
List'' that are above the approved budget line. Once a State or Tribe
receives an opportunity letter, it has until the fourth quarter of that
same fiscal year to complete all necessary planning work (design/
architectural and engineering), receive vendor bid tabulations, and
complete the remaining grant application documentation. Upon successful
completion of these process steps, VA officially approves the grant
award and work can begin immediately. VCGP continually monitors
construction progress, with Federal grant funds reimbursed consistent
with the progress of the project.
State of Minnesota VCGP Grants/Applications
VCGP awarded grant funding totaling $3.9 million to the State of
Minnesota in 1995 and 2002 for the large scale expansion of the
Minnesota State Veterans Cemetery in Little Falls. This cemetery has
provided a burial option for nearly 4,000 veterans and their families
since it was established in 1994.
Currently, the State of Minnesota has four different grant
applications ranked at various positions on the FY 2012 Priority List.
The first application (MN-11-06) would provide a grant to expand and
improve the Minnesota State Veterans Cemetery in Little Falls.
Minnesota has three additional applications to establish new veterans
cemeteries in South East (Fillmore County) (MN-10-05), Redwood County
(MN-09-04), and in Duluth (St. Louis County) (MN-08-03).
Of the three establishment grant applications on the FY 2012
``Priority List,'' Minnesota initially opted to defer the Redwood
County and Duluth (St. Louis County) applications, as land has not been
acquired. States, Territories and Tribal governments are solely
responsible for acquisition of the necessary land. The South East
(Fillmore County) grant application would establish a new veterans
cemetery for over 50,000 unserved veterans. The proposed site is
approximately 155 acres. In February 2012, Minnesota deferred its
application to allow Fillmore County to resolve title issues associated
with the site. The application will be included on the FY 2013
``Priority List'', and once all issues are resolved, the application
can be considered for a grant award, as determined by the approved
budget and per the processes outlined above.
Recent Developments in VCGP Service to Veterans
VA appreciates Congress' continued interest in the Veteran Cemetery
Grant Program--both through annual budgetary support and recent
statutory changes that further enhance VCGP's ability to support VA's
mission to serve veterans. Under Public Law 109-461, VCGP may now
administer grants to Tribal Organizations in the same manner and under
the same conditions as grants to States. Since last fall, VA has
awarded three grants for the establishment of Tribal veterans
cemeteries on Tribal lands. Recipients were the Rosebud Sioux Tribe in
South Dakota, the Yurok Tribe in California, and the Pascua Yaqui Tribe
in Arizona. Additional Tribal governments have submitted applications
for consideration in FY 2012. Under additional provisions of Public Law
110-157, VA may now offer operating grants to assist States and Tribes
to achieve and maintain standards of appearance commensurate with
national cemetery shrine status.
Thank you, again, for the opportunity to share an overview of VA's
Veteran Cemetery Grants Program--an expanding partnership between VA
and State and Tribal governments which is critical to ensuring veterans
have access to the benefits and services they have earned through their
service and sacrifice. NCA's partnership with individual State
departments and directors continues to grow--and grow stronger. Nearly
25 State Veteran Cemetery directors attended NCA's annual training
event in Nashville, Tennessee last week, including the Director of the
Minnesota State Veterans Cemetery in Little Falls.
I look forward to working with the members of this Subcommittee as
we jointly meet the burial needs of the veterans we are entrusted to
serve. I would be pleased to answer any questions.
MATERIAL SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
Prepared Statement of The Hon. Gregory Davids, Speaker Pro Tempore,
Minnesota Legislature
As the Chair of the Minnesota House of Representatives Taxes
Committee, and chief author of H.F. 226 that authorizes the planning of
this cemetery, I would like to thank the House Committee on Veterans'
Affairs Subcommittee on Disability Assistance and Memorial Affairs for
holding a public hearing in Preston, Minnesota regarding the National
Veterans Cemetery in Fillmore County. I am looking forward to hearing
your findings as you explore the grant process.
The veterans' cemetery in Fillmore County will fill a great need
for our veterans and their families who have so selflessly served our
great country. This cemetery will serve not only south eastern
Minnesota, but northern Iowa, and western Wisconsin.
I would like to thank the Fillmore County Commissioners for their
tremendous support of this cemetery and for their generous donation of
the beautiful property that will serve those who have served our
country. A special thank you goes to all the veterans' organizations
and area cities for their strong support.
I would also like to thank Senator Jeremy Miller and former Senator
Sharon Ropes for their tireless efforts to see this project come to
reality. I am attending my daughter's graduation ceremony at Baylor
University in Waco, Texas, and I regret that I am unable to attend this
hearing. I will continue to make every effort to see this project
through until the end.

As Always Yours,
Your Friend,
Gregory M. Davids


