- OVERSIGHT OF THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 10, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov
www.cha.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-607             WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin, Chairman

BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOSEPH MORELLE, New York,
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia              Ranking Member
GREG MURPHY, North Carolina          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             NORMA TORRES, California
MIKE CAREY, Ohio                     DEREK KILMER, Washington
ANTHONY D'ESPOSITO, New York
LAUREL LEE, Florida

Mike Platt,  Staff Director
Jamie Fleet,  Minority Staff Director
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Opening Statements

Chairman Bryan Steil, Representative from the State of Wisconsin.     1
Prepared statement of Chairman Bryan Steil...................     2
Ranking Member Joseph Morelle, Representative from the State of
New York.......................................................     3
Prepared statement of Ranking Member Joseph Morelle..........     5

Witness

Dr. Carla Hayden, the Librarian of Congress......................     6
Prepared statement of Dr. Carla Hayden.......................     9

Questions for the Record

Dr. Carla Hayden answers to submitted questions..................    32

OVERSIGHT OF THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS

----------

July 10, 2024

Committee on House Administration,
House of Representatives,
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:17 a.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Bryan Steil
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Steil, Loudermilk, Griffith,
Murphy, Carey, D'Esposito, Morelle, Sewell, and Kilmer.
Staff present: March Bell, General Counsel and
Parliamentarian; Annemarie Cake, Professional Staff and Deputy
Clerk; Kristen Monterroso, Director of Operations and
Legislative Clerk; Michael Platt, Staff Director; Elliot Smith,
Director of Oversight; Evan Van Orman, Oversight Professional
Staff; Jordan Wilson, Director of Member Services; Khalil
Abboud, Minority Deputy Staff Director; Jamie Fleet, Minority
Staff Director; Kwame Newton, Minority Oversight Counsel;
Heather Painter, Minority Legislative Director; Owen Reilly,
Minority Professional Staff; and Matt Schlesinger, Minority
Senior Counsel.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRYAN STEIL, CHAIRMAN OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WISCONSIN

Chairman Steil. The Committee on House Administration will
come to order.
I note that a quorum is present.
Without objection, the chair may declare a recess at any
time.
Also without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days so Members may submit any materials they
wish to include therein.
Thank you, Ranking Member Morelle, Members of the
Committee, and our witnesses, for participating at today's
panel.
Before we begin, I would like to also welcome back Dr.
Murphy. It is spectacular to have you back here at the dais
with us. We missed you while you were gone, but excited that
you are on your way to a full recovery, we all hope. Welcome
back.
Dr. Murphy. Thank you very much.
Chairman Steil. Today, the Committee on House
Administration continues our legislative oversight by focusing
today on the Library of Congress. We thank Dr. Hayden, the
Librarian of Congress, for joining us today to discuss the work
the Library of Congress is doing.
The Library of Congress is the third-largest agency under
the Committee on House Administration's jurisdiction and falls
under the legislative branch. In Fiscal Year 2024, the Library
of Congress's budget was $852 million.
The Library of Congress, which was first established in
1800, serves as the largest library not only in America but the
largest in the world. The Library of Congress is home to
millions of books, films, newspapers, and more.
Nearly 2 million people visit the Library of Congress every
year. The visitors range from tourists to researchers to world-
renowned scholars, who go to the Library of Congress to explore
the wealth of knowledge held inside.
Even more people access the Library of Congress's resources
online. Because of this, it is crucial that the Library of
Congress is continuing its modernization efforts and working to
welcome more visitors every year.
The Library of Congress is also home to the Congressional
Research Service, which has been a crucial, valued resource for
Congress for over a century. The CRS works in a nonpartisan
fashion to provide policy and legal analysis to Committees and
Members in the House and the Senate.
Since 2019, the Library of Congress Office of Inspector
General has identified various areas of improvement in
enterprise-wide project and budget management, cybersecurity,
data storage, and collections management that have taken up
much of the Library of Congress's energy.
Additionally, the Library of Congress has been working to
implement their Visitor Experience Master Plan. Since 2019, the
Visitor Experience Master Plan budget has increased by $33
million, resulting primarily from inflation in recent years.
Today, we will be taking a close look at the budget for the
Visitor Experience Master Plan, as well as focus on the initial
scope set in 2019 compared to the current scope today.
IT modernization is critical, and it is key that the
Library of Congress continues to work toward improving their IT
systems.
We will also be focusing on the general oversight of the
Library of Congress. This oversight includes the Library of
Congress's top management challenges, as identified by the
Office of the Inspector General; the Fiscal Year 1924 to 1928
strategic plan; preservation and digitalization of collections;
and the Congressional Research Service Director search.
While progress has been made across the board at the
Library of Congress, there is still more to do to make sure
they are modernizing for what researchers and scholars need. I
look forward to a robust discussion today to ensure we are
working to advance the Library of Congress's modernization
efforts.
With that, I will yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle,
for 5 minutes for the purpose of providing an opening
statement.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Steil follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION BRYAN STEIL

Today, the Committee on House Administration continues our
legislative oversight by focusing today on the Library of
Congress. We thank Dr. Hayden, the Librarian of Congress, for
joining us today to discuss the work the Library of Congress is
doing.
The Library of Congress is the third-largest agency under
the Committee on House Administration's jurisdiction and falls
under the legislative branch. In Fiscal Year 2024, the Library
of Congress's budget was $852 million.
The Library of Congress, which was first established in
1800, serves as the largest library not only in America but the
largest in the world. The Library of Congress is home to
millions of books, films, newspapers, and more.
Nearly 2 million people visit the Library of Congress every
year. The visitors range from tourists to researchers to world-
renowned scholars, who go to the Library of Congress to explore
the wealth of knowledge held inside.
Even more people access the Library of Congress's resources
online. Because of this, it is crucial that the Library of
Congress is continuing its modernization efforts and working to
welcome more visitors every year.
The Library of Congress is also home to the Congressional
Research Service, which has been a crucial, valued resource for
Congress for over a century. The CRS works in a nonpartisan
fashion to provide policy and legal analysis to Committees and
Members in the House and the Senate.
Since 2019, the Library of Congress Office of Inspector
General has identified various areas of improvement in
enterprise-wide project and budget management, cybersecurity,
data storage, and collections management that have taken up
much of the Library of Congress's energy.
Additionally, the Library of Congress has been working to
implement their Visitor Experience Master Plan. Since 2019, the
Visitor Experience Master Plan budget has increased by $33
million, resulting primarily from inflation in recent years.
Today, we will be taking a close look at the budget for the
Visitor Experience Master Plan, as well as focus on the initial
scope set in 2019 compared to the current scope today.
IT modernization is critical, and it is key that the
Library of Congress continues to work toward improving their IT
systems.
We will also be focusing on the general oversight of the
Library of Congress. This oversight includes the Library of
Congress's top management challenges, as identified by the
Office of the Inspector General; the Fiscal Year 1924 to 1928
strategic plan; preservation and digitalization of collections;
and the Congressional Research Service Director search.
While progress has been made across the board at the
Library of Congress, there is still more to do to make sure
they are modernizing for what researchers and scholars need. I
look forward to a robust discussion today to ensure we are
working to advance the Library of Congress's modernization
efforts.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH MORELLE, RANKING MEMBER OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
NEW YORK

Mr. Morelle. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here.
Welcome back, Dr. Murphy. Great to have you with us, and
praying for your continued recovery. You look great.
Dr. Murphy. Just so you know, if I say something that is
not really great on the record for the next year or so, I am
just going to say I had brain surgery, OK?
Mr. Morelle. Blanket immunity. OK. We got that. Thank you.
Chairman Steil. Ordered.
Mr. Morelle. I also want to welcome students from
Gettysburg College who are here with their very cool T-shirts.
Because Ethics bars me from getting a free one, I am willing to
pay you for one of those cool T-shirts, so bear that in mind.
Dr. Hayden, always a pleasure to see you and a pleasure to
share--discuss our shared passion for the Library of Congress,
which I think is one of the most extraordinary institutions in
the world.
Your leadership over the past 8 years has been
transformative. I, like the other Members of the Committee,
look forward to hearing from you today about your work to
modernize the Library, improve the visitor experience here in
Washington, and increase access to the Library's vast
collections to citizens all through the country.
Since its founding back in 1800, the Library of Congress
has become more than a repository of books; it is the very
cornerstone of American democracy.
In a recent op-ed you co-authored with the Secretary of the
Smithsonian and Archivist of the United States, you said that
the Library is more important than ever as a trustworthy source
of history, and you noted that it maintains our collective
memory as a Nation, something critical to an informed
citizenry.
I completely agree with those sentiments, and I am looking
forward to hearing more about the ways in which the Library
achieves that important goal.
To that end, I am grateful that you have dedicated
significant resources to connecting the Library to all
Americans.
For those that are here in D.C., the visitor experience
transformation project, including the recently opened Treasures
Gallery--which is fabulous; I encourage everyone to come and
spend time there--will facilitate even greater and more
meaningful visitation to the already-breathtaking Thomas
Jefferson Building, which I think is one of the most gorgeous
buildings not only in Washington but in the world. I look
forward to an update on that project.
For individuals who cannot make it to D.C., cannot get
here, I am pleased that under your leadership the Library has
made great strides in digital access, allowing citizens
literally from coast to coast to explore our national
treasures.
I also want to hear more about modernization initiatives
that are enhancing the Library's services and capabilities not
just for Members and congressional staff but for all Americans.
I am particularly interested in your vision for the
Congressional Research Service. I believe CRS is at an
inflection point, and the decision you made in appointing a new
permanent Director--that you make, in that regard--I know that
you are working on that--will shape the way CRS operates for
decades to come.
It will be imperative for the new Director to ensure CRS's
products and services are designed to adapt to meet the needs
of a constantly changing Congress. To achieve this, the new
Director is going to need to address longstanding management
and organizational issues within CRS, including morale, which
we understand at times has not been as high as we would like,
the high attrition, and lack of diversity at senior levels in
the organization.
The Library's educational outreach has touched millions,
and events like the National Book Festival have helped foster a
love for learning and literacy nationwide. From students to
researchers, from history enthusiasts to inspiring
entrepreneurs, the Library serves a diverse array of Americans.
As we, together, explore ways in which the Library has enhanced
its service delivery, I am also keen to hear about your roadmap
for the Library's future.
How will you continue to make the Library's collections
more accessible? How will the Library continue to ensure its
data, from copyright deposits to personally identifiable
information, is protected from cyber criminals, which is a
growing concern that we all have? How will the Library leverage
artificial intelligence to further modernize the institution,
and what challenges might the use of AI bring to the Library?
Your service, Dr. Hayden, to learners of all ages and
circumstances and your experience as an innovator in library
and information sciences are a tremendous asset to the
Committee, the Congress, and the country.
Under your leadership--and I note that you often like to
say that you are an actual librarian, which we so appreciate--
the Library has shown it can adapt and thrive in a rapidly
changing world. I am looking forward to our discussion on how
we can work together to ensure the Library continues to
inspire, educate, and serve Americans for generations to come.
Again, thank you for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to speak, and
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Morelle follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION JOSEPH MORELLE

Dr. Hayden, always a pleasure to see you and a pleasure to
share--discuss our shared passion for the Library of Congress,
which I think is one of the most extraordinary institutions in
the world.
Your leadership over the past 8 years has been
transformative. I, like the other Members of the Committee,
look forward to hearing from you today about your work to
modernize the Library, improve the visitor experience here in
Washington, and increase access to the Library's vast
collections to citizens all through the country.
Since its founding back in 1800, the Library of Congress
has become more than a repository of books; it is the very
cornerstone of American democracy.
In a recent op-ed you co-authored with the Secretary of the
Smithsonian and Archivist of the United States, you said that
the Library is more important than ever as a trustworthy source
of history, and you noted that it maintains our collective
memory as a Nation, something critical to an informed
citizenry.
I completely agree with those sentiments, and I am looking
forward to hearing more about the ways in which the Library
achieves that important goal.
To that end, I am grateful that you have dedicated
significant resources to connecting the Library to all
Americans.
For those that are here in D.C., the visitor experience
transformation project, including the recently opened Treasures
Gallery--which is fabulous; I encourage everyone to come and
spend time there--will facilitate even greater and more
meaningful visitation to the already-breathtaking Thomas
Jefferson Building, which I think is one of the most gorgeous
buildings not only in Washington but in the world. I look
forward to an update on that project.
For individuals who cannot make it to D.C., cannot get
here, I am pleased that under your leadership the Library has
made great strides in digital access, allowing citizens
literally from coast to coast to explore our national
treasures.
I also want to hear more about modernization initiatives
that are enhancing the Library's services and capabilities not
just for Members and congressional staff but for all Americans.
I am particularly interested in your vision for the
Congressional Research Service. I believe CRS is at an
inflection point, and the decision you made in appointing a new
permanent Director--that you make, in that regard--I know that
you are working on that--will shape the way CRS operates for
decades to come.
It will be imperative for the new Director to ensure CRS's
products and services are designed to adapt to meet the needs
of a constantly changing Congress. To achieve this, the new
Director is going to need to address longstanding management
and organizational issues within CRS, including morale, which
we understand at times has not been as high as we would like,
the high attrition, and lack of diversity at senior levels in
the organization.
The Library's educational outreach has touched millions,
and events like the National Book Festival have helped foster a
love for learning and literacy nationwide. From students to
researchers, from history enthusiasts to inspiring
entrepreneurs, the Library serves a diverse array of Americans.
As we, together, explore ways in which the Library has enhanced
its service delivery, I am also keen to hear about your roadmap
for the Library's future.
How will you continue to make the Library's collections
more accessible? How will the Library continue to ensure its
data, from copyright deposits to personally identifiable
information, is protected from cyber criminals, which is a
growing concern that we all have? How will the Library leverage
artificial intelligence to further modernize the institution,
and what challenges might the use of AI bring to the Library?
Your service, Dr. Hayden, to learners of all ages and
circumstances and your experience as an innovator in library
and information sciences are a tremendous asset to the
Committee, the Congress, and the country.
Under your leadership--and I note that you often like to
say that you are an actual librarian, which we so appreciate--
the Library has shown it can adapt and thrive in a rapidly
changing world. I am looking forward to our discussion on how
we can work together to ensure the Library continues to
inspire, educate, and serve Americans for generations to come.

Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Without objection, all other Members' opening statements,
as well as letters for the record submitted from outside
parties, will be made part of the hearing record if they are
submitted to the Committee clerk by 5 p.m. today.
Today we have one witness.
We welcome you, Dr. Carla Hayden, the Librarian of
Congress.
Dr. Hayden was sworn in as the 14th Librarian of Congress
on September 14th, 2016.
We appreciate you being with us today and look forward to
your testimony.
Pursuant to paragraph (b) of Committee Rule 6, the witness
will please stand and raise her right hand.
[Witness sworn.]
Chairman Steil. Let the record show that the witness
answered in the affirmative.
We appreciate you being--you may be seated. We appreciate
you being here today and look forward to your testimony.
Let me remind you that we have read your written statement
and it will appear in full in the hearing record; you are to
limit your presentation to a brief summary.
It is now my honor to recognize the Librarian of Congress,
Dr. Hayden, for 5 minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DR. CARLA HAYDEN, PH.D., LIBRARIAN OF CONGRESS

Dr. Hayden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Morelle, and Members of the Committee. We are very pleased to
have this opportunity to appear before you to update you on the
Library of Congress's activities and programs.
With more than 178 million physical items and a growing
digital collection, the Library takes tremendous pride in our
role as the steward of the national collection and a repository
for our shared cultural heritage.
However, it is not enough that the collections be
preserved; they must also be usable. There are many ways that
our users--Congress's constituents--connect to the Library,
virtually and in person.
In fiscal year 1923, our robust and expanding online
presence recorded over 150 million visits to the Library
websites and over 532 million page views from those who could
not visit in person.
The Library responded to more than 681,000 reference
requests from Congress and others.
The Congressional Research Service, or CRS, published
nearly 1,200 new products and handled more than 76,000
congressional requests--3,000 more than the previous year.
Our Congressional Relations Office administered over 800
events, displays, and tours for Members of Congress throughout
the year.
The U.S. Copyright Office issued in a timely manner--and I
emphasize that--more than 441 copyright registrations.
The National Library for the Blind and Print Disabled, NLS,
circulated more than 24.5 million copies of Braille, audio, and
large-print materials for the blind and visually impaired.
In addition to all of those connection points, our
buildings continue to welcome millions of visitors,
researchers, and congressional stakeholders each year. In
fiscal year 1923, the Library welcomed over 726,000 visitors to
the historic Jefferson Building, a 95-percent increase over the
previous year.
We have taken great strides to introduce new programs,
initiatives, and activities to bring in new audiences. For
instance, the ``Live! at the Library'' Thursday night events in
Jefferson welcomed more than 40,000 in-person guests in fiscal
year 1923 and garnered additional audiences with several events
being streamed online.
For visitors to Capitol Hill, a pilot program allowing
visitors to explore the wonderful Main Reading Room during
specified hours received an overwhelmingly positive response
from over 100,000 guests who toured the space. We are excited
about the opportunities like this to open up what we call the
``treasure chest'' and many more opportunities.
To that end, you know that the visitor experience
initiative is one of the top priorities for the Library. We
have been executing it in partnership with Congress and the
Architect of the Capitol.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank this
Committee's direct involvement, with monthly briefings and
biweekly reporting over the last 17 months. That has been a
tremendous help, and we hope that that will continue as the
project continues.
Because the first of the three components of the initiative
did open in June, with the unveiling of the new David M.
Rubenstein Treasures Gallery, in addition to the opening of a
new Library store. The Treasures Gallery will serve as a
dedicated space, the first permanent dedicated space, to
display the scope and wonder of the Library's collections. We
will be able to periodically rotate exhibits. The inaugural
exhibit theme is ``Collecting Memories,'' and, I must say, it
is breathtaking.
A youth center will open in late 2025, attracting new
audiences to interact with our collections and exercise their
creativity in a dedicated space.
The last component to open will be a visitor orientation
gallery, scheduled for early 2027. This space will include the
Thomas Jefferson Library, a look into the stacks for all the
visitors who come to the Library and wonder where and how we
store the world's largest book collection. There will be a new
exhibit space to tell the Library's story and very engaging
media interactors.
Yes, elsewhere in the Library, major technology
enhancements are being achieved in several of our service
units. We are investing in technology, and we are making sure
that we are using it to our best advantage.
As an example, the Library is constantly enhancing the
online availability of the legislative data with continuous
development of Congress.gov, adding new functionality every 3
weeks based on user feedback. CRS has been working closely with
our Chief Information Officer to modernize many aspects of
CRS's operations. Copyright Office is continuing to make
progress, and their most complex component of their
modernization is a new registration application.
In closing, the Library takes great pride in serving
Congress and the American people, and with Congress's support,
our collections and services will continue to be unmatched. We
thank this Committee, in particular, for its interest in the
Library.
I look forward to answering any questions, hearing your
concerns, so that we can really make the Library of Congress,
as our strategic plan says, a library for all.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hayden follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF DR. CARLA HAYDEN
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Dr. Hayden.
I will begin our questions, followed by the Ranking Member,
and then we will alternate between parties. I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes for the purpose of asking questions.
Dr. Hayden, thank you for being here.
In your remarks, you noted the work that is being done, in
particular, on the visitor experience--in particular, Visitor
Experience Master Plan. ``VEMP,'' I think, is the acronym for
short. We are familiar with that and also some of the
challenges.
This VEMP began in 2019 with really good intentions to
showcase the national treasures of the Library of Congress. As
you noted, there are a lot of national treasures at the Library
of Congress. We came through in COVID, through inflation,
rising construction costs, and some other challenges.
When VEMP began, it was estimated to cost $60 million
total, with $20 million coming from donors and $40 million paid
from the American taxpayers. Is that accurate from 2019?
Dr. Hayden. Yes.
Chairman Steil. Then, as the costs have shifted, it is now
set to cost $90 million, $70 million of which would be from
taxpayers. Is that accurate?
Dr. Hayden. Yes.
Chairman Steil. I just want to discuss the timeline, some
of the challenges--and noted, with COVID and other things that
have come up.
Do you still anticipate VEMP being completed by 2027?
Dr. Hayden. Definitely. We have been really anxious to be
able to work with the new Architect of the Capitol to continue
that progress that we have had, Thomas Austin.
We are scheduled to make sure that we are able to make all
of the deadlines. It is something that we are concerned about,
but we think that we will continue on the progress.
Chairman Steil. And--but--that is great.
Do you think you have everything you need to be able to
execute on the timeline that you have in front of you? I know
we now have a new Architect of the Capitol that has been in
that position for a handful of weeks who is ramping up. Do you
feel like you have what you need to be able to execute on this?
Dr. Hayden. The Library has what it needs. The design
elements have been worked out with the Architect of the
Capitol. We are now in the phase that it really is part of the
Architect of the Capitol's domain: preparing spaces----
Chairman Steil. Terrific.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. for fabrication of cases that the
Library is responsible for.
That is the work that is going to be done now. In fact, it
has started.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much. I think we are all
excited as this--as the full project rolls out. I think it is a
great opportunity for people to be able to come in and have
access to a lot of the treasures that the Library of Congress
has.
Let me shift gears slightly. I know a lot of the LOC staff
has been utilizing telework, in particular, in a substantive
shift since before the pandemic. Is that an accurate
description?
Dr. Hayden. The--yes.
We have taken a rather different approach from some other
agencies. We started--we were the first legislative-branch
agency to open to the public. We did a thorough examination
from each position and determined how much telework would be
appropriate. We started basically from the bottom up and went.
There are some positions that are more appropriate for telework
and others it is impossible to do.
Chairman Steil. Understood.
What would be the building utilization rate, then, of the
Madison and Adams Building, say, pre-COVID to today's
environment with the utilization of telework?
Dr. Hayden. The space utilization has been thoroughly
examined as well, because we have had to make sure that we had
spaces for staff members who were coming in at different times,
and in the Madison Building in particular, we are making sure
that we have space for expansion of the collections.
Even though collections in the future will be coming in
even more digitally, we still will have needs for physical
collections, like closed stacks and----
Chairman Steil. You are seeing a transition from areas
inside both the Madison and Adams Building that was previously
utilized by----
Dr. Hayden. Adams Building.
Chairman Steil [continuing]. individuals working on
premises into collections?
Dr. Hayden. In fact, we have relocated and saved--a $1
million plan to have a separate building for the National
Library for the Blind. We have relocated them into the Adams
Building. That was a great savings also, savings on rent that
we were paying.
Chairman Steil. Do you know how much will be saved over
that? I was going to ask you a question on--and you brought it
up. Do you know what the savings will be by that relocation?
Dr. Hayden. Well, immediately, the plan for a $100 million
estimate of a new facility, and even looking at renovating a
space that had been designated. Then, of course, the rent,
which was in the millions of dollars a year, and had been a
rental space for NLS for 50 years.
The savings is wonderful and also the fact that we now can
have more programming and the people who use our NLS services
are able to have access to other places in the Library on
Capitol Hill.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much. Appreciate you being
here. Appreciate your testimony.
I will yield back.
I will recognize the Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Hayden, it is said that all politics is local. Given
that, I am actually going to start with a local issue in
Rochester. My district, Rochester, New York, is home to
Frederick Douglass. It is where he lived, where he published
The North Star, where he is buried, at Mount Hope Cemetery in
Rochester.
My community, in close coordination with the Douglass
family, is endeavoring to build a fitting tribute to this
American hero, the Frederick Douglass Museum Center. The center
will focus on the pillars of Mr. Douglass's life--knowledge,
equality, and justice.
The Library, your Library, is home to a vast collection of
Douglass papers and archives.
A two-part question. First, will you commit to having the
Library of Congress work with the Douglass family on developing
the museum? Second, would you be willing to visit my district
in the coming months to learn more about the project and how we
could work together?
Dr. Hayden. I will take the second one first. Yes, in terms
of visiting. Because Frederick Douglass, as you noted, not only
has a significant impact in terms of collections that are
utilized by researchers at the Library of Congress but I also
have a personal connection. He famously said, ``Once you learn
to read, you will be forever free.''
We would be delighted to also invite the people who are
working on that project to, if they could, come and see some of
the collection. There might be opportunities--and we have done
this with other institutions, partnerships--where we provide
facsimiles of some of the original materials.
In their development of a museum, seeing and having the
people that are working with them look at the original
materials, it----
Mr. Morelle. That is great. Thank you.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. might be helpful.
Mr. Morelle. Well, thank you. I look forward to that. I
appreciate your willingness to assist in what I think will be
an amazing project.
Let me shift just briefly to the Congressional Research
Service. It serves a vital role here in Congress. I must say
that I have had and my staff has had many, many briefings by
CRS staff. I find them to be very, very helpful. Really
talented people.
Can you give an update on the search for a new permanent
Director and the qualities that are of particular interest as
you work through that process?
Dr. Hayden. First, I would like to thank Mr. Robert Newlen
for serving as the Interim Director. He is here today. He has
had already a substantial and excellent career at the Library
and the CRS for over 40 years. He has brought stability and
progress to the Service during this period.
He has also been very helpful as we have an interview panel
of experts to consider the candidates. They are going to be
making recommendations to me very shortly. They have had a
substantial number of people who are interested.
One of the main qualities, though, that I am definitely
committed to is that the new Director will continue with the
progress that has been made and provide the continued stability
to advance CRS. That will be one of the main----
Mr. Morelle. Very good. Thank you.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. parts that I need to look at.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you. Thank the gentleman for his great
work over the last several months.
Last October, cyber criminals attacked the British Library,
demanded a sizable ransom to restore services and return data.
Nine months later, the British Library is not even close to
reopening and recovering.
Has the Library studied that attack and learned any lessons
that you could share with us?
Dr. Hayden. Yes. I just want to go on the record as saying
that we join with other libraries in the library community in
wishing them well.
We have benefited from the fact that the British Library
actually issued a report with 16 recommendations based on their
experience that they shared with the larger library community.
We had 8 of those 16 already implemented----
Mr. Morelle. Great.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. and we were in the process of
implementing the remaining 8.
With Congress's support, we have--because, as you know, the
fact that we have additional security needs beyond what the
British Library has--the Congressional Research Service,
Copyright Office. Cybersecurity has been a major concern for
us.
Mr. Morelle. Well, I appreciate it and would appreciate
updates.
One last question, if I can just be indulged. Really
important. I was telling my wife, who spent 31 years as a
middle-school English language arts teacher, that you had the
largest comic book collection----
Dr. Hayden. Yes.
Mr. Morelle [continuing]. in the world. She said, ``They
are called `graphic novels.' ''
I want you to break the tie between my wife and I. I call
them ``comic books.'' She says ``graphic novels.'' Do you have
a professional opinion?
Dr. Hayden. They are both. Comic----
Mr. Morelle. That is so political. I----
Dr. Hayden. Graphic novels are thicker and----
Mr. Morelle. Ah.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. usually----
Mr. Morelle. Ah. Very good.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. and more modern.
Mr. Morelle. All right. There you go.
Thank you, Dr. Hayden.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. I would always go with your wife over you,
sir.
The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Ranking--I now recognize Mr. Loudermilk for
5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is good to see you again. We have had several
interactions over the years, both in this Committee and over at
the Library, so, Dr. Hayden, it is good to--that you are with
us again.
When the Library of Congress was first founded, it was
intended to be a resource to inform Congress. Over the last two
centuries, the Library of Congress's role in our Nation has
expanded to include greater direct engagement with the American
people, as many of the projects that you have discussed here
today are illustrating. However, in recent years, it seems that
the Library has moved away from its primary and preeminent
mission to support Congress in the legislative process.
Now, as the longest-serving Member of this Committee, I
have seen some changes in that over the years. In fact, several
years ago, we were having a hearing with the Library regarding
the strategic plan, and there was an effort then to change the
mission statement to minimize the role of being the Library
``of Congress.'' Most recently, in many of the Library of
Congress's branding, which emphasizes ``Library'' in big, bold
letters, with ``Congress'' in much smaller letters beneath it.
There has been a concern of a shift away from being the Library
``of Congress.''
The question is, is the Library still focused on its
preeminent mission to serve Congress and to prioritize Congress
among its customers? If so, how are you carrying that out?
Dr. Hayden. Well, thank you for that question, because we
remain--and it is in our name--the Library of Congress. By
opening up more opportunities for the general public,
Congress's constituents, to access some of the collections, we
have not deviated from our primary mission to serve Congress.
The emphasis on the Congressional Research Service shows
that. They are still the research and reference arm for
Congress, and we have extended what services that we can
provide for Congress.
That is still in our mission. We have not deviated from it,
and we will not.
Mr. Loudermilk. Well, that is good to hear.
Just--and, going forward--and the things that are happening
with bringing the public more engaged, I think, is very, very
good. Just, as we go forward, I think it is important that we
continue that it is the Library of Congress, not just the
national library. I thank you for your response there.
On another issue, in August of last year, CIGIE produced a
report with serious allegations surrounding the independence of
the Library of Congress's former inspector general. The report
found that Inspector General Hyde's relationship with a senior
employee wrongfully created the appearance that the
independence of Inspector General Hyde and his office was
compromised. According to their report, the IG compromised the
independence of his office.
Are you familiar with that investigation and the findings
of CIGIE?
Dr. Hayden. I am familiar and received notice, the Library
received notice--and believe it was January 2023----
Mr. Loudermilk. Right.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. that is when we first received any
indication about the investigation itself--that the issue had
been closed. Also, in that intervening time, Mr. Hyde had left
the Library----
Mr. Loudermilk. Right.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. in 2020. That is the only
notification----
Mr. Loudermilk. OK.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. that we got from CIGIE.
Mr. Loudermilk. The reason I am bringing this up is, a
whistleblower had alleged many of the findings that were
highlighted in this report, but the whistleblower was fired by
the Library of Congress.
Now, that whistleblower came to my office several years ago
with these types of allegations. We looked into it, did not
find really anything credible at the time. Now that this report
has come out--this report is alleging the same things that this
whistleblower alleged that led to their termination.
Real quick, since we are running out of time here: Is the
Library of Congress willing to reopen their review of the
conduct toward that particular whistleblower now, with this new
revelation that there may have been truth to the allegations?
Dr. Hayden. We--I would need to work with you on getting
information about the particular whistleblower----
Mr. Loudermilk. OK.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. and also work with the current
acting inspector general at the Library.
Mr. Loudermilk. OK.
Dr. Hayden. I definitely want to follow up with you on
that----
Mr. Loudermilk. OK. I appreciate it. And----
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. and look into the matter.
Mr. Loudermilk [continuing]. I will make sure my staff gets
with your staff, because we just want to make sure----
Dr. Hayden. That would be helpful.
Mr. Loudermilk [continuing]. that this gets covered.
Thank you, Dr. Hayden.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Sewell is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Sewell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Dr. Hayden, for being here today.
My mom, Nancy Gardner Sewell, was a high-school librarian
for 42 years. Libraries hold a very special place in my heart.
I have to say, during my time here in Congress, some of the
most memorable and reflective opportunities I have had have
been through the congressional dinner series with David
Rubenstein. I want to thank you and your Library staff for
always engaging us as Members of Congress and giving us an
opportunity to have bipartisan efforts to get to know each
other and to also share our shared history. I want to thank you
for that.
The Library of Congress plays a special role in preserving
our Nation's history, because it is not only the oldest Federal
cultural institution in the country but it is the largest
library in the world.
Every day, the Library of Congress helps Congress function
by assisting Members of Congress and staff with their research,
learning the legislative process and helping to develop new
ideas for legislation.
The Library of Congress has been intentional by developing
a digital collection so that your footprint can meet every
classroom and be available across this Nation.
Access to information is precious, but as of late we have
seen extremists making efforts across the Nation to decide what
information is worthy of consumption by removing books that
tell the full story about diversity, equity, and inclusion in
the classroom.
I believe that preserving all of our history is important,
because it reflects the cultural diversity, ingenuity, and
challenges that are at the very fabric of this Nation.
Dr. Hayden, in 2021, the Library of Congress launched a
Minority Serving Institutions Program to connect more deeply
with Black, Hispanic, indigenous, and other minority
communities by expanding its collection, using technology to
enable storytelling, and offering more internships and
fellowship opportunities. This initiative has helped a number
of my constituents at HBCUs in the State of Alabama, and I am
incredibly grateful for that.
Can you provide an update on how this program might be
impacting communities across this Nation?
Dr. Hayden. Thank you.
The Library of Congress received one of its largest
philanthropic gifts from the Andrew Mellon Foundation to
develop a multiprong approach to having paid internships for
students to mine the Library's collections, discover new ways
to use the Library's collections, as well as to give many
grants to communities for their local histories and creating
things using digital methods.
We are in the third year; we have got an extension on the
program. It has developed into a program that is proof of
concept for other foundations that are interested in making
sure that students have an opportunity to learn how to do
research, basically, and to create their own histories and in
communities.
We are very pleased that the opportunity from Mellon
provided us with a way to look into how we can integrate what
we have learned from those programs into our regular
operations. You will be hearing more about that.
Ms. Sewell. Yes.
You recently wrote an op-ed piece with the Secretary of the
Smithsonian, Lonnie Bunch, as well as with the Archivist,
really talking about the role of cultural institutions in
preserving our collective memory.
How would you describe the Library's specific role in
preserving our collective memory?
I ask that being a little bit biased, since I represent
Alabama's civil rights district, and there is an awful lot of
amazing collective history and storytelling regarding the civil
rights and the voting rights movement that the Library of
Congress hosts.
Dr. Hayden. For a number of years, the Library of Congress,
starting with, for instance, women's suffrage----
Ms. Sewell. Yes.
Dr. Hayden. One of my predecessors knew Susan B. Anthony
and said, ``We'd like your papers.''
The Library has been at the forefront of really looking at
what are some of the historic events, movements, personages in
history that need to be remembered, and provide firsthand
resources--you know, the letters of Frederick Douglass or the
letters of 23 Presidents and Supreme Court Justices, as well as
everyday people and groups like veterans, our Veterans History
Program, where we have oral histories of over 100,000
individuals.
The Library of Congress's mission in providing a resource
for Congress to be able to do the research it needs and to be
able to have that historic----
Ms. Sewell. I would like to say--and I know my time is up,
but I want to just commend the Library of Congress for its book
supplies that you give us, an opportunity----
Dr. Hayden. Surplus books.
Ms. Sewell [continuing]. to--the surplus books to go to our
local libraries and local classrooms. It is an amazing program
that benefits all of us.
Thank you very much.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
Mr. Griffith is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much.
We had Ms. Perlmutter in here a couple weeks ago talking
about some new proposed rulemaking. Based on your opening
statement, you are at least vaguely familiar with that.
They have got an office of proposed--a notice--the
Copyright Office has a notice of proposed rulemaking out there,
and it strongly encourages folks to submit digitized copies of
their works to the Copyright Office. Some would even argue that
it essentially requires that you digitize your work to send it
in, at least to get it in a timely manner processed for
copyright.
Here is the dilemma that--and I did not--I was not very
articulate that time, and I may not be this time, but here is
the concern that has been raised: If you require that it be
digitized to file with the Copyright Office and then the
Copyright Office immediately sends that to the Library of
Congress without a licensing agreement, are not you kind of
putting yourself in the position of Napster, where now you all
have it, that is available to the public, in essence, and yet
there is no licensing agreement?
That is the concern, is that they are being required or at
least strongly encouraged to submit a digitized copy to
Copyright, and then they are actually bypassing the copyright
because they send it to you all in that digitized form without
a licensing agreement.
Dr. Hayden. The Library of Congress uses digitized content
in a very responsible manner and fair use. It would not make
available----
Mr. Griffith. I am not accusing. What I am saying is, is
that I think that there is a glitch in the process that may be
setting up a system where it may accidentally get abused. That
is the concern that I have heard.
I just--I raise that to your attention. I am not sure that
Ms. Perlmutter was fully understanding it. Mrs. Bice and I both
had questions on it. I would just ask you to go back and take a
look at it.
Because that is what--the Library of Congress has always
been great on that. I am not fussing about it. I am just
worried that we might be creating a system where we
accidentally bypass the copyright by forcing the digitization,
which is then immediately sent to the Library of Congress.
Dr. Hayden. Thank you for bringing that up at this point,
because, as I mentioned in my opening remarks, we are working
very diligently with the Copyright Office on their continuous
development of their registration system. That is the hardest
part of what they have been doing in terms of modernizing.
To bring up different issues and concerns at this point is
very timely. We have a public stakeholder group. They have been
bringing up a lot of things too. Thank you for that.
Mr. Griffith. Well, take a look at it. I appreciate that.
Now I am going to switch over to--I love real books. There
is nothing better than sitting in a chair, particularly if you
can get a fire going, and reading a real book. What I find in
my job--and there are lots of other people in similar types of
jobs--is that I very rarely get that chance, and so what I do
is, I am often doing audiobooks.
Through Libby, I am able to get a lot of books. What I have
found, though, is, is that my Roanoke Valley Libraries' Libby
has more offerings, at least that I am looking for, than the
Library of Congress.
Can you--it looks like you want to address that, and I want
you to address that.
Dr. Hayden. Your public library probably has more of the
current fiction or mysteries and things like that----
Mr. Griffith. Well, I find it to be true--I find it to be
true also with older books.
I thought it was interesting, because we were sitting here
having this chat, so I quickly looked up Frederick Douglass.
There are a couple of e-books that I found on Libby, but no
audiobooks. Although, there was one that said--you have this
process, for those who do not know it, you can tag it. I want
to compliment the Library of Congress on that in just a second,
but--so I tagged the Frederick Douglass--``Narrative of the
Life of Frederick Douglass'' by Frederick Douglass, because I
would love to listen to that. It is a fairly short listen, 4
hours. That is halfway across my district. You know, I will be
done before I can get to the other side.
It is things like--``The Last Lion,'' Manchester's book on
Winston Churchill, is not available either place. It is not
just the modern--I mean, I get it. When I am looking for some
fluff, I expect my local library to have it. When I am looking
for deeper things, I might want to see some more from the
Library of Congress.
I am just wondering what y'all's plans are on that. I know
it is new, and I know it is a small market, but what are
y'all's plans on that, on increasing your audiobooks?
Dr. Hayden. Well, this is also timely as well, because, as
you know--and people have even asked, ``If I am listening to a
book, am I reading?'' Yes, you are. All right?
As we expand and provide that service as well, beyond basic
research and history and things for Members of Congress, we
will be cognizant of looking at what the requests are----
Mr. Griffith. Let me----
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. and what----
Mr. Griffith. I was going to compliment you, and I want
to--if I can take just another couple seconds.
I tagged a James L. Nelson book earlier this year, and
about 6 weeks later it popped up and I was able to listen to it
from the Library of Congress, which is a--which is a
swashbuckler. He writes naval stories.
Anyway----
Dr. Hayden. Uh-huh.
Mr. Griffith [continuing]. I yield back.
Dr. Hayden. That is good to hear. In fact--and I know that
some of my colleagues are with me today--we are taking note of
just--that is a good opportunity to do a survey and ask what
types of things people would be interested in.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Always happy to have a conversation on Libby. I think a lot
of us do a lot of driving, and I actually use a lot of the
audiobooks on Libby from the Library of Congress as well.
Now recognize Dr. Murphy for 5 minutes.
Dr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for coming before the Committee.
I had one quick question. How many books are overdue?
Dr. Hayden. Members of----
Dr. Murphy. Specifically, how many----
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. Congress are the only people who
can----
Dr. Murphy. What is that?
Dr. Hayden. Members of Congress are the only patrons that
we have----
Dr. Murphy. OK.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. to circulate materials to, and we
keep records of how long----
Dr. Murphy. Would you commit to making that a public
record, of who owes money to the Library of Congress and----
Dr. Hayden. You do not owe money. We have appropriations,
though.
Dr. Murphy. I just think it would be a good revenue thing,
so----
Dr. Hayden. Well----
Dr. Murphy. Anyway, in all seriousness, thank you.
I want to talk a little bit about the Veterans History
Project.
Dr. Hayden. Oh, yes.
Dr. Murphy. It is--I am blessed to have almost 1 out of 10
of my constituents as a veteran. We have been very active in
seeking out stories with so much of our military community--
Camp Lejeune and New River Air Station, Cherry Point. We have
had three very successful events, collected over 30 oral
histories, 900 minutes of stories.
I just wanted to know, you know, can you give an update or
a progress report about--we have so much--I think we are just
touching the surface on this. We have so much more work to do.
Dr. Hayden. There is--we have approximately 117,000
collections. We have migrated the legacy data base to a more
modern form. We are really looking at having a more robust
website and making it easier for veterans and their families to
record and submit their oral histories. That is a major
initiative that we are working on.
We want to do more with Members of Congress, in terms of
the workshops. We have staff that will come into districts----
Dr. Murphy. Yes.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. and do that.
Dr. Murphy. We have--so our district has a quarter of them,
essentially----
Dr. Hayden. Right.
Dr. Murphy [continuing]. of the ones that have been
collected, so----
Dr. Hayden. We definitely--and there are certain
engagements that we are very interested in, more recent
engagements, veterans. Of course, the Vietnam era is one that--
--
Dr. Murphy. If I may make one suggestion, I do think we
need to decrease the bureaucracy of it a little bit. It is a
little bit onerous. I actually tried to do it for my own
family, and it was--it made it much too hard. I do think we
need to cut that probably in half. We need more stories; we do
not necessarily need----
Dr. Hayden. Yes.
Dr. Murphy [continuing]. 100 percent of the details.
Anyway--but thank you for doing that. We should have, you
know, 5,000 at this point, so----
Dr. Hayden. We should.
Dr. Murphy. I want to switch things over a little bit to
funding for the Library of Congress. It is my understanding we
have gotten donations anywhere between 15 and 25 million over
the last couple years.
So I wanted to dive into a little bit on how the Trust Fund
Board works. How do they solicit funds? What type of investors,
rather, do we get to invest in a public--in a private manner
for the Library of Congress?
Dr. Hayden. The Trust Fund Board, as you might be aware, is
appointed, and the Library is not involved in terms of saying
who should be on it.
They manage the Library's funds. The Library--the funds
that are raised are mission-specific, and they are supplemental
to our basic operations. The funds provide opportunities for
things that we would not be able to do.
That is really what the Trust Fund Board----
Dr. Murphy. How do you interact with them?
Dr. Hayden. We give reports. They work with a trust fund
manager, a management company, that the board vets and hires to
manage the funds. They work with our office of----
Dr. Murphy. Do you submit----
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. financial services.
Dr. Murphy [continuing]. a wish list to them to say, ``Hey,
we'd like these things,'' and then it is their job to try to
help fund them?
Dr. Hayden. No. They do not try to help--they do not
solicit funds. The Library has a development office that
submits proposals and things like that. They basically manage
the funds of the Library.
Dr. Murphy. OK.
Dr. Hayden. They are not propelling and saying, this is
what you should raise funds for.
Dr. Murphy. OK. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Carey is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carey. I want to thank the Chairman and I also would
like to thank the Ranking Member for having this hearing.
The Chairman made a statement early on about the national
treasures that are obviously at the Library of Congress. I
would argue that the Library of Congress is a national
treasure.
I appreciate you being here today.
I have very short time, obviously, about 5 minutes, but I
do want to touch on a couple of issues.
Prior to your arrival, the IT challenges were a serious
issue for the Library of Congress. The OIG and the GAO
identified the deficiencies in IT management in numerous
reports.
During your tenure--and you have done a great job at this--
addressing those deficiencies has been a major priority for the
Library. This coincides with an ongoing trend to centralize all
of the Library's technology needs under the control of the
OCIO.
Is that an accurate statement?
Dr. Hayden. Yes. It was part of the GAO report and
recommendation that the information technology operations in
the Library of Congress be centralized.
Mr. Carey. Can you explain how the initiative has benefited
the Library in general?
Dr. Hayden. Off the bat, there were economies in terms of
purchasing equipment, standardization of equipment----
Mr. Carey. Uh-huh.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. and being able to work on projects
that would integrate the information technology systems, many
of which were over 20 or 30 years old, and to have a dedicated
group that was looking at the Library as a whole.
You have economies of purchasing, skill, and then
accessibility and coordination between units.
Mr. Carey. Well, and I appreciate that, and I want to thank
you for your comments.
With the short amount of time that I have left, I want to
quickly shift the conversation to the Library of Congress's
field offices.
Dr. Hayden. Yes.
Mr. Carey. The Library of Congress has a handful of these
field offices in other countries around the world. These field
offices are located within the U.S. embassies? Am I correct
with that?
Dr. Hayden. Yes. Six----
Mr. Carey. Six of them?
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. offices.
Mr. Carey. Can you kind of speak of the necessity of these
field offices to carry out the Library of Congress's mission?
Dr. Hayden. The term ``office'' really captures what these
operations are. They are offices that are led by a Library of
Congress head, the person, and also nationals from the area,
who are responsible for acquiring materials from different
parts of the world. The Library of Congress collects in 470
languages, and so the people in the field office acquire
materials in different languages.
The Library of Congress also is the coordinator and
administrator for over, I want to say, 120 other educational
institutions in the United States who pay for that service. We
are collecting not only for the Library of Congress but for
other colleges and universities and research centers in the
United States.
Mr. Carey. When you said there is six----
Dr. Hayden. Yes.
Mr. Carey [continuing]. I mean, not to put you on the spot,
but what countries are they in?
Dr. Hayden. Well, I am glad you asked that, because the
first one is in Cairo----
Mr. Carey. Uh-huh.
Dr. Hayden [continuing]. Islamabad, Jakarta, Nairobi, New
Delhi, and Rio de Janeiro.
Mr. Carey. OK. Well, she gets 100 percent.
Mr. Chairman, with that, again, I appreciate the
opportunity.
I appreciate you being here, Doctor----
Dr. Hayden. Oh, thank you.
Mr. Carey [continuing]. and talking to all of us.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. D'Esposito may or may not be able to join us here, but
can I--I am just going to ask one more question in the event
that he comes back. Otherwise, we will wrap the hearing at that
point.
I just want to touch base on the Library of Congress's
Office of Inspector General report that found the Library of
Congress did not sufficiently track or manage the agency's
strategic directional plans.
Have you made progress in implementing the recommendations
of the OIG report? Or could you just give us an update on that
status?
Dr. Hayden. The Library's made great progress, and we have
worked very closely with the IG's Office and their assessment
of that. We launched a new strategic plan, but we have also
been able to put in a lot of the initiatives for managing risk,
for performance measurements.
We hope that in the next year we would be able to satisfy
the inspector general's requirements to take strategic planning
off of the Library's top management----
Chairman Steil. You think you will be in that position next
fiscal year?
Dr. Hayden. We are very hopeful. We are hopeful. We had
hoped for this year, but there were still things we needed to
do.
Chairman Steil. Understood. We look forward to you
continuing updates for us on that.
I will now recognize Mr. D'Esposito for 5 minutes.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Doctor.
In January of this year, the Library of Congress restricted
the use of generative AI tools to use only within authorized
pilot programs.
As of today, how many pilots have been authorized at the
Library of Congress that incorporate the use of AI tools?
Dr. Hayden. I am very pleased that you noted that we are
assessing and making sure that we are not on the cutting edge
of AI.
We have a number of use cases. In each of the service
units, there are experiments and pilots that we are looking at.
For instance, CRS is looking at how AI could be used.
I would say--and I would have to get back to you on the
exact number of the use cases, but they are limited, they are
controlled, and we are very concerned that there is governance
of anything that happens with AI so we can maintain the quality
of service that we provide currently.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Thank you.
On Long Island, where I represent, there are over 100,000
veterans. Almost half of them live in Nassau County, which is
part of my district. I appreciate the Library of Congress's
efforts with their Veterans History Project.
Could you explain to me and us how the Library of Congress
works with local communities for those who volunteer in this
project, such as veterans and Gold Star families?
Dr. Hayden. The Gold Star family project--and when we were
able to expand to Gold Star families, that really helped in
terms of getting more people to participate in the program.
We have staff members that will actually visit
communities--I have been part of that in Wyoming--where we give
workshops and work with local communities to train volunteers.
We have been working very hard to make sure that our digital
efforts make it easier for people to participate.
There is quite a bit of outreach going on, and we want to
expand that.
Mr. D'Esposito. How do you go about deciding where your
outreach is? You mentioned----
Dr. Hayden. We worked----
Mr. D'Esposito. You mentioned Wyoming. How did--for
example, how does Wyoming become a place where----
Dr. Hayden. Senator Enzi.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK.
Dr. Hayden. Particular Members come to us. Some are very
active. Our Congressional Relations Office has been really
trying to make an effort to go to each office and say, We can
make it easier, and all of this.
We would love to have more participation, because that is
the straight, really, way to get to communities, because
Members know and--know the groups.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Yes. I think what would be beneficial
is for us to make sure that our colleagues know that----
Dr. Hayden. Yes.
Mr. D'Esposito.--you know, opportunities like this are
available. I think that is probably part of the--you know, that
will help us get these programs into communities throughout the
country. Because I think the work that is being done is
important, but, obviously, if the information is not delivered
to every corner, we have to do better.
Dr. Hayden. It was interesting that during the pandemic
when we participated in a lot of townhalls, virtual townhalls,
we were able to really get the word out that way too. We
actually gave presentations with Members and things like that.
Putting it--and connecting Veterans History to Member
websites is also a way.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Well, I look forward to working with
your office and trying to help make sure we can let our
colleagues know about those resources.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Dr. Hayden, we appreciate you being here with us today. We
appreciate all the work you do. We know, in any organization,
it is not just one person; there are a handful of people that
work at the Library of Congress that are sitting behind you. I
know there are many others who may be watching online or--who
work day-in and day-out. We appreciate all the work you do, but
we also appreciate all the work so many do at the Library of
Congress to share not only the national treasures but to be a
resource in research or, as well, maybe just to simply listen
to a Libby book online, as Dr. Griffith spoke about.
We appreciate you being here and the work you do.
Without objection, each Member will have 5 legislative days
to assert additional materials into the record or to revise and
extend their remarks.
If there is no further business, I thank the Members for
their participation.
Without objection, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:18 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
