- OVERSIGHT OF THE U.S. CAPITOL POLICE OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE U.S. CAPITOL POLICE
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE

ADMINISTRATION

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

JULY 19, 2023
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov
www.cha.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-734                    WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin, Chairman

BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOSEPH MORELLE, New York,
MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia               Ranking Member
GREG MURPHY, North Carolina          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             NORMA TORRES, California
MIKE CAREY, Ohio                     DEREK KILMER, Washington
ANTHONY D'ESPOSITO, New York
LAUREL LEE, Florida

Tim Monahan, Staff Director
Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT

BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia, Chair

MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia            NORMA TORRES, California
GREG MURPHY, North Carolina             Ranking Member
ANTHONY D'ESPOSITO, New York         DEREK KILMER, Washington

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Opening Statements

Chairman Barry Loudermilk, Representative from the State of
Georgia........................................................     1
Prepared statement of Chairman Barry Loudermilk..............     2
Ranking Member Norma Torres, Representative from the State of
California.....................................................     3
Prepared statement of Ranking Member Norma Torres............     4

Witness

Ron Russo, Inspector General, United States Capitol Police.......     6
Prepared statement of Ron Russo..............................     7

OVERSIGHT OF THE U.S. CAPITOL POLICE
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL

----------

July 19, 2023

Subcommittee on Oversight,
Committee on House Administration,
House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2 p.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Barry
Loudermilk [chair of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Loudermilk, Steil, Griffith,
Murphy, D'Esposito, and Torres.
Staff present: Tim Monahan, Staff Director; Elliott
Tomlinson, Deputy General Counsel; Hillary Lassiter, Clerk;
Jordan Wilson, Director of Member Services; Elliot Smith,
Deputy Director of Oversight; Logan Langemeier, Professional
Staff Member; Khalil Abboud, Minority Deputy Staff Director,
Chief Counsel; Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director; and
Matthew Schlesinger, Minority Oversight Counsel.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BARRY LOUDERMILK, CHAIRMAN OF
THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE
FROM THE STATE OF GEORGIA

Chairman Loudermilk. The Subcommittee on Oversight will
come to order.
We note that a quorum is present.
Without objection, the chair may declare a recess at any
time.
Also, without objection, the meeting record will remain
open for 5 legislative days so Members may submit any materials
they wish to be included therein.
Thank you, Ranking Member Torres, Members of the
Subcommittee, and our witness, Mr. Ron Russo, for joining us
for today's oversight hearing.
The United States Capitol Police Office of Inspector
General is responsible for evaluating the efficiency and the
effectiveness of the U.S. Capitol Police's programs and
operations. This includes supervising and conducting audits,
inspections, and investigations to prevent fraud, waste, and
abuse.
The OIG is responsible for both making recommendations to
the Capitol Police Board and also ensuring that those
recommendations are completed.
On January 6th, 2021, the U.S. Capitol experienced one of
the biggest security failures in this institution's history.
Following the attack on the Capitol, the OIG published six
flash reports. In those flash reports, the OIG detailed
specific failures related to operations, intelligence,
training, and other specialized units. To correct these
failures, the OIG made specific recommendations to the Capitol
Police.
During today's hearing, we will review those findings and
evaluate the department's completion of the recommendations
made in those flash reports.
Since being hired, Mr. Russo has closed numerous previous
inspector general recommendations. I look forward to learning
more about specifically what actions Capitol Police
implemented.
Given that Mr. Russo is new to the role, today's hearing is
also an opportunity to ensure that the OIG is fulfilling its
purpose to provide independent and relevant analysis of the
department.
An independent inspector general is essential to ensuring
transparency. We have made progress to increase transparency by
finally taking steps to publicly publish OIG reports, which is
consistent with other Federal inspectors general. However, to
date, there are only two available on the OIG's website.
Finally, since announcing today's hearing, numerous
whistleblowers have come forward with claims of retaliation and
abuse after speaking with the Office of Inspector General.
While we have concerns about the conduct of both the inspector
general and the--Inspector General's Office and the department
on these matters, the Committee does not believe it is in a
position yet to publicly address these allegations.
While we review these allegations, we take all
whistleblower reports seriously and appreciate their
willingness to come forward.
Before Mr. Russo was hired as inspector general, there were
serious allegations of retaliation within the Capitol Police
against whistleblowers who had spoken confidentially to a
previous U.S. Capitol Police inspector general. Let me be
clear: Any retaliation is unacceptable. I think I speak for
both Democrats and Republicans when I say this Committee will
aggressively protect whistleblowers from any internal
retaliation.
Ensuring the U.S. Capitol Police is best positioned to
defend against threats to the Capitol, including all the
Members, staff, and visitors, is a priority for this
Subcommittee. To accomplish this, Congress must continue to
exercise our oversight responsibilities.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Loudermilk follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN OF THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT BARRY LOUDERMILK

The United States Capitol Police Office of Inspector
General is responsible for evaluating the efficiency and the
effectiveness of the U.S. Capitol Police's programs and
operations. This includes supervising and conducting audits,
inspections, and investigations to prevent fraud, waste, and
abuse.
The OIG is responsible for both making recommendations to
the Capitol Police Board and also ensuring that those
recommendations are completed.
On January 6th, 2021, the U.S. Capitol experienced one of
the biggest security failures in this institution's history.
Following the attack on the Capitol, the OIG published six
flash reports. In those flash reports, the OIG detailed
specific failures related to operations, intelligence,
training, and other specialized units. To correct these
failures, the OIG made specific recommendations to the Capitol
Police.
During today's hearing, we will review those findings and
evaluate the department's completion of the recommendations
made in those flash reports.
Since being hired, Mr. Russo has closed numerous previous
inspector general recommendations. I look forward to learning
more about specifically what actions Capitol Police
implemented.
Given that Mr. Russo is new to the role, today's hearing is
also an opportunity to ensure that the OIG is fulfilling its
purpose to provide independent and relevant analysis of the
department.
An independent inspector general is essential to ensuring
transparency. We have made progress to increase transparency by
finally taking steps to publicly publish OIG reports, which is
consistent with other Federal inspectors general. However, to
date, there are only two available on the OIG's website.
Finally, since announcing today's hearing, numerous
whistleblowers have come forward with claims of retaliation and
abuse after speaking with the Office of Inspector General.
While we have concerns about the conduct of both the inspector
general and the--Inspector General's Office and the department
on these matters, the Committee does not believe it is in a
position yet to publicly address these allegations.
While we review these allegations, we take all
whistleblower reports seriously and appreciate their
willingness to come forward.
Before Mr. Russo was hired as inspector general, there were
serious allegations of retaliation within the Capitol Police
against whistleblowers who had spoken confidentially to a
previous U.S. Capitol Police inspector general. Let me be
clear: Any retaliation is unacceptable. I think I speak for
both Democrats and Republicans when I say this Committee will
aggressively protect whistleblowers from any internal
retaliation.
Ensuring the U.S. Capitol Police is best positioned to
defend against threats to the Capitol, including all the
Members, staff, and visitors, is a priority for this
Subcommittee. To accomplish this, Congress must continue to
exercise our oversight responsibilities.

I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mrs. Torres, for 5
minutes for the purpose of providing an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. NORMA TORRES, RANKING
MEMBER OF THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT, A U.S.
REPRESENTATIVE FROM CALIFORNIA

Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Russo. I also want to thank you for meeting
with me earlier this week to discuss some of my concerns about
security at the Capitol, and I look forward to working with you
in conducting oversight of the United States Capitol Police.
Oversight of the police, including the Office of Inspector
General, should be a bipartisan issue. And, while my colleagues
on the other side of the aisle and I disagree on some issues, I
am hopeful that we can approach oversight of the Office of
Inspector General with the seriousness and bipartisanship that
it deserves.
The U.S. Capitol Police Office of Inspector General is one
of the most essential offices in the entire legislative branch.
The inspector general's audits, investigations, and other
oversight activities related to Capitol Police operations are
vital to the Committee, the Congress, and, as a result, our
Nation.
Tragically, on January 6, 2021, we saw firsthand the
importance of the inspector general's work in making
recommendations to the department and ensuring that those
recommendations are implemented.
Last Congress, on the morning of January 7, 2021, then
chair of this Committee, Zoe Lofgren, asked the prior Capitol
Police inspector general to drop all of their pending work and
evaluate the department's preparation for the January 6th
attack on the Capitol. This resulted in a series of seven flash
reports and corresponding series of hearings. The inspector
general spent nearly 7 hours in front of this Committee
explaining his findings and answering tough questions.
Today I am particularly interested in implementation and
the status of those recommendations. And, as I mentioned to you
when we met privately, I spent 17-and-a-half years as a 911
dispatcher with the LAPD. I was also in the House gallery when
the Capitol was breached on January 6th. Needless to say, I
take my security and the security of the people that visit here
and that work here very seriously.
Inspector General Russo and his team are subject-matter
experts. You know, you are a vital partner to the Committee as
we conduct our oversight. I am eager to hear Inspector General
Russo's assessment of the current state of the department. What
steps has the department taken to improve its intelligence-
sharing capabilities with both partner agencies and internally?
What are the offices at the top of the department's
organizational chart doing to ensure the rank-and-file officers
are appropriately read into relevant intelligence assessments,
and has officer morale improved? How has the department changed
the way it trains both new recruits and veteran officers? Will
the department be ready if and when an event like the January
6th attack happens again?
These are just a few of the questions that I hope to have
answered today.
In addition to the Committee prepared for today's
proceedings, it heard from several individuals expressing
concerns about the operations of the Inspector General's
Office.
I hope that anyone, any one of our Federal employees, who
has experienced workplace misconduct can feel comfortable
coming forward and has the appropriate tools and resources to
do so.
I look forward to continuing conversations with the
inspector general to ensure that the office is held to its
highest possible standard. And, while this is not the forum to
address those concerns, I do expect the Committee to do so
thoroughly.
Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you again, Mr. Russo, for being here with us today.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Torres follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER OF THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT NORMA TORRES

Oversight of the police, including the Office of Inspector
General, should be a bipartisan issue. And, while my colleagues
on the other side of the aisle and I disagree on some issues, I
am hopeful that we can approach oversight of the Office of
Inspector General with the seriousness and bipartisanship that
it deserves.
The U.S. Capitol Police Office of Inspector General is one
of the most essential offices in the entire legislative branch.
The inspector general's audits, investigations, and other
oversight activities related to Capitol Police operations are
vital to the Committee, the Congress, and, as a result, our
Nation.
Tragically, on January 6, 2021, we saw firsthand the
importance of the inspector general's work in making
recommendations to the department and ensuring that those
recommendations are implemented.
Last Congress, on the morning of January 7, 2021, then
chair of this Committee, Zoe Lofgren, asked the prior Capitol
Police inspector general to drop all of their pending work and
evaluate the department's preparation for the January 6th
attack on the Capitol. This resulted in a series of seven flash
reports and corresponding series of hearings. The inspector
general spent nearly 7 hours in front of this Committee
explaining his findings and answering tough questions.
Today I am particularly interested in implementation and
the status of those recommendations. And, as I mentioned to you
when we met privately, I spent 17-and-a-half years as a 911
dispatcher with the LAPD. I was also in the House gallery when
the Capitol was breached on January 6th. Needless to say, I
take my security and the security of the people that visit here
and that work here very seriously.
Inspector General Russo and his team are subject-matter
experts. You know, you are a vital partner to the Committee as
we conduct our oversight. I am eager to hear Inspector General
Russo's assessment of the current state of the department. What
steps has the department taken to improve its intelligence-
sharing capabilities with both partner agencies and internally?
What are the offices at the top of the department's
organizational chart doing to ensure the rank-and-file officers
are appropriately read into relevant intelligence assessments,
and has officer morale improved? How has the department changed
the way it trains both new recruits and veteran officers? Will
the department be ready if and when an event like the January
6th attack happens again?
These are just a few of the questions that I hope to have
answered today.
In addition to the Committee prepared for today's
proceedings, it heard from several individuals expressing
concerns about the operations of the Inspector General's
Office.
I hope that anyone, any one of our Federal employees, who
has experienced workplace misconduct can feel comfortable
coming forward and has the appropriate tools and resources to
do so.
I look forward to continuing conversations with the
inspector general to ensure that the office is held to its
highest possible standard. And, while this is not the forum to
address those concerns, I do expect the Committee to do so
thoroughly.

Chairman Loudermilk. The gentlelady yields.
Thank you, Ms. Torres.
Without objection, all other Members' opening statements
will be made part of the hearing report if they are submitted
to the Committee clerk by 5 p.m. today.
Pursuant to paragraph (b), Committee rule 6, the witness
will please stand and raise your right hand.
[Witness sworn.]
Chairman Loudermilk. Let the record show that the witness
answered in the affirmative and may be seated.
I will now introduce our witness, Mr. Ron Russo.
The United States Capitol Police Board hired Mr. Russo to
be the United States Police inspector general on January 29th,
2023.
As the United States Capitol Police inspector general, Mr.
Russo reports directly to the Capitol Police Board and leads
the Office of Inspector General, where he supervises and
conducts audits, inspections, investigations involving U.S.
Capitol Police programs, functions, systems, and operations.
We appreciate Mr. Russo being here with us today, and I
look forward to your testimony.
As a reminder, we have read your written statement, and it
will appear in the full hearing record. Under Committee rule 9,
you are to limit your oral presentation to a brief summary of
your written statement, unless I extend this time period in
consultation with Ranking Member Torres.
Please remember to press the button on the microphone in
front of you so that it is on and the Members can hear you.
When you begin to speak, the light in front of you will
turn green. After 4 minutes, the light will turn yellow. When
the red light comes on, your 5 minutes have expired. You do not
have to stop at that moment, but we would ask that you do wrap
up your statements at that time.
And, Mr. Russo, I now recognize you for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF RON RUSSO, INSPECTOR GENERAL, UNITED
STATES CAPITOL POLICE

Mr. Russo. Thank you, Chairman. Good afternoon.
My name is Ron Russo, and I was appointed inspector general
of the United States Capitol Police in January 2023.
I thank you for this opportunity to appear before you today
to discuss the status of recommendations made by the Office of
Inspector General concerning the events of January 6th, 2021.
In accordance with our statutory authority, the Office of
Inspector General began a review of the operations and programs
in place prior to and during the events of January 6th. Our
objectives were to determine if the department established
adequate measures for ensuring the safety and security of
Members of Congress, their staff, and the Capitol complex.
Over a 10-month period ending October 2021, our reviews
resulted in seven specific flash reports containing 103
recommendations. The areas reviewed included Operational
Planning and Intelligence, resulting in eight recommendations;
the Civil Disturbance Unit and Intelligence, 26
recommendations; Countersurveillance and Threat Assessment, 10
recommendations; the Containment Emergency Response Team and
First Responders Unit, 21 recommendations; Command and
Coordination Bureau, resulting in 12 recommendations; Hazardous
Incident Response Division and K-9 Unit, 15 recommendations;
and, finally, the Dignitary Protection Division and Human
Capital, resulting in 11 recommendations.
Overall, of the 103 recommendations, the department has
remediated 86 percent, closing 89 of the 103, and is actively
working toward closing the remaining 14 recommendations. The
remaining open recommendations include nine related to updating
or creating policy and procedure, two concerning reorganizing
units, two regarding compliance with existing policies, and one
related to training.
In addition to our oversight efforts concerning the events
of January 6th, our office has also conducted several other
department reviews aimed at enhancing operations in areas, such
as policy and procedure, the USCP field offices, the career
progression and rotation, the MP7 rifle program, Training
Services Bureau, and the processes of the Intelligence and
Interagency Coordination Division.
Since my appointment, I have also worked closely with the
Capitol Police Board and the department to increase
transparency by providing public access to inspector general
reports for the first time ever. We recently published two
reports with several under review, pending release.
Finally, I would like to commend the dedicated officers of
the USCP for their tireless efforts to protect the U.S. Capitol
Building, Members of Congress, and visitors. I would also like
to recognize the Capitol Police Board and the congressional
committees for their oversight and leadership.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you
today, and I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Russo follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF RON RUSSO

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Russo.
I now recognize Mr. Murphy for 5 minutes for the purpose of
asking questions.
Dr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Russo, for coming today. Appreciate your--
your service to our Nation.
I am just going to run through a few questions, if I can.
It is my understanding--I am not a--I am not a bureaucrat;
I have just been in Congress for a few years--inspector
generals are tasked with conducting oversight, providing
reports to Congress.
The report--your report--your work rather--I am sorry--
should include audits, evaluations and investigations. The aim
is to ensure transparency and to boost accountability,
accountability to Congress and accountability to the American
people. These reports give us the requisite information to
better inform Congress and the American people and make changes
to rules and laws.
To do this, however, the inspector general must be truly
independent, independent of the department, independent of the
agency that it is overseeing so that a fair, balanced analysis
can be provided.
Would you--I would like to ask a series of questions
regarding your independence, your relationship with the Capitol
Police, as well as its board.
First of all, can you tell me what role do you play in the
hiring decisions for personnel broadly at the U.S. Capitol
Police?
Mr. Russo. As far as hiring decisions within the U.S.
Capitol Police, nothing.
Dr. Murphy. Correct.
Mr. Russo. Nothing.
Dr. Murphy. Correct.
Mr. Russo. I am not involved with that.
Dr. Murphy. Not involved at all.
Mr. Russo. No, sir.
Dr. Murphy. All right. Thank you.
Recently the Capitol Police hired a new Chief
Administrative Officer.
What role did you play, if any, in that hiring?
Mr. Russo. In that instance, I was asked to participate in
the initial review team that looked over the first level of
applicants for the sole purpose of determining if their
background and accomplishments demonstrated the same as the
position description for that position.
Dr. Murphy. All right. Just screening, essentially.
Mr. Russo. That is all it was, the top screen.
Dr. Murphy. All right. At the Capitol, the CAO oversees a
number of offices related to financial management, human
resource, IT, as well as other functions.
Can you describe what relationship you have with the CAO?
Mr. Russo. Only from the standpoint of that position being
over the administrative functions of the agency, and we would
interface as it relates to our audit work that might affect
those areas, as you mentioned, finance, HR, the various
administrative support functions for the police department.
Dr. Murphy. OK. During the hiring of the new CAO, who asked
to you review the resumes when you did that?
Mr. Russo. The chief of staff for the department.
Dr. Murphy. OK. In what other ways did you participate in
the hiring process of the new CAO?
Mr. Russo. That was the extent of it. After the first----
Dr. Murphy. Did you speak with the candidate or anything
like that, or did you review----
Mr. Russo. No, sir.
Dr. Murphy. Just review the----
Mr. Russo. Just the original and there was--well, I did not
sit on a board. I did not----
Dr. Murphy. You just made a recommendation that the process
could move forward. Is that correct or not?
Mr. Russo. We--we ended up with I think it was five
candidates that met the position description and passed that
on. Beyond that, I was not involved.
Dr. Murphy. OK.
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Dr. Murphy. Last, just about the hiring of the new CAO, do
you believe it is appropriate for the IG to participate in the
process that you are stating, given the nature of your role and
the oversight that you should be provided?
Mr. Russo. I was careful to only be involved at the very
top level. I certainly did not rank or promote any one
individual for that position. So----
Dr. Murphy. How did you--how did it move forward from when
you reviewed things? How did you----
Mr. Russo. There was----
Dr. Murphy [continuing]. check and sign off on the----
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir. There was three Members doing the
first review. We took a group of names, identified who matched
the position description, and those, far as I know from there,
the names were pushed up to the chief or to another hiring
board. I am not sure the details on what went on.
Dr. Murphy. That was your extent of it.
Mr. Russo. That was my extent of it, yes, sir.
Dr. Murphy. OK. All right. Just changing gears a little
bit, how often do you meet with the U.S. Capitol Police Board?
Mr. Russo. Monthly or as needed, if things come up, but I
would say, on average, monthly and there may have been one
other two off meetings based on issues that come up.
Dr. Murphy. Are these oversight meetings? What are they?
What kind of meetings are they?
Mr. Russo. The monthly meeting is a standard meeting that
the board has every quarter. I provide a presentation.
Dr. Murphy. Is that--is the police chief there?
Mr. Russo. Generally, he is, yes.
Dr. Murphy. OK. All right.
Just a couple other questions. Do you have a legal counsel
on your staff?
Mr. Russo. I do.
Dr. Murphy. You do.
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Dr. Murphy. All right. Do you meet with him how often?
Mr. Russo. As needed.
Dr. Murphy. On an ad hoc basis. OK.
Last question of mine. How often do you speak with the
Capitol Police counsel's office?
Mr. Russo. Not often.
Dr. Murphy. Anybody--just--can you describe that just a
little bit or----
Mr. Russo. If there is an H.R. issue, I have talked to
them. You know, if there is an emerging issue within the
department, there may be some communication for familiarity
purposes. That--that is about it.
Dr. Murphy. Only on an incident-specific basis.
Mr. Russo. I would say.
Dr. Murphy. Is that correct?
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Dr. Murphy. OK. Thank you for appearing.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Loudermilk. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from California,
Mrs. Torres, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Chairman.
Inspector General Russo, in May of this year, Capitol
Police Chief Manger testified that, and you testified here
today, that, of the 103 recommendations related to January 6th,
89 have been closed. Correct?
Mr. Russo. That is correct.
Mrs. Torres. Since the chief testified--it has been 2
months--before this Committee, why have not any other
recommendations been closed? Do you have an expectation as to
how long it will take to close out the remaining 14
recommendations that you made?
Mr. Russo. I really do not. The department works fairly
independent in working through those recommendations. I am
familiar that they have a recommendation review committee, that
they have an internal process to evaluate the recommendations
and put in place measures to correct.
Mrs. Torres. Is there a timeframe that you have given them
to close out the remaining 14?
Mr. Russo. No, ma'am.
Mrs. Torres. Of the--of the open recommendations that they
still have, the department must seek approval from the Capitol
Police Board and its congressional oversight committees to
elevate and recognize its intelligence resources into a bureau-
level entity.
Over--you and I talked about my visits with both the Los
Angeles Police Department and the New York Police Department to
get feedback from them as their--as to their assessments during
civil unrest or major demonstrations.
I heard from them, from both of those departments, and
others that I talked to, that communication from the top down
is critical.
My concern here lies with those who are making decisions at
the very top, you know, how is--how is information trickling
down to rank-and-file officers and how intelligence is being
shared among entities. I am also concerned how Capitol Police
officers are trained to effectively use their equipment and
able to adequately gather and share intelligence within a
centralized interconnected network.
I understand that the department has submitted a proposed
reorganization plan to the Capitol Police Board and the
Committee. How, if at all, does that proposed organization plan
address your recommendations?
Mr. Russo. Several of our recommendations dealt with the
training issue you are talking about, how do we collect, how do
we--how do we discern the intelligence, make it workable, get
it to all members of the agency.
The other portion is centralizing. Whenever you centralize
that functionality, it helps to prevent miscommunication,
ensure that intelligence does not fall through the cracks.
One of our recommendations, of course, was to elevate the
Intelligence Unit to a bureau level, as you had mentioned.
Since our flash reports came out, much additional training
has gone on. Strengthening of the communication, as you said,
from the top down, from where--from our vantage point has been
put in place. I think they are in a much better place now to
both collect, share with our--with our stakeholders out--even
outside the agency to deal with those intelligence issues.
Mrs. Torres. If we do not have proper communication now as
a division and, you know, your proposal is to elevate it to a
bureau, and that does not seem to be happening, and I hear the
K-9 Unit is not receiving their 16 monthly hours of training,
we need to expedite the recommendation to make sure that, if
the division is not working and we are going to move it into
the bureau that the bureaucrats, as my colleague stated, move
in that direction.
Do you have any idea, you know, any feedback on when that
will happen?
Mr. Russo. I do not know when it will happen. I know they
are working on it. I think the--the--the main issue with
elevating that to the bureau is to centralize that chain of
command and that communication, instead of having a disparate
intel capacity in each unit, centralizing that.
And, as far as the K-9, yes, 16 hours of training, we
suggested that they change the training, the 10-hour shifts to
10 or whatever way they could do it to ensure that training
occurs.
Mrs. Torres. My time has expired, but I will follow up with
your office on this very important issue.
Mr. Russo. Thank you, ma'am.
Mrs. Torres. I yield back.
Chairman Loudermilk. The gentlelady yields.
It is the chair's intention with consultation, agreement
with the minority that we may go a second round of questions to
be able to follow up. I have--I have spoken to Mr. Russo about
that, as well.
At this point, I recognize Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes for
the purpose of questioning the witness.
Mr. Griffith. Mr. Russo, let me apologize first that I was
not here earlier and that I will not be here later. I have got
another markup going on in another Committee across in another
building.
Can the U.S. Capitol Police Office of Professional
Responsibility, OPR, investigate assistant chiefs of police,
yes or no?
Mr. Russo. We generally handle anybody. No, I mean, they--
they could if for some reason we referred it to them.
Generally, we have an essentially an MOU where we would handle
management positions.
Mr. Griffith. All right. In practice, how does your office
handle issues that would otherwise be handled by the Office of
Professional Responsibility?
Mr. Russo. We--so, when I got there, I put in place a
referral system. We have that 360 tracking. We work in--they
are a dotted line to my office.
Mr. Griffith. Prior to that, do you know what the policy
was?
Mr. Russo. I am not positive.
Mr. Griffith. OK. That is fair. We may--I may follow up
with some written questions afterwards.
Mr. Russo. Sure.
Mr. Griffith. Are you familiar with the separation
agreement that former Assistant Chief Pittman entered into with
the United States Capitol Police when she went on leave without
pay for 6--5, 6 months in order to be able or to be eligible to
receive her department retirement?
Mr. Russo. I have some understanding of it, yes, sir.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Are you aware that the United
States Capitol Police Board has a requirement to have a formal
or standard leave policy in effect?
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Mr. Griffith. Leave policies for the department stipulate
that an officer to be eligible to receive leave without pay
must indeed have an expectation of returning to full-time duty.
However, former Assistant Chief Pittman had accepted a job
located across the country at the time she was placed on leave
without pay.
Have you opened an investigation, or have you looked into
this matter?
Mr. Russo. We did a cursory review of the matter.
Mr. Griffith. Did you come up with a conclusion, or do you
need to do more investigation?
Mr. Russo. We certainly can.
If I could, we received information that she was actually
still getting a paycheck. The information that came to us was
still on payroll, getting a paycheck. We looked into that. That
was not the case.
In the course of our cursory review, we did determine
that--that she was on leave without pay from February 1st until
June I feel like it was 17th, that she had also entered into a
separation agreement with the department.
We looked at the relevant policies and compared them
actually with OPM, which does not have the likelihood of
returning portion, but ours does. It also stipulates that the
chief has the authority to alter--alter those.
I conversed with my legal counsel in the office, and it
was--we came to the conclusion at this point in our cursory
review that they entered into a legal agreement, that the--it
became a legal matter at that point. Because the chief had
the--had the authority, based on the policy changes, that is
where we ended up.
If it is a desire for us to look deeper, we can do that.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I would express that desire on the
record right now.
Now that being said, so here becomes the question. If the
chief has changed the policy, does that mean any rank-and-file
officer, whether they be an assistant or, you know, relatively
low-ranking person, could get 5 to 6 months of time off after
taking another job without any real expectation of coming back?
Let me be clear: I am not talking about a situation where
somebody has a disability and maybe, you know, people are
hopeful they will be able to come back but they may not be able
to come back and they are within 6 months of being able to
retire. That is a different animal. I understand that one.
Taking a job all the way across a country, I am having a
hard time understanding how this is not some form of abuse of
the system and maybe even a fraud--not by the chief of police
but by others--on the U.S. Government and its system.
My time is out. Can--can you look into that for me, please?
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Mr. Griffith. I am very concerned about it.
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Mr. Griffith. All right. Thank you.
Chairman Loudermilk. The gentleman yields back.
Chair now recognizes Mr. D'Esposito for 5 minutes.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, thank you, Chairman.
And, Mr. Russo, thank you for being here today. I also want
to thank you for your service to keeping people safe and law
enforcement.
I, too, spent a career in the NYPD. Thank you for all that
you have done.
Mr. Russo. Thank you.
Mr. D'Esposito. Are you aware of the law that governs the
IG's nondisclosure of the identity of an employee or member who
has come forward with a complaint or information of potential
Capitol Police misconduct?
Mr. Russo. I am familiar with it.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. I am just going to read it for the
record.
U.S. code 2, U.S.C. 1901(3)(B): The inspector general shall
not, after receipt of a complaint or information from an
employee or member, disclose the identity of the employee or
member without the consent of the employee or member, unless
required by law or the inspector general determines such
disclosure is otherwise unavoidable during the course of the
investigation.
I think I know the answers to these questions, but I am
going to ask them for the record.
Do you agree that this is important to protect rank-and-
file officers and employees from receiving retribution from
coming forward with potential misconduct?
Mr. Russo. It is of paramount importance.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Do you interpret this section as only
protecting specific individuals who specifically ask for
whistleblower protections? Or does it apply to anyone, the rank
and file, the men and women of the Capitol Police that come
forward with a complaint or information regarding potential
misconduct, and speaks to the OIG or someone from your office?
Mr. Russo. It applies to all.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. As inspector general, have you ever
disclosed--and I know you have only been here since January
29th and--and we--we thank you for that. During your time as an
inspector general here or in previous capacities, have you ever
disclosed the name of an employee or member who had come
forward with a complaint or any information?
Mr. Russo. Not that I can recall.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Would you ever disclose this
information without the individual's permission?
Mr. Russo. We would protect that information at all costs.
It is super serious that people feel comfortable to come to us
without fear of retaliation. It is a priority to make sure we
handle that with great care.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you.
Do you know of any prior IGs disclosing the names of
Capitol Police employees who spoke to the OIG and made
complaints about USCP leadership?
Mr. Russo. I do not.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. We have heard from multiple individuals
in different hearings that have spoken to this Committee,
alleging that the previous OIG received whistleblower
information about intelligence failures on January 6th under
former Acting Chief Pittman.
Subsequently, the individuals were placed on a performance
improvement plan and eventually forced out of the department.
Do you, as the IG and in your previous capacities, do you
consider this retaliation?
Mr. Russo. I am not familiar with the situation or the
details. It is hard for me to make a judgment.
I would--I would submit to the Committee that it is one of
the most important things we do to be able to protect these--
these complainants and that any disclosure of that information
is inappropriate. You want to protect them from retaliation.
Again, I cannot speak to the specifics of that issue. I can
assure this Committee that is a top priority for us.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, thank you. I think--I know I agree.
Those allegations that I referenced--and I am not sure if
this has happened since January 29th. Have any of these
allegations of retaliation been investigated by the OIG?
Mr. Russo. I believe we have had some investigations
related to that. It might have been prior to January, but I can
certainly look into that.
Mr. D'Esposito. Yes, so I guess the question I really have
is: Are you committed to conducting full investigation and
providing a report to this Committee of your findings?
Mr. Russo. Absolutely.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you.
I just have a minute left.
Are there any practices in place in your office that would
ensure that this statutory prohibition on disclosing a
whistleblower's information is enforced?
Mr. Russo. The--the general principles of the Whistleblower
Act would be the governing principle for us to ensure we keep
that confidential, that information.
Mr. D'Esposito. What, if any, do you think the disciplinary
action should be against an IG who fails to comply with this
section of the statute?
Mr. Russo. In Florida, I think we put in a civil penalty.
It is--it is a very serious issue. I am not sure what the
penalty is here. Certainly a violation of our administrative
policies that would have to be dealt with in that arena.
Mr. D'Esposito. I know I am just a second over time, but I
think this is an important question.
In your opinion, should the United States Capitol Police
adopt specific policy to protect whistleblowers?
Mr. Russo. Yes, if they--if they do not have a particular
policy right now that speaks to that specifically, they--there
should be.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you.
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Mr. D'Esposito. My time has expired.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Loudermilk. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize myself for purpose of questioning our
witness.
Mr. Russo, thank you for your forthrightness in the
questions so far, especially with Mr. D'Esposito.
I just want to quickly follow up on his line of questioning
because our goal in this Committee is to work together to make
sure, as the Ranking Member alluded to, that the horrors of
January 6th do not happen again. That is the ultimate goal of
what we are trying to get to, and I think you would agree with
that.
To do that, though, we need to be able to get questions
answered. We need to work with you and, with it, the Capitol
Police to make sure that we do get the information that we need
to work with.
I asked these questions of the chief of police, and he
agreed to this. The first question for the record is: Will you
commit to make all members of your staff available for
questioning by the Committee?
Mr. Russo. Absolutely.
Chairman Loudermilk. Thank you.
The second question: Will you commit this--to this
Committee that you or anyone on your staff will not take
retaliatory action against any officer or employee of the
United States Capitol Police and any employee of the Office of
Inspector General?
Mr. Russo. Absolutely.
Chairman Loudermilk. Well, thank you for that.
That is what we expected and look forward to working with
you and your staff as we proceed down this path.
Your predecessor, Michael Bolton, conducted a sweeping
review of the Capitol Police following January 6th that many
observers view as a, let us say, a roadmap for improving
Capitol Police.
Have you reexamined Mr. Bolton's recommendations since you
have been in this post?
Mr. Russo. I have.
Chairman Loudermilk. What was your assessment?
Mr. Russo. I think they touched on all the important areas.
You know, when you talk about the lack of command and control,
the communication issues, the stifled intelligence gathering
and coordination with outside agencies, and then you add in
the--the equipment failures and lack of training, you know, all
were contributing factors to the issues of January 6th.
I think the recommendations, 103 of them that focused
specifically in those areas, really moved the ball downfield. I
think they are--I think they are wholeheartedly trying to
implement these changes and trying to raise the bar.
Chairman Loudermilk. When you first started as The Capitol
Police Inspector General, how many outstanding recommendations
from post-January 6th or, yes, the post-January 6th flash
report series remained outstanding?
Mr. Russo. You know, I am not sure of the exact number. I
think that there was--we have closed somewhere maybe just south
of 20 since I have gotten here.
Chairman Loudermilk. How many were open when you came in?
Mr. Russo. Maybe 30-something.
Chairman Loudermilk. OK.
Mr. Russo. I can get back to you with a more exact----
Chairman Loudermilk. My recollection is maybe 37. I think
you said out of 103 but if you could--if you could check on
that----
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Chairman Loudermilk [continuing]. we would appreciate it.
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Chairman Loudermilk. Did you say 14 are outstanding as of
today?
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Chairman Loudermilk. OK. After going through a long period
of time without much movement on these recommendations, it
appears that recommendations were closed out more quickly after
you arrived. Is this because you are really putting an effort
into it or--or do you have an explanation for the sudden rush
to close out recommendations?
Mr. Russo. I do not. I think that we looked over some of
these findings. We worked with the department. They would have
questions about how closely they were to the finish line on
some of them. And, frankly, there were some of them that we
could apply compensating controls. They were moving in the
right direction. They met the spirit of the recommendation.
You know, we are certainly going to follow up and evaluate
the thoroughness of their work. I think--I think we are able to
get a few closed through that.
Chairman Loudermilk. Briefly explain. Capitol Police, they
say that they have met a recommendation. How do you evaluate
whether it has actually been completed or not?
Mr. Russo. They do furnish us information. Let us say it is
a policy enhancement. They actually have to provide us that
policy. In some cases, they show evidence that it was
disseminated to the rank-and-file, whatever we need to feel
comfortable that the remedy is in place.
Chairman Loudermilk. OK. Something you said just a moment
ago just raises a red flag. You used the term ``in the spirit
of.''
Would you--that--that rings to me as maybe it is not
totally done, or maybe it was done not exactly as the
recommendation said, but it was in the spirit of it.
Would you ever close a recommendation because the Capitol
Police indicated they were taking steps in the spirit of the
recommendation, even though they have not totally completed it
or completed it as was recommended?
Mr. Russo. It is possible they did not fulfill the letter
of the recommendation, and yet we felt comfortable enough that
the risk no longer existed and it could be closed.
Chairman Loudermilk. I guess my question then would lead
into: If there was recommendations that were there that you
evaluated from Mr. Bolton that you thought were the right
things to do, but yet you closed them out in the spirit of, it
may not be exactly the way it is, is that what I am
understanding is----
Mr. Russo. Well----
Chairman Loudermilk [continuing]. it may not have been done
exactly the way that it was recommended?
Mr. Russo. Well, and I will give you an example.
My predecessor closed one out after he said--after it was
said every member of the agency needs a top secret clearance.
After discussions with the department, they acquiesced and
determined that, as long as the department finds certain high--
key positions that would require that and make it voluntary,
they closed it out. This can happen from time to time. If the
department can demonstrate to you that they are meeting that
spirit, ultimately getting that security background and
clearance with certain positions, sometimes you can modify your
approach and get that closed.
Chairman Loudermilk. This will be my last question this
round. I will save the others because I think this is important
here.
You close out a recommendation, even though it is not
precisely what the recommendation is. I understand what you are
saying.
Mr. Russo. Yes.
Chairman Loudermilk. Is that a fair way of saying, ``Yes,
we have actually met this recommendation,'' or do you annotate
that ``we have modified the recommendation and it is not
exactly the way it was''? The illustration you gave, I can
agree with that.
Are there others that have been done in the spirit of that
may not have actually been per the letter of the
recommendation, some closed out in the spirit of the
recommendation?
Mr. Russo. Yes, it is hard to come up with a--you know, I
can--I am thinking of one that is more clerical, you know,
where they had a batch of policies that were basically ready to
go but they had the wrong acronym for the division. The
division name had since changed.
They ended up sending out a directive to the affected
parties, up--making sure everybody knew that one administrative
issue, they need to follow up and cleanup those policies. In
the short-term, they are able to get the--the bigger part of
that guidance out to the affected people.
You know, I--I think there is a few ways to answer that
question, Chairman.
Chairman Loudermilk. Well, my----
Mr. Russo. You know, for the most part, that is why I say
``spirit of.'' We want to try to get the corrections in place.
Chairman Loudermilk. OK. Thank you.
I appreciate the Ranking Member.
I was going to cut myself off because I had gone over time.
As the rules say, in consultation, we give you a little more
time.
I am going to continue on with that line of questioning
when we come back to--to round two. I have a little bit more at
this point.
I recognize the Chairman of the full Committee, Mr. Steil,
for 5 minutes.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Chair Loudermilk.
Appreciate your holding today's hearing on the oversight of the
U.S. Capitol Police Office of Inspector General.
As Chairman, one of my priorities has been to depoliticize
the Capitol security. I think we have got to increase
transparency and accountability within the Capitol Police, and
it requires an independent inspector general.
I have been concerned that the OIG lacks that independence
necessary to properly do its job, and I know it is in part due
to OIG's unique reporting structure.
The U.S. Capitol Police Board selects and oversees the OIG.
And, as we continue to review potential reforms to the board,
OIG independence must be part of that conversation.
During today's hearing, we must also address how OIG is
handling whistleblowers who come forward. There has been recent
allegations made by whistleblowers against the current IG's
leadership that are highly concerning.
I want to assure all of those who are tuning in to today's
hearing that this Committee takes all whistleblower allegations
seriously, and we are committing--we are committed to
protecting you.
Now, Mr. Russo, can I ask. I am going to dive into a series
of questions here.
How many U.S. Capitol Police Office of Inspector General
reports have been made public?
Mr. Russo. Two, sir.
Chairman Steil. Out of how many?
Mr. Russo. I think that we have--you mean the universe of
all reports? We have--we have--we have completed since
inception of the office about 650 reports.
Chairman Steil. Two were made public?
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Chairman Steil. Are you obligated to make those reports
public?
Mr. Russo. No, sir.
Chairman Steil. No.
Mr. Russo. Previous to the newest direction to come up with
a process to publicize them, there--there was actually a
directive from the board, I feel like it was 2017, that
instructed reports not to be published.
Chairman Steil. In 2017, there is an instruction to not
make them public. Now there is an instruction to make them
public. Out of that, only two of a large number have been made
public.
What--what is the process for making a U.S. Capitol Police
OIG Report public?
Mr. Russo. When I got here, we finalized that process
which--which includes our office, the IG office, looking over
the reports to ensure security-sensitive information is not
disseminated. We then send it to the department for them to go
through and ensure there was nothing against sensitive
information. Then, ultimately, it goes to the board counsel,
board staff to do their evaluation. After that is complete, it
comes back to my office, and it gets posted on the OIG website.
Chairman Steil. After a report's completed, is it submitted
to the Capitol Police Board? Is that the final destination of
the report? Who do you submit the report to upon a--upon a
report being completed?
Mr. Russo. Exactly. It goes to the police chief and his
team for response. They have an opportunity in so many days to
respond back to the recommendations in terms of discussion of
corrective action plans. Then, ultimately and shortly after
that, we send it off to the board, and then we send it off to
the committees.
Chairman Steil. Do you personally support making OIG
reports public?
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Chairman Steil. You do not have a problem with--with the
transparency that I think is important in contrast to what the
2017 rule was.
Mr. Russo. No, sir. I am--you know, in Florida,
everything's opening. This is a completely different process up
here.
Chairman Steil. Do you currently feel that you have the
full authority to make reports public, or does someone else
control that decision?
Mr. Russo. The board makes the decision on a case-by-case
basis.
Chairman Steil. The board makes the decision as to whether
or not an OIG report becomes public, not you.
Mr. Russo. Correct.
Chairman Steil. The fact that they are required to be made
public by Congress, that is a--that is a decision-making
process, you are saying, by the Capitol Police Board, not a
decision-making process by you?
Mr. Russo. Correct.
Chairman Steil. Have you spoken to the Capitol Police Board
about making OIG reports public?
Mr. Russo. Not outside of our process to make them public.
My sense is that now we have fulfilled the guidance of--of the
last Congress to get the--get these reports publicized. We
developed the process. Again, as you pointed out, we have put
two online. I think there is six or seven in review now. I
would anticipate those becoming public more rapidly.
Chairman Steil. Who do you have those conversations with to
increase the speed at which those are becoming public?
Mr. Russo. Just--just through my staff who talk to the
next--the contacts in the department and then--and then they
converse with the contacts at the board. I have seen some group
email. I think now that we have all the--the folks around the
table, so to speak, that need to be part of the review, it
should be a little bit more rapid.
Chairman Steil. OK. I will come back and follow up on this
in the second round of questioning.
I appreciate you being here today.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Chairman Loudermilk. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Ranking Member Torres for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you.
Mr. Russo, one of the two reports that your office has
publicly released is a 2022 review of the department's dispatch
and call-taking process.
One of the recommendations from that report is that the
department should convert dispatcher roles from sworn officers
to civilian.
Changing those roles will, you know, relieve some officers
to handle the field operations, you know, where they are short
of personnel. It will also ensure that we have specifically
911-trained dispatchers to handle those 911 calls that come
into the center and the traffic from the officers' request.
Can you tell us where that recommendation is?
Mr. Russo. I believe it is closed. We had discussions with
the department about the challenges to hire civilian staff in
the D.C. area, frankly. They, I think, have 28 dispatchers. I
think 20 of them are--are sworn. We would definitely like to
see that move more toward the civilian end of things but that--
--
Mrs. Torres. We have received conflicting information about
this specific issue.
Can you respond back to the Committee as to, are there
sworn officers there? Has this department been converted to a
civilian department? If not, why not?
Can you just get back to us on that?
Mr. Russo. Absolutely.
Mrs. Torres. Because, again, you know, we want information
that is accurate. I would also, Mr. Chairman, you know, with
you want to request that you send us a list of those
recommendations that were closed based on the spirit of the
recommendation or spirit of the law.
Mr. Russo. Sure.
Mrs. Torres. You know, we want to make sure that what you
have recommended is taken seriously.
On another issue, I want to ask you about Member security.
As you know, our security issues have more than quadrupled over
the last few years. Capitol Police cannot be present in every
single congressional district and certainly not while we are,
you know, working during district work periods.
Has your office examined the department partnerships with
our State and local law enforcement? Are there MOUs that have
been signed? Is there a process that has been created to make--
to write up those MOUs?
Mr. Russo. Yes, ma'am. We have not looked specifically at
the process on the MOUs. In other words, how does the chief
determine the best sheriff's office or city police department
to coordinate with or both in some cases?
We are aware of the MOUs. We actually are releasing or have
released a report that talks about field office reviews that we
just did in San Francisco and Tampa. That--and, you know, in
that review we talked about the, you know, the networking they
are doing with local law enforcement, intelligence community,
and things of that nature.
Many of these also come from our flash reports. These
recommendations are reoccurring themes, whether it is enhancing
your outreach, your connections, contacts, and the
dissemination of--of the intelligence.
You know, we are doing more work in that area to--to be
able to evaluate the effectiveness. You are right on. As far as
having to network with the local law enforcement in each of
your districts is imperative.
Mrs. Torres. It is--Tampa, it is easier to get to Tampa
from the Inland Empire than it is to get to San Francisco, for
example, in my district.
I want to see a process, a real process on how we reach out
to, you know, local jurisdictions. For example, my home city is
about 25-percent underdeployment every single day. They do not
have the officers that are readily available to respond to any
incidents, you know, at my home.
My district office is just the opposite. You know, it is
located in an area where they are fully deployed, very, very
quick responses to my staff when they have had to put the
office on lockdown.
It is very important for me that, when we are coordinating
with local law enforcement or State jurisdictions, that we look
at their deployment needs and we look at it from, you know, a
perspective: Do they have the manpower to respond? If not, what
do we need in order for them to help us?
With that, Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Loudermilk. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize the Chairman of the full Committee, Mr.
Steil, for purpose of questioning the witness.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much.
I am going to come back to--to where I was just to make
sure I fully understand where we are at in your comments.
Are you aware of the language included in the Fiscal Year
2022 Appropriations Committee report that instructs the IG to
make reports publicly available, whenever practical, and begin
publishing reports on your website?
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir, I have a general understanding of the
direction.
Chairman Steil. Do you believe that that gives you the
authority, or do you believe that that language still requires
you to obtain the consent of the Capitol Police Board? Just
making sure I understand that what your view of the chain of
command, in other words, what I think is congressional intent,
and figuring out where there might be a break in this so we can
improve process.
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir. The way the process is set up includes
those other bodies that I had mentioned.
Certainly want to engage the department to help review the
material to make sure we are not missing something----
Chairman Steil. Understood.
Mr. Russo [continuing]. or putting something out. From that
standpoint, I feel comfortable with the collaborative effort
that we put together as long as we are all moving forward and
getting these reports out.
Chairman Steil. You feel--I mean, historically that has not
been the case. Right? Only two have been made public----
Mr. Russo. Correct.
Chairman Steil [continuing]. out of a very large volume of
total reports----
Mr. Russo. Sure.
Chairman Steil [continuing]. that have been done. Is that a
fair----
Mr. Russo. That is----
Chairman Steil [continuing]. assessment of the situation?
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Chairman Steil. You think that that is changing, but we
just have not seen it make it all the way through the pipeline.
Is that kind of how you--is that a fair characterization of how
you are presenting this?
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir. I think the approach was, after the
2022 guidance or directive from Congress, the process was
finalized. It had started before I got here, but we----
Chairman Steil. Understood.
Mr. Russo [continuing]. finalized it when I got here. Got
those two out. I think there is six, seven or so that are in
the review period. My hope is that we are going to start seeing
a steady stream of our reports coming out.
Chairman Steil. We will definitely be looking forward to
that. I think that is--that is an important piece of the puzzle
here.
The Capitol Police Board, although you have described the
pipeline a bit, the Capitol Police Board does not have the
ability to then prevent you from complying with those specific
instructions from Congress. Is that--is that true or do you
disagree with that? I mean, there is a process. Right? They are
invested in this. Ultimately, that authority resides with you.
No?
Mr. Russo. They put out a--they put out a directive years
ago that we do not release anything.
Chairman Steil. Correct.
Mr. Russo. The current process, as I understand it, is the
board, when they get to the final review, the third person, the
third party in the review process, they then give--they give
authority for us to then release it on a case-by-case basis.
Chairman Steil. OK.
Mr. Russo. Not--not a carte blanche, everything's moving
forward. It is on a case by case due to the sensitivity of the
information contained.
Chairman Steil. I understand the sensitivity but, I mean,
you are also privy to the sensitivity----
Mr. Russo. Yes.
Chairman Steil [continuing]. and could consult with the
board. Ultimately, in your view, the board has the final says.
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Chairman Steil. OK. I have thoughts and comments on that,
but I understand your position and appreciate you being here.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Loudermilk. The chair yields back and--there we
go.
The Chairman of the full Committee yields back, and this
will be the final questions of the day.
Kind of want to go back to where we were talking about the
different recommendations and how they were closed. Before we
do that, let me ask a couple other questions.
Is CERT, being the Containment Emergency Response Team, do
you know what bureau they are currently under? Are they under
OSB or PSB, the----
Mr. Russo. They are in the Special Operations. We requested
or we suggested in a recommendation that they get moved to the
Protective Operations Unit.
Chairman Loudermilk. OK. They are--they are still under
Operation Services Bureau.
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Chairman Loudermilk. I assume you are aware that
recommendation from the June 2021 flash report was that the
U.S. Capitol Police IG, your predecessor, recommended that they
be moved from Operation Services Bureau to the Protective
Services Bureau. Per the QFRs from Chief Manger's hearing, you
have marked this recommendation as ``complete'' as of April
18th, 2023.
We have a copy. I have seen the department's proposed
reorganizational chart, and it still has that CERT remains
under OSB. Now this is--it is currently in OSB. It is proposed
to remain in OSB, but yet that recommendation has been closed
as if it was--if it was completed.
The concern that we have is that: Are the goalposts being
moved to make it easier for the department to appear to be
completing recommendations than actually ensuring that it is
being held at a higher standard? Is--are we just seeing maybe
easing up the recommendations just to be able to close them
out? I mean----
Mr. Russo. No, I do not think so. You know, I think in the
case of the, you know, the CERT team, one of the big
fundamental issues was communication. When Protective
Operations needed CERT present, they--or Dignitary Protection,
they would show up, you know, 12 strong. The only way they were
rolling--I do not want to get into numbers, but they would roll
in, in a full team fashion.
Because they reported to the Special Operations Bureau,
Protective Ops did not get--did not get a lot of their requests
fulfilled. It became an ongoing issue.
I come from the standpoint that communication issues in an
organization need to be dealt with through the chain of
command, as opposed to just arbitrarily grabbing the whole unit
and moving it----
Chairman Loudermilk. Right.
Mr. Russo [continuing]. to save yourself some communication
issues.
Now, in my conversations with the department, they are
moving toward more of a response fashion, counter-assault
fashion for the Protective Ops. They are actually--I do not
want to get into it here, but some of the things they are doing
to support Protective Operations.
Chairman Loudermilk. Understand.
Mr. Russo. They still have that responsibility of the
campus--of the campus.
Chairman Loudermilk. Right.
Mr. Russo. We want to make sure we do not take away their--
their effectiveness on the campus, as well.
I think we hit a middle ground. I do not think we moved the
goalpost. We got a good middle ground to build upon.
Chairman Loudermilk. The short answer being you did not
fully agree with the recommendation from--from Mr. Bolton.
Mr. Russo. That is fair.
Chairman Loudermilk. It kind of takes me back to our
previous question. If that recommendation is marked as complete
but modified, how do we know that, when we, you know, we look
at it as a Committee, and we are looking at, OK, they have
completed this, and then we find out it was not completed.
It really only matters if they are implemented the way that
it was recommended, if you are going to close that
recommendation. Otherwise, the recommendation has to be
modified. Undermining--otherwise, we are undermining this--the
spirit of the recommendation really, if you want to use that
term.
That is one of the things that I think we need to work on
to improve communication between your office and the Committee
and the public is, you know: What is really being done? We may
have to go back and review all the recommendations, as Mrs.
Torres requested. We would appreciate a list of those
recommendations that were completed less than a hundred percent
than the way that the recommendation was made, if that is--if
that is a fair way of putting it. So----
Mr. Russo. That is exactly right and we have--we have that.
We track that information.
Chairman Loudermilk. OK.
Mr. Russo. Be happy to provide it.
Chairman Loudermilk. Since the inception of the U.S.
Capitol Police OIG in 2007, the OIG has made on an average 36
recommendations per fiscal year. Of course, in 2021, there was
104. That is kind of an exception there.
With only 2 months left in 2023, your tenure has yielded
only two recommendations. Look, I am not one that we should
just be making recommendations for making recommendations. I do
not think that we do that just for the sake of, hey, we are--we
are outputting product here.
It does bring to question why such a disparity when on
average there were 36 recommendations per year and now we have
only had two.
Mr. Russo. I want meaningful recommendations. We just did
103 just for J4. You know, it makes you wonder what are the
other areas this office looked at all these years before. We
have touched on everything, as we said, you know, training, you
know, recruitment, the--you know, training--the equipment,
communication. We touched almost every facet of the agency.
We actually have quite a few reports in progress right now.
Some are coming out with some recommendations. I think that
number's going to increase a significant amount here in the
short--short term.
No, we are--we have got a lot of projects going on and I
think we are, you know, of course, risk-based. We are looking
at the highest priority areas.
Chairman Loudermilk. Well, I appreciate that.
Just for correction, you said J4. I think you meant J6.
Mr. Russo. I am sorry. J6.
Chairman Loudermilk. Yes.
Mr. Russo. My apologies.
Chairman Loudermilk. I want to make sure for the record
that----
Mr. Russo. My apologies.
Mr. Loudermilk [continuing]. you know, it was correct.
As I said, we are not looking for just doing busy work to
do busy work. Right?
Mr. Russo. Correct.
Chairman Loudermilk. We want to make sure that what we do
is good and proper.
Who on your team is involved in determining if a
recommendation has been completed?
Mr. Russo. Well, ultimately. It will--it would be my
responsibility but I do that in coordination with my team----
Chairman Loudermilk. OK.
Mr. Russo [continuing]. my No. 2.
Chairman Loudermilk. There is not really a process other
than just everyone agreeing that, yes, this is--making
recommendation to you and you----
Mr. Russo. Well, it is not haphazard. We actually evaluate
all the aspects or elements of the recommendation, the risk
associated with it. We determine back and forth with the
department audit coordinator any materials that we need. Then
we will sit around and determine if that--a risk has been
neutralized or, you know, are they putting in place a
compensating control that will achieve that.
Chairman Loudermilk. General idea, how many are on this
team?
Mr. Russo. How many are on?
Chairman Loudermilk. That--that you work with about
closing, how many people? Just--just a ballpark.
Mr. Russo. Oh, on the team?
Chairman Loudermilk. Yes.
Mr. Russo. Well, my audit director and could be the auditor
that did it, so maybe just two----
Chairman Loudermilk. OK.
Mr. Russo [continuing]. maybe three----
Mr. Loudermilk. So----
Mr. Russo [continuing]. maybe our coordinator in the
office, as well.
Chairman Loudermilk. Let us say you are going to look at
closing out a recommendation. Is it always unanimous, or do you
occasionally have dissenters?
Mr. Russo. Well, I open it up. You know, everybody has
outstanding backgrounds in audit and, you know, blessed to have
a very professional team, experienced team. I take--take into
account what they--the guidance they provide.
You know, I am--I think we have seven where we, as we say,
spirit of. You know, some of them are, they are performing a
function, an intelligence fusion center function. They were
just waiting for furniture. The function was being done. They
were waiting for final build-out. As long as they are able to
furnish--furnish information, that they are actually performing
the function, I am not overly concerned about what room number
they sit in to do it.
Chairman Loudermilk. Right.
Mr. Russo. That would be--that is an example of one of the
seven.
Chairman Loudermilk. There may be times that one of the
team members dissents, but you still feel that it is enough has
been done. I mean, and I am not trying to put words in your
mouth.
Mr. Russo. Yes, I----
Mr. Loudermilk. I am just trying to get an understanding.
Mr. Russo. No, I do not----
Mr. Loudermilk. It is not always unanimous.
Mr. Russo. I do not know--I cannot remember a time where we
had any serious difference in concluding that the controls were
adequate. I mean, could it happen? Sure.
Chairman Loudermilk. OK.
Mr. Russo. You know----
Mr. Loudermilk. It is not a----
Mr. Russo [continuing]. perhaps with the CERT team issue.
Chairman Loudermilk. Yes.
Mr. Russo. Having 33 years of law enforcement, having dealt
with counter-assault and CERT and all that, I had a pretty good
feeling that the homogenized version that they were putting in
place was sufficient for what they were trying to get at. So--
--
Chairman Loudermilk. I am just trying to get an idea
because----
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Chairman Loudermilk [continuing]. you know, you are talking
to a body who normally never has anything we have unanimity on.
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Chairman Loudermilk. Just trying to get an idea.
The moment's come. Last question. Do you--and we talked
about this in private. We see that the makeup of your office
and the process is out of the norm of what you would see in
most inspector generals is that you report to the very people
that have the power to terminate you. Right? That--that is a
conflict of interest in our mind and within a lot of inspector
generals. I am not trying to put you on the spot because I
understand the situation you are in. You may not be able to
answer this, and that is fine.
Let me put it this way. Do you--do you feel that there are
times, not necessarily in yours, but when an inspector
general--and being hypothetical, but we all know what I am
talking about. If an inspector general is responsible for
investigating the very entity that has the power to hire and
fire, does that not create some level of conflict?
Mr. Russo. It is an ongoing challenge. In Florida, I had
three IG posts. Two of them were secretaries of an agency
appointed by a Governor. One was an elected official.
In all three of those occasions, I was reporting to one
person, who paid my check, who provided me administrative H.R.
support, training, et cetera.
That was a lot less independent than how I feel it is now
where I now report to three people who have to unanimously
decide to hire or fire rather than just one person. It is an
ongoing challenge in the IG----
Chairman Loudermilk. Right.
Mr. Russo [continuing]. community to achieve that, you
know, Utopia. I think it is a pretty good--from where I am
sitting, my relationship with the board is a better, stronger,
more independent relationship than if I were to have just
reported to one individual.
Chairman Loudermilk. OK. I appreciate that.
It may be better, but I do not think it is best. We will
be--we will be working with you.
Appreciate the work you are doing. We appreciate you being
here. I would like to thank you for joining us.
Before we adjourn, I also want to mention the good work
that was done by Mrs. Torres and the minority side relating to
the psychological evaluation that was recently revealed. We
really appreciate work that you will put into investigating
that, as well.
Again, I would like to thank you for being here and for
joining us today.
Members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for you, and we ask that you please respond to those
questions in writing.
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Chairman Loudermilk. Without objection, each Member will
have 5 legislative days to insert additional material into the
record or to revise and extend their remarks.
If there is no further business, I thank the Members for
their participation.
Without objection, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:09 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
