- SAFETY ON CAPITOL HILL: DC CRIME'S IMPACT ON CONGRESSIONAL OPERATIONS AND VISITORS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SAFETY ON CAPITOL HILL: DC CRIME'S IMPACT
ON CONGRESSIONAL OPERATIONS AND VISITORS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 21, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov
www.cha.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-270                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin, Chairman

BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOSEPH MORELLE, New York,
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia              Ranking Member
GREG MURPHY, North Carolina          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             NORMA TORRES, California
MIKE CAREY, Ohio                     DEREK KILMER, Washington
ANTHONY D'ESPOSITO, New York
LAUREL LEE, Florida

Mike Platt,  Staff Director
Jamie Fleet,  Minority Staff Director
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Opening Statements

Chairman Bryan Steil, Representative from the State of Wisconsin.     1
Prepared statement of Chairman Bryan Steil...................     3
Ranking Member Joseph Morelle, Representative from the State of
New York.......................................................     4
Prepared statement of Ranking Member Joseph Morelle..........     6

Witnesses

J. Thomas Manger, Chief of Police, United States Capitol Police..     8
Prepared statement of J. Thomas Manger.......................    10
Greggory Pemberton, Chairman, D.C. Police Union..................    15
Prepared statement of Greggory Pemberton.....................    18
Rafael A. Mangual, Nick Ohnell Fellow, Policing and Public Safety
Initiative, Manhattan Institute for Policy Research............    20
Prepared statement of Rafael A. Mangual......................    23

Submissions for the Record

The Two-Decade Red State Murder Problem study....................    44
Letters of appointment...........................................    55

Questions for the Record

J. Thomas Manger answers to submitted questions..................    57
Rafael A. Mangual answers to submitted questions.................    71

SAFETY ON CAPITOL HILL: DC CRIME'S IMPACT ON CONGRESSIONAL OPERATIONS
AND VISITORS

----------

March 21, 2024

Committee on House Administration,
House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:37 a.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Bryan Steil
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Steil, Loudermilk, Murphy, Bice,
Carey, D'Esposito, Lee, and Morelle.
Staff present: March Bell, General Counsel; Alexander
Deise, Counsel; Kristen Monterroso, Director of Operations and
Legislative Clerk; William Neitzel, Deputy Director of Member
Services; Michael Platt, Staff Director; Elliot Smith, Director
of Oversight; Evan Van Orman, Professional Staff; Jordan
Wilson, Director of Member Services; Khalil Abboud, Minority
Deputy Staff Director; Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director;
Kwame Newton, Minority Oversight Counsel; and Owen Reilly,
Minority Professional Staff.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRYAN STEIL, CHAIRMAN OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WISCONSIN

Chairman Steil. The Committee on House Administration will
come to order. I note that a quorum is present.
Without objection, the chair may declare a recess at any
time.
Also, without objection, the meeting record will remain
open for five legislative days so Members may submit any
materials they wish to include therein.
Thank you, Ranking Member Morelle, Members of the
Committee, and our witnesses, for participating in today's
hearing.
D.C. crime is out of control. Anyone who lives, visits, or
works in D.C. has seen the impact that weak-on-crime policies
have had on public safety.
In recent years, the D.C. City Council has taken a variety
of steps that have weakened the city's crime laws, requiring
Congress to step in.
In 2020, the D.C. City Council cut $15 million from the
Metropolitan Police Department budget. Simultaneously, the
council repeatedly passed temporary emergency policies that
restricted police officers' authority and changed the D.C.
criminal code.
For the first time in 30 years, Congress had to act and
nullify a D.C. law because it was so ridiculous.
Crime in D.C. is so bad that President Biden was shamed
into reversing his veto threat.
Months later, the House and Senate had to act again. We
passed another resolution to overturn the anti-police policies
implemented by the D.C. City Council.
Unfortunately, President Biden vetoed this bill.
This was a missed opportunity, as today D.C. crime
continues to remain a problem.
In my hometown of Wisconsin, I hear from countless families
who are concerned with crime and policies we have in place.
Last spring, Wisconsin adopted a new amendment to our State
constitution related to bail reform. This amendment came as
concerns for public safety and crime continued to increase.
The same can be said for Capitol Hill today.
I hear from visitors and staff alike who share their
concerns about crime in our Nation's capital. Capitol Hill,
specifically Ward 6, which encompasses the Capitol complex, has
seen an increase in violent crime in the past few years.
I would like to note for the Committee record that we
invited Ward 6 Councilman Charles Allen to our discussion
today. The Committee made several attempts. Unfortunately, Mr.
Allen did not answer our requests to participate in today's
hearing.
As Chairman of the Committee on House Administration, I am
committed to ensuring our Nation's capital and surrounding area
is safe for every American family.
I think we can all agree, whether you are here for a tour
of the Capitol or to meet with your Representative, every
visitor deserves to feel safe.
Each year, the Capitol Visitor Center alone welcomes an
estimated 2.5 million visitors to our Nation's capital.
However, in the last year we have seen a dramatic increase in
crime in Washington, D.C., particularly near the Capitol
complex.
Let us examine the numbers.
In 2023, violent crime was up 39 percent year over year in
our Nation's capital. There were over 6,800 motor vehicle
thefts in D.C. There were 959 carjackings. For context, there
were 152 carjackings in 2019.
In Ward 6 specifically, which includes the United States
Capitol, there were over 150 robberies in the past 6 months,
and 350 vehicles were stolen.
Last year, two of my colleagues were victims of crime. In
September, I hosted a security briefing where we heard from two
staff members who were mugged at gunpoint just down the street.
These individuals shared their stories about the dangers of
violent crime and the need to remain vigilant.
Each of these statistics represents a staff member, a
visitor, a Member of Congress.
As the Committee on House Administration, we are tasked
with the oversight over the Capitol campus security. Rising
crime in our Nation's capital, particularly near the Capitol,
has constrained resources for U.S. Capitol Police and the
Sergeant at Arms. U.S. Capitol Police must devote more and more
of their resources to increased threats against the Hill
community.
These resources may otherwise be spent on the U.S. Capitol
Police's actual obligation and their core mission.
As crime continues to remain a serious threat and concern
for Members, staff, and visitors, I am focusing on finding ways
we can reduce violent crime in our Nation's capital, in
particular near the Capitol campus.
Today I am looking forward to hearing from our witnesses
about how violent crime threatens U.S. Capitol security. We
will explore the impact of soft-on-crime policies, and we must
discuss how we can ensure the Capitol is safe and secure for
all visitors and staff.
As Chairman, I am committed to making Capitol Hill a safe
place to visit and to work.
With that, I will now yield to the Ranking Member 5 minutes
for an opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Steil follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION BRYAN STEIL

D.C. crime is out of control. Anyone who lives, visits, or
works in D.C. has seen the impact that weak-on-crime policies
have had on public safety.
In recent years, the D.C. City Council has taken a variety
of steps that have weakened the city's crime laws, requiring
Congress to step in.
In 2020, the D.C. City Council cut $15 million from the
Metropolitan Police Department budget. Simultaneously, the
council repeatedly passed temporary emergency policies that
restricted police officers' authority and changed the D.C.
criminal code.
For the first time in 30 years, Congress had to act and
nullify a D.C. law because it was so ridiculous.
Crime in D.C. is so bad that President Biden was shamed
into reversing his veto threat.
Months later, the House and Senate had to act again. We
passed another resolution to overturn the anti-police policies
implemented by the D.C. City Council.
Unfortunately, President Biden vetoed this bill.
This was a missed opportunity, as today D.C. crime
continues to remain a problem.
In my hometown of Wisconsin, I hear from countless families
who are concerned with crime and policies we have in place.
Last spring, Wisconsin adopted a new amendment to our State
constitution related to bail reform. This amendment came as
concerns for public safety and crime continued to increase.
The same can be said for Capitol Hill today.
I hear from visitors and staff alike who share their
concerns about crime in our Nation's capital. Capitol Hill,
specifically Ward 6, which encompasses the Capitol complex, has
seen an increase in violent crime in the past few years.
I would like to note for the Committee record that we
invited Ward 6 Councilman Charles Allen to our discussion
today. The Committee made several attempts. Unfortunately, Mr.
Allen did not answer our requests to participate in today's
hearing.
As Chairman of the Committee on House Administration, I am
committed to ensuring our Nation's capital and surrounding area
is safe for every American family.
I think we can all agree, whether you are here for a tour
of the Capitol or to meet with your Representative, every
visitor deserves to feel safe.
Each year, the Capitol Visitor Center alone welcomes an
estimated 2.5 million visitors to our Nation's capital.
However, in the last year we have seen a dramatic increase in
crime in Washington, D.C., particularly near the Capitol
complex.
Let us examine the numbers.
In 2023, violent crime was up 39 percent year over year in
our Nation's capital. There were over 6,800 motor vehicle
thefts in D.C. There were 959 carjackings. For context, there
were 152 carjackings in 2019.
In Ward 6 specifically, which includes the United States
Capitol, there were over 150 robberies in the past 6 months,
and 350 vehicles were stolen.
Last year, two of my colleagues were victims of crime. In
September, I hosted a security briefing where we heard from two
staff members who were mugged at gunpoint just down the street.
These individuals shared their stories about the dangers of
violent crime and the need to remain vigilant.
Each of these statistics represents a staff member, a
visitor, a Member of Congress.
As the Committee on House Administration, we are tasked
with the oversight over the Capitol campus security. Rising
crime in our Nation's capital, particularly near the Capitol,
has constrained resources for U.S. Capitol Police and the
Sergeant at Arms. U.S. Capitol Police must devote more and more
of their resources to increased threats against the Hill
community.
These resources may otherwise be spent on the U.S. Capitol
Police's actual obligation and their core mission.
As crime continues to remain a serious threat and concern
for Members, staff, and visitors, I am focusing on finding ways
we can reduce violent crime in our Nation's capital, in
particular near the Capitol campus.
Today I am looking forward to hearing from our witnesses
about how violent crime threatens U.S. Capitol security. We
will explore the impact of soft-on-crime policies, and we must
discuss how we can ensure the Capitol is safe and secure for
all visitors and staff.
As Chairman, I am committed to making Capitol Hill a safe
place to visit and to work.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH MORELLE, RANKING MEMBER OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
NEW YORK

Mr. Morelle. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for
convening us.
Let me begin, first of all, by offering congratulations. I
know we have some new staff here, a new parliamentarian,
assistant parliamentarian, deputy clerk. I want to congratulate
these appointees and wish them the best as they take on these
new responsibilities.
I certainly want to welcome our panel.
First of all, always good to see Chief Manger--thank you
for your long service--Chairman Pemberton, and Mr. Mangual. We
are grateful for your service and for being here today.
I do not think there is a responsibility I take more
seriously as the Ranking Member of this Committee than the
safety of staff, visitors, and certainly Members on or around
the Capitol campus.
I have said this before, I will say it in the future: Law
enforcement has our back. It is critical that we have your back
as well. That includes the United States Capitol Police, the
Washington Metropolitan Police Department, as well as Federal
law enforcement agencies like the FBI and ATF.
It is no secret that in 2020, during the pandemic, homicide
and violent crime increased across the Nation.
Thankfully, while there is so much more that needs to be
done, in 2023 violent crime and homicide rates dropped
significantly, and last year saw one of the lowest rates of
violent crime in the United States in more than half a century.
Those are not my observations. Those are the statistics.
Unfortunately, the District of Columbia has been the
exception to the rule, and the congressional community has not
been immune to this uptick in violence here. Members, as the
chair has indicated, have been assaulted in elevators and
carjacked, and staff have been brutally stabbed and robbed at
gunpoint.
I am pleased that the District of Columbia has taken some
steps to address these issues.
As I understand it, earlier this month the D.C. Council
passed the Secure D.C. Omnibus Amendment Act, which contains
about a hundred provisions--increasing gun violence penalties,
expanding the definition of carjacking, addressing organized
retail theft, and more.
I must point out, however, that this is at least the fourth
hearing convened by my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle on crime in the Nation's capital this Congress.
Despite all the talk of armed robberies and shootings, I
have yet to hear my colleagues meaningfully address the issue
of common-sense gun safety measures to keep guns out of the
hands of criminals in the District of Columbia.
On the contrary, the Fiscal Year 2024 Financial Services
and General Government funding bill includes a policy rider
advanced by my Republican colleagues that would permit
concealed carry of firearms in the District of Columbia.
It is astonishing that you would do that at a time when we
are concerned about violent crime.
Guns--and let us make this clear--guns make violent crime
more violent and more deadly. I struggle to reconcile my
colleagues' concerns about violent crime with a complete
disregard of the key driver of those crimes.
There are no commercial gun stores in the District of
Columbia. The guns used here are from out of State. These guns
are often acquired illegally through either straw purchasers or
unlicensed sellers.
Yet, every single Republican on this Committee who was here
in the last Congress voted against the Bipartisan Safer
Communities Act, which created the first Federal criminal
statutes for firearms trafficking and straw purchasing.
Just recently, Capitol Police officers arrested a man just
off Capitol Grounds carrying a rifle he brought to the District
of Columbia from the State of Georgia.
Unless we take common-sense steps supported by a majority
of Americans, the American people, on the question of illegal
firearms, we will never fully address or solve the violent
crime issue here in Washington.
That is why I have introduced the State Firearms Dealer
Licensing Enforcement Act and will soon reintroduce the Gun
Theft Prevention Act. These bills would crack down on gun
trafficking by ensuring oversight and licensing requirements
for firearm dealers and by granting ATF the tools to hold
repeat offenders accountable.
We also need to support the efforts of Federal law
enforcement partners, like the FBI and ATF, who in the last few
months have redoubled their efforts to track down and prosecute
violent criminals in Washington, D.C.
What we should not be doing at this time is to call for the
defunding of the FBI and ATF.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not note the role the
Federal Government plays in the local criminal justice system
here in the District of Columbia. For example, when the
Metropolitan Police reports to the city government, much of the
rest of the criminal justice infrastructure is Federal, which
creates serious coordination issues.
In a tragic example of these issues, according to the
Chairman of the D.C. Council, the individual who stabbed
Senator Rand Paul's staffer was released by the Federal Bureau
of Prisons with no notice to the District of Columbia. He was
supposed to go into custody or supervision of another Federal
agency, the Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency,
which apparently did not happen.
The coordination is an issue we must address.
I want to thank again our witnesses. I am looking forward
to your testimony and to the questions. I look forward to the
proceedings.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Morelle follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION JOSEPH MORELLE

First of all, always good to see Chief Manger--thank you
for your long service--Chairman Pemberton, and Mr. Mangual. We
are grateful for your service and for being here today.
I do not think there is a responsibility I take more
seriously as the Ranking Member of this Committee than the
safety of staff, visitors, and certainly Members on or around
the Capitol campus.
I have said this before, I will say it in the future: Law
enforcement has our back. It is critical that we have your back
as well. That includes the United States Capitol Police, the
Washington Metropolitan Police Department, as well as Federal
law enforcement agencies like the FBI and ATF.
It is no secret that in 2020, during the pandemic, homicide
and violent crime increased across the Nation.
Thankfully, while there is so much more that needs to be
done, in 2023 violent crime and homicide rates dropped
significantly, and last year saw one of the lowest rates of
violent crime in the United States in more than half a century.
Those are not my observations. Those are the statistics.
Unfortunately, the District of Columbia has been the
exception to the rule, and the congressional community has not
been immune to this uptick in violence here. Members, as the
chair has indicated, have been assaulted in elevators and
carjacked, and staff have been brutally stabbed and robbed at
gunpoint.
I am pleased that the District of Columbia has taken some
steps to address these issues.
As I understand it, earlier this month the D.C. Council
passed the Secure D.C. Omnibus Amendment Act, which contains
about a hundred provisions--increasing gun violence penalties,
expanding the definition of carjacking, addressing organized
retail theft, and more.
I must point out, however, that this is at least the fourth
hearing convened by my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle on crime in the Nation's capital this Congress.
Despite all the talk of armed robberies and shootings, I
have yet to hear my colleagues meaningfully address the issue
of common-sense gun safety measures to keep guns out of the
hands of criminals in the District of Columbia.
On the contrary, the Fiscal Year 2024 Financial Services
and General Government funding bill includes a policy rider
advanced by my Republican colleagues that would permit
concealed carry of firearms in the District of Columbia.
It is astonishing that you would do that at a time when we
are concerned about violent crime.
Guns--and let us make this clear--guns make violent crime
more violent and more deadly. I struggle to reconcile my
colleagues' concerns about violent crime with a complete
disregard of the key driver of those crimes.
There are no commercial gun stores in the District of
Columbia. The guns used here are from out of State. These guns
are often acquired illegally through either straw purchasers or
unlicensed sellers.
Yet, every single Republican on this Committee who was here
in the last Congress voted against the Bipartisan Safer
Communities Act, which created the first Federal criminal
statutes for firearms trafficking and straw purchasing.
Just recently, Capitol Police officers arrested a man just
off Capitol Grounds carrying a rifle he brought to the District
of Columbia from the State of Georgia.
Unless we take common-sense steps supported by a majority
of Americans, the American people, on the question of illegal
firearms, we will never fully address or solve the violent
crime issue here in Washington.
That is why I have introduced the State Firearms Dealer
Licensing Enforcement Act and will soon reintroduce the Gun
Theft Prevention Act. These bills would crack down on gun
trafficking by ensuring oversight and licensing requirements
for firearm dealers and by granting ATF the tools to hold
repeat offenders accountable.
We also need to support the efforts of Federal law
enforcement partners, like the FBI and ATF, who in the last few
months have redoubled their efforts to track down and prosecute
violent criminals in Washington, D.C.
What we should not be doing at this time is to call for the
defunding of the FBI and ATF.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not note the role the
Federal Government plays in the local criminal justice system
here in the District of Columbia. For example, when the
Metropolitan Police reports to the city government, much of the
rest of the criminal justice infrastructure is Federal, which
creates serious coordination issues.
In a tragic example of these issues, according to the
Chairman of the D.C. Council, the individual who stabbed
Senator Rand Paul's staffer was released by the Federal Bureau
of Prisons with no notice to the District of Columbia. He was
supposed to go into custody or supervision of another Federal
agency, the Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency,
which apparently did not happen.
The coordination is an issue we must address.
I want to thank again our witnesses. I am looking forward
to your testimony and to the questions. I look forward to the
proceedings.

Chairman Steil. The Ranking Member yields back.
Today we have one witness panel. We welcome Chief Manger,
Mr. Greggory Pemberton, and Mr. Rafael Mangual.
We appreciate you being with us today and look forward to
your testimony.
Pursuant to paragraph (b) of Rule 6, the witnesses will
please stand and raise their right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Steil. Let the record show that the witnesses all
answered in the affirmative.
I will now introduce our panel of witnesses.
Our first witness is Chief Thomas Manger, who is the Chief
of the U.S. Capitol Police.
Chief Manger was appointed as Chief of Police in July 2021.
Chief Manger has served 45 years in the policing profession,
including more than two decades as Chief of Police for three of
the largest police agencies in the national capital region.
Our next witness, Mr. Greggory Pemberton, is the Chairman
of the D.C. Police Union.
Mr. Pemberton joined the Metropolitan Police Department in
2005 and worked in patrol and vice in the Third District.
In 2020, Gregg successfully ran for the position of
Chairman of the D.C. Police Union and was reelected in 2022 and
again in 2024. He currently serves and represents the 3,000
members of MPD's rank and file.
Our last witness, Mr. Rafael Mangual, is a fellow at the
Manhattan Institute. He has authored and co-authored a number
of Manhattan Institute reports and op-eds on issues ranging
from urban crime and jail violence to broader matters of
criminal and civil justice reform.
We appreciate all of you being here today and look forward
to your testimony.
I will now recognize Chief Manger for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF J. THOMAS MANGER, CHIEF OF POLICE, UNITED STATES
CAPITOL POLICE; GREGGORY PEMBERTON, CHAIRMAN, D.C. POLICE
UNION; AND RAFAEL A. MANGUAL, NICK OHNELL FELLOW, POLICING AND
PUBLIC SAFETY INITIATIVE, MANHATTAN INSTITUTE FOR POLICY
RESEARCH

STATEMENT OF J. THOMAS MANGER

Chief Manger. Chairman Steil, Ranking Member Morelle, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the invitation to
testify regarding crime and safety in and around Capitol Hill.
The department greatly appreciates the Committee's
continued support of the men and women of the United States
Capitol Police. Congress' support has been invaluable as we
continued our work in addressing law enforcement demands within
our jurisdiction and the dramatic workload increases in an
ever-expanding volatile threat environment throughout the
country.
I want to start off with a very brief video. This is
something that happened just 2 weeks ago. A lookout was
broadcast for a robbery that occurred at the CVS on I Street
Southeast. What you are going to see catches the suspect as he
runs, flees the scene. I want to show you what happens next.
[Video shown.]
Chief Manger. You will see here in a moment, there is a
black SUV that comes down the street and stops. There it is
right there. It is going to stop on the corner. You see two
women jump out of the SUV because they have seen the suspect
fleeing down the street. The one intercepts him; the other one
tackles him.
Then you see the driver of the SUV, a male, help bring the
suspect down. The fourth individual came out of the back
passenger seat.
All four of those individuals were Capitol Police officers.
The first one who intercepted him, the tall woman, was Deputy
Chief Jeanita Mitchell. Inspector Carneysha Mendoza tackled
him. Dave Millard and Sergeant Angela Singletary assisted with
getting him into custody.
This is just an example of the almost daily interaction
that the USCP has with our law enforcement partners in the
national capital region. It is a mutually beneficial
relationship that allows our department to fulfill its mission
in securing the Capitol and the surrounding neighborhoods in
order to keep Members, their families, staff, and visitors
safe.
By necessity, we are more and more a protection agency.
However, at its core, the USCP still has traditional police
department responsibilities.
The department has patrol officers who enforce traffic
laws. We have criminal investigators, crime scene technicians,
officers that handle prisoner processing, motorcycle units, a
topflight bomb squad team, canine units.
The department deals with the enforcement of the law as it
applies on Capitol Grounds and the extended jurisdiction zone
in order to protect the campus and the Members and staff who
work, reside, and travel through the neighboring communities.
For instance, like the case last year where USCP officers
spotted a stolen car tied to multiple carjackings in the city.
The suspects in the vehicle were considered armed and
dangerous. The vehicle sped away from our officers. We chased
them. When they bailed out on foot, our cops ran them down and
took them into custody, recovering a gun and a high-capacity
magazine.
Right after that case, one of our bicycle officers spotted
a suspect wanted by the Secret Service. Our officer took
multiple knives and a chainsaw blade off of the guy. The Secret
Service also found that the individual had fake police
equipment in his car and charged him with impersonating a
police officer.
I am sure that some of you recall when the USCP officer
confiscated an M4-style rifle near the Senate Parks. That day
they stopped the assault rifle from getting onto Capitol Hill.
Even more recently, we made an arrest of an individual
carrying a machete on Capitol Grounds and arrested another
individual for carrying Molotov cocktails just off Capitol
Grounds.
Just last week, officers at the Capitol Visitor Center
prevented a man with a hammer in his backpack from entering the
Capitol.
Over the course of the last 2 years, we have had a Member
attacked in their apartment building, a Member and staff
carjacked, and a staff member assaulted at the congressional
Baseball Game.
The fact is our community--the Members of Congress, their
staff, their families, our visitors--do not just stay on
Capitol Grounds. Many live here when they are in session. For
many, this city is their home away from home.
The USCP works hand in hand with the Metropolitan Police
Department of Washington, D.C., and our other law enforcement
partners to keep people safe, and we patrol and respond to
where our community lives, works, and plays when they are in
the Nation's capital.
You each should have a map of our extended jurisdiction
zone. We have full police authority in that zone.
You should also know that the USCP has a roster of
locations where many Members reside when they are in session,
and we regularly patrol and respond to those buildings and
areas 24/7.
Our partnership with MPD is as strong as ever. They never
fail to assist us when needed. Our cops are out there as well.
In conclusion, earlier this week, for example, we responded
to an assault in the 400 block of New Jersey Avenue. We
arrested the individual who struck a passerby with a tree
branch.
Then, just a couple days ago, we responded at 3 o'clock in
the morning to a man who was throwing bricks at the front of a
house, of a home, on Maryland Avenue. We responded, we stopped
the guy, and we took him into custody. The home that was
damaged was adjacent to the home of a U.S. Senator.
U.S. Capitol Police understand that our priority has to be
this Capitol campus, but we also understand that our community
does not just stay on this campus.
We are working hand in hand with the Metropolitan Police
Department in the areas in and around Capitol Hill when we have
events in the city but outside the Capitol Hill area. We send
our folks there to ensure and enhance the safety in partnership
with MPD. We will continue to do that.
I am happy to answer any questions that the Committee may
have.
[The prepared statement of Chief Manger follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF J. THOMAS MANGER
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you, Chief Manger.
If I can, I think on behalf of all of the Members here, we
want to extend our appreciation to all the men and women that
serve in the U.S. Capitol Police.
I think the four individuals you highlighted in that video
who were involved in taking down a suspect is a reminder of how
dangerous of a job all of our law enforcement officers have.
We thank those four, but it is the countless men and women
that work at U.S. Capitol Police. If you could extend our
appreciation, I would appreciate it.
Chief Manger. Thank you.
Chairman Steil. Our next witness is Mr. Gregg Pemberton.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GREGGORY PEMBERTON

Mr. Pemberton. Good morning, Members of the Committee.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify.
As the Chairman of the D.C. Police Union, I speak on behalf
of approximately 3,000 sworn police officers, detectives, and
sergeants who serve the District of Columbia as members of the
Metropolitan Police Department.
I am a Detective Grade 1, and I have worked for the MPD for
19 years. I take great pride in serving the city.
My testimony here today will be an effort to inform the
Committee on issues related to crime in the District of
Columbia.
I will try to answer three questions that I hear most often
here in the District. Why is crime so bad? How did it get like
this? What can we do to fix it?
My testimony will focus on how numerous actions by the D.C.
Council--to include their rhetoric--has resulted in a mass
exodus of sworn law enforcement officers and an exponential
increase in violent crime.
Beginning in June 2020, the D.C. Council began introducing
anti-police legislation designed, in their own words, to,
quote, ``act accordingly to bend the arc of justice,'' end
quote.
I would like to provide a list of just some of the
legislation that the D.C. Council would introduce over the
course of the next 2 years.
The Comprehensive Policing and Justice Reform Amendment
Act. The Strengthening Oversight and Accountability of Police
Amendment Act. The Revised Criminal Code Amendment Act.
Reducing Law Enforcement Presence in Schools Act. Law
Enforcement Qualified Immunity Cessation Act. Law Enforcement
Present Sense Impression Act. Law Enforcement Vehicular Pursuit
Reform Act. The School Police Incident Oversight and
Accountability Amendment Act. The White Supremacy and Policing
Prevention Act.
The rhetoric that council members use when speaking
publicly about law enforcement amounts to nothing short of
virulent attacks on all police officers in the District.
One council member stated in a public hearing, quote, ``I
know for a fact there are police in the District who are bad
actors and who have been going on without the proper penance,''
end quote. He felt the need for Metropolitan Police officers to
receive, quote, ``some kind of retribution.''
Other council members bragged about defunding the
Department or making, quote, ``the biggest reduction to MPD he
had ever seen.''
In a hearing that took place just 2 weeks ago, many council
members became apoplectic when there were proposals to roll
back just some of the legislation that I mentioned earlier.
Without delving into the granular details of how terrible
these bills are or how blatantly awful the council's rhetoric
is, I can assure the Members of this Committee that the direct
result has been a mass exodus of police officers from the
Department.
Since the beginning of 2020, the MPD has lost 1,426
officers, more than one-third of the Department; 540 of those
separations, nearly 40 percent, were resignations, employees
who just walked away from a career with the MPD.
The MPD currently has over 500 vacancies for the position
of sworn officer, and our Chief of Police has testified that it
will take over a decade to fill them.
These dangerously low police officer staffing levels take
away valuable resources from our ability to respond to and
investigate crime. Losing patrol officers and detectives
impedes the Department's ability to close cases and to engage
and speak with victims in a timely manner.
Crime stats in the District closing out 2023 are absolutely
staggering. Homicides have reached 274, a 35-percent increase.
Carjackings reached 958, a 105-percent increase. Robberies were
up 67 percent. Violent crime overall went up 39 percent, and
all crimes went up 26 percent.
These statistics I have mentioned are city-wide. If one
parses out the data to the neighborhood level, some of these
communities have grown to look like war zones.
The District's Ward 6, which encompasses the Capitol,
downtown, Navy Yard, Eastern Market, Barracks Row, and Capitol
Hill, experienced a 188-percent increase in homicides, a 66-
percent increase in robberies, a 42-percent increase in sex
assaults, a 57-percent increase in carjackings, and a 44-
percent increase in violent crime.
Over the past three-and-a half years, our union has been
sounding the alarm about this problem to anyone within earshot,
including the D.C. Council. We tried to inform our elected
leaders of the unintended consequences of these policies.
Unfortunately, we have been ignored.
D.C. residents and business owners are under siege. Members
of Congress are being assaulted and carjacked. Your
congressional staff members are being robbed and stabbed.
Tourists and visitors, your constituents, are being targeted
and attacked. Yet, the D.C. Council fails to admit that their
policies have played a significant role in this outcome.
Now, almost 4 years later, we have all seen the results of
the D.C. Council's experiment, the empirical data is in, and we
know for a fact that their efforts have been an abject failure,
resulting in thousands of more victims of crime for the city.
The lasting impacts of these horrible policies will not be
fully realized for some time, and the efforts to repair the
damage done could take decades without swift and thoughtful
actions.
If we do not undo the failing policies put in place by the
D.C. Council that are pushing our police officers to leave MPD,
crime will continue to rise and thousands more victims will be
subjected to crime and violence.
The purpose of my testimony here today is to inform the
Committee on this ongoing crisis that exists in the District
and to publicly state that we are prepared to assist in any way
we can.
Again, I thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I
welcome any questions the Committee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pemberton follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF GREGGORY PEMBERTON
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you, Mr. Pemberton.
Mr. Mangual, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RAFAEL A. MANGUAL

Mr. Mangual. Chairman Steil, Ranking Member Morelle, and
other Members of this distinguished body, I would like to begin
by thanking you for the opportunity to offer remarks on an
important topic.
To put it bluntly, our Nation's capital is very much in the
midst of a crime and disorder crisis. In 2023, a year in which
the latest FBI estimates suggest the Nation saw homicides
decline by 13 percent and violent crime decline by nearly 6
percent, Washington, D.C., saw homicides spike 35 percent and
violent crime increase 39 percent.
For historical context, D.C.'s 2023 homicide total was the
highest it has been in 26 years. Robberies and car thefts in
the District were up a whopping 67 and 82 percent,
respectively, in 2023, while carjackings nearly doubled, even
after half a decade of year-over-year increases.
Those numbers are even more concerning than they might seem
at first glance because robberies, carjackings, and assaults
are occurring at such high numbers despite the fact that D.C.
has, like other cities, seen a marked shift in what
criminologists call routine activities.
In short, foot traffic, in-office work, and public transit
ridership in D.C. are all down significantly, which has reduced
the number of opportunities for offenses to take place because
there are fewer targets in public spaces.
In other words, what the official crime statistics do not
fully capture is the increase in the rate at which
opportunities for crime are actually converted into
victimizations.
According to an analysis of cell phone data by the
University of Toronto, foot traffic in downtown Washington as
of last spring was just 70 percent of what it was pre-pandemic.
Data published by the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit
Authority shows that on weekdays rail ridership in November
2023 was just 55 percent of what it was in November 2019. Just
last week, The Washington Post reported that office attendance
is at, quote, ``48 percent of pre-pandemic levels, as a
preponderance of Federal workers still work from home,'' and,
quote, ``More than 20 percent of downtown storefronts and
offices are vacant.''
All of this means that the crime increases seen in the
District reflect an even larger increase in the risk of
victimization. This phenomenon was recently illustrated by
research published last fall in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, which found that activity-adjusted crime
rates--i.e., crime rates that accounted for the amount of time
that potential victims actually spent outside--showed that in
New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago people in public spaces
were, quote, ``15 to 30 percent more likely to be robbed or
assaulted'' in 2020 even though the number of robbery and
assault offenses recorded in those cities that year decreased.
The increase in victimization risk is, on its own,
sufficient cause for urgency when it comes to combating crime
here in Washington, but it is worth noting that the economic
and broader societal impacts of rising crime and disorder are
unlikely to be positive.
Research establishes that violent crime can impact housing
prices, economic mobility, and even standardized test
performance. Then there is the potential effect of crime and
perceptions of public safety on tourism, which should be
particularly concerning for Washington.
All of this raises two questions. What might explain the
recent crime spike? What can be done about it?
The answer to the first suggests the answer to the second.
Like so many other American cities that have seen crime spike
in recent years, D.C. has fallen short in two important ways.
First is the dwindling number of experienced police
officers on the street. Last spring, the now former D.C. Metro
Police Chief, Robert J. Contee, reported to the D.C. Council
that the Department was down some 450 officers compared to
2020, bringing it to its lowest staffing level in half a
century.
This is not unrelated to the sharp decline in arrests
throughout the city, a measure that has remained low after
falling off a cliff midway through 2020.
Strong causal analyses show that the addition of new
officers will likely reduce homicides, particularly in the
city's most troubled enclaves, and D.C. knows firsthand just
how effective police surges can be on crime, as it was home to
one of the most well-known studies on the effect of additional
police presence on crime.
Second is the fact that serious violent crime in Washington
is driven disproportionately by chronic offenders with
extensive criminal histories, suggesting that not enough is
being done to incapacitate those who repeatedly offend.
A 2021 report published by the National Institute for
Criminal Justice Reform reported that, quote, ``Approximately
86 percent of homicide victims and suspects were known to the
criminal justice system prior to the incident,'' and that,
quote, ``Most victims and suspects with prior criminal offenses
had been arrested about 11 times for about 13 different
offenses by the time of the homicide.''
That measure was in line with what Chief Contee related to
reporters in March of last year when he said that homicide
offenders in D.C. had 11 prior arrests, which is in line with
measures from other cities.
The repeat offender problem certainly has not been helped
by the decline in the share of felony and misdemeanor arrests
charged by the U.S. Attorney's Office. Total cases charged by
that office hit a 20-year low in 2022, though recent reporting
from The Washington Post shows that more cases were filed by
U.S. Attorney Graves in 2023. Still, there is much ground to
make up on that front.
The reality is that D.C. has not been immune from the
general national trend toward depolicing and decarceration. I
do not think it is a coincidence that the city has also seen
public safety deteriorate since more dramatically moving in
that direction.
Now is the time to pause and recalibrate. The recent
passage of a new omnibus crime bill by the D.C. Council last
week is a good first step, but the city is far from out of the
woods, even if recent year-to-date crime numbers show declines
on some crime measures.
If the city is to achieve a true turnaround on the public
safety front, it is going to have to address the gaps in
policing and prosecution that have allowed too many chronic
offenders to walk the streets of our Nation's capital with too
few officers to respond and prevent the sorts of offenses that
have been plaguing D.C. residents and visitors for far too
long.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to answering any of
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mangual follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF RAFAEL A. MANGUAL
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Mangual.
We will now begin our questions, starting with me, followed
by the Ranking Member. We will then alternate between the
parties. I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I will start with you Mr. Pemberton.
Countless congressional staffers have been robbed within a
mile of the Capitol. Last year, a staffer for Senator Rand
Paul, he was stabbed repeatedly, puncturing his lungs and
skull. A Member of Congress was assaulted in an elevator. A
Representative was carjacked just down the road.
All these crimes happened within a mile of here, largely in
Ward 6, represented by Council Member Charles Allen. We invited
Allen to speak today, but he rejected that invitation.
Mr. Pemberton, you mentioned some of the bills the D.C.
Council passed in the last few years that have had a negative
impact on policing. I want to focus in on the Youth
Rehabilitation Act that passed in 2018 that reduced sentences
for first-time offenders.
Is it true that the bill raised the age of what is
considered a youth to 24 years of age?
Mr. Pemberton. That is correct.
Chairman Steil. If a 24-year-old was to commit a carjacking
with a gun in our Nation's capital, they would be eligible for
a reduced sentence under that law?
Mr. Pemberton. That is correct.
Chairman Steil. Have you encountered people who have used
this program more than once, contrary to how the program was
sold?
Mr. Pemberton. Absolutely.
Chairman Steil. You know individuals who are over the age--
well over the age of 18, up to the age of 24, who could commit
a carjacking with a gun, be eligible for a reduced sentence,
and that can happen multiple times?
Mr. Pemberton. Yes, absolutely.
Chairman Steil. What would be the impact of an individual
who does this? What is your analysis of that law?
Mr. Pemberton. There are no consequence for the actions of
their behavior, and they understand that. When they get back
out on the street, they are free to recommit these crimes as
often as they like.
Chairman Steil. What does that do to the morale of police
officers serving in the Metropolitan Police Department?
Mr. Pemberton. It is horrible, because you are arresting
people for violent crimes, and then they are back out on the
street the next day, and then they are never held accountable
for their actions. It really takes an impact on morale.
Chairman Steil. An officer would risk their life to try to
apprehend a dangerous criminal, in this case maybe a 24-year-
old who carjacked someone with a gun, only to find out that
this individual is treated as a youth in our Nation's capital
with limited consequences and can find themselves back out on
the street in short order to commit another crime?
Mr. Pemberton. This is what happens more often than not.
Yes, this is regular.
Chairman Steil. Then if we look at the numbers in D.C.,
violent crime increased last year by 39 percent, homicides
increased 35 percent, robberies increased 67 percent, and
carjackings increased 82 percent.
For those reasons, we created a House Security Resources
Guide after a briefing with you last September.
Would you agree that D.C.'s increase in crime is a direct
result of the policies pushed by the D.C. City Council and
anti-policing and soft-on-crime policies?
Mr. Pemberton. Absolutely.
Chairman Steil. To go to you, Mr. Mangual, is it safe to
say that the nationwide research shows a correlation between
increased crime and anti-policing, soft-on-crime policies?
Mr. Mangual. Absolutely.
Chairman Steil. Let me come back to you, Mr. Pemberton, if
I can.
In 2023, D.C. had the fifth-highest homicide rate of any
city in the country. That is saying something, and it is not
saying anything good.
Meanwhile, the average homicide suspect in our Nation's
capital had already been arrested 11 times. Is that accurate?
Mr. Pemberton. That is correct, yes.
Chairman Steil. We are looking at these trends where
officers are arresting time and again as having a detrimental
impact on morale, correct?
Mr. Pemberton. Absolutely.
Chairman Steil. Mr. Pemberton, in your testimony you
mentioned the Comprehensive Policing and Justice Reform Act was
negatively impacting police. There were a number of policies
that are in there.
Can I ask you what the impact of negative rhetoric by the
D.C. City Council toward police has had on officers?
Mr. Pemberton. Yes. The discussions that came out around
all these pieces of legislation and then the regular
conversations that the council has about policing generally are
incredibly negative.
The message is loud and clear from the council, and the
rank-and-file Members are receiving that: The council does not
like police officers. They do not want them doing police work.
They do not want them making arrests. They certainly do not
want them getting out and stopping and investigating people.
That message is loud, and it drives people away from the
Department, and people who, those that do not leave the
Department, are apprehensive about doing their job.
Chairman Steil. Thank you.
Then, as noted, because of the dramatic increase in crime,
in particular in the area surrounding the Capitol, this has an
overflow effect on you, Chief Manger, and your officers.
Is it accurate that last year Capitol Police made 234
arrests related to DUI, assaults, drugs, motor vehicle thefts,
and weapon law violations?
Chief Manger. That is correct.
Chairman Steil. Have you seen a dramatic uptick in those
types of arrests in the Capitol Hill area over the last 4
years?
Chief Manger. Yes, we have.
Chairman Steil. Has it made your job harder and the job of
the U.S. Capitol Police harder to deliver on your chief
mission, which is securing and protecting the Capitol complex.
Chief Manger. Yes. We look at our crime-fighting
responsibilities as integral to our mission. It just, like so
many other areas of our mission, it has just increased. The
volume of work has increased.
Chairman Steil. Understood. We appreciate the work that you
and the men and women under your command do every day.
I think D.C. in 2023 is a stark example of what happens
when anti-police, soft-on-crime policies are implemented. The
data is clear: When you make a police officer's job harder and
more difficult, when you denigrate the service of police
officers, when you defund police, there are negative
consequences.
In contrast, we are going to continue to support the law
enforcement officers, and in particular the law enforcement
officers of the Capitol Police who are doing their job to
protect visitors, staff members, and Members here, and we will
ensure that they have the resources to do their job. I am
committed to making sure the U.S. Capitol and the surrounding
area are safe.
I will yield back. I now recognize the Ranking Member for 5
minutes.
Mr. Morelle. Thanks so much, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate all the comments made by the witnesses, and,
obviously, this is a challenging, challenging issue.
I do note that since there has been extensive use made of
statistics, I just thought I would read some of the more
current ones for the year 2024, which, admittedly, we are only
about a quarter of the year in, so I want to be mindful of
that.
As I understand it, according to the Metropolitan Police
Department statistics, homicide in 2024 for the same period in
2023 is down 31 percent, assault with a dangerous weapon is
down 32 percent, robbery down 8 percent, violent crime overall
down 16 percent.
As it relates to property crimes, burglary is down 19
percent, motor vehicle theft down 30 percent, theft from auto
is down 23 percent, arson is down 40 percent, property crime
down 11 percent, and all crime down 12 percent.
I assume if these trends continue that some of the remarks
that have been made would be withdrawn by people who have made
them since we are relying so heavily on statistics, and I
certainly hope that the trend lines continue.
I also just want to note for the record that, while a
number of statements have been made about continuing to support
law enforcement, I do note that the Republican House bill on
CJS, which is Commerce, Justice, and Science, that the
Republican bill, had it passed--and, fortunately, it did not--
would have cut funding for the FBI by $415.3 million as opposed
to Fiscal Year 2023, would have reduced ATF's funding by $149.9
million, and would have reduced funding for United States
Attorneys who prosecute these Federal crimes by $320 million.
For folks who continue to talk about supporting law
enforcement, some of my colleagues either have amnesia or do
not recognize the importance of supporting law enforcement at
the Federal, State, and local levels.
I want to ask you, Chief Manger, particularly since you
have responsibility for the Capitol complex, and this hearing
is really about Capitol Hill--in fact, it is titled ``Safety on
Capitol Hill,'' and you have responsibility to that--you
mention in your testimony that the Capitol Police confiscated
an M4-style ghost gun near the Senate Parks, stopped an assault
rifle from getting to Capitol Hill, and arrested an individual
with a high-capacity magazine.
I also know you have experience as a police chief in both
Maryland and Virginia.
How are these guns making their way into Washington, D.C.?
Chief Manger. Typically, they are coming from other States.
I can tell you, having been a police officer in Virginia for 27
years, Virginia has got plenty of guns.
Mr. Morelle. Many of those guns are making their way into
Washington, D.C.?
Chief Manger. They make their way to a lot of places.
Mr. Morelle. In your opinion, your professional opinion,
would the Capitol campus and the area immediately around it be
safer without M4-style ghost guns, assault rifles, and high-
capacity magazines on the street?
Chief Manger. Certainly in the wrong hands, yes.
Mr. Morelle. Yes.
Do you believe your officers would be safer if it was more
difficult to obtain M4-style guns, assault rifles, and high-
capacity magazines?
Chief Manger. Any police officer is safe when there are
fewer guns around, in my view.
Mr. Morelle. I want to ask you, you have talked about and
others have mentioned the attacks that have occurred on Members
of Congress, as well as staff.
What are the safety resources available to Members and
staff when they are off Capitol Grounds in D.C.? You mentioned
it a little bit in your testimony. I wonder if you could just
expand on that.
Chief Manger. We do--when we have congressional events that
are off campus, we certainly want to provide escorts or
resources.
One of the initiatives that we are looking to do is to
reach a memorandum of agreement with MPD so that when we have a
congressional event--I will give you an example, like the
congressional football game or the congressional softball
game--that we have authority to take action should something
happen.
We have that in the extended jurisdiction zone. If we can
have that at any congressional event no matter where it might
be in the city, that would be of great benefit to us.
Because, again, we are not trying to replace MPD. MPD is
the best partner we have. We can supplement and focus more
resources when our community is in and around the city.
Mr. Morelle. Very good.
I want to join with you, Mr. Chairman, in certainly
thanking the officers of the Capitol Police department and MPD
who put their lives on the line every day.
We are completely grateful for your service and for your
sacrifice and will continue to support your efforts.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Dr. Murphy is recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a point of inquiry. Can we subpoena the D.C. City
Council? Do you know if we are able to subpoena the D.C. City
Council?
Chairman Steil. We do have that authority. We invited Mr.
Charles Allen. Mr. Charles Allen rejected the invitation to
attend. We did not----
Dr. Murphy. I do not know why this crime and the safety of
individuals within this community is a partisan issue. I do not
get it. I do not get--like, bullets can kill Democrats just as
well as they can kill Republicans and innocent individuals.
There is a reason that criminals should be prosecuted. I
will remind our colleagues that money for prosecutors does not
matter if the laws do not allow them to be prosecuted, period.
I am just going to remind everybody here, the Michael Brown
incident in St. Louis was a tragic one, but the bullet holes
were in the top of his head, showing that he did not have his
hands up. He was charging the police officer, period. That is
when so much of this started, and truth matters when we are
dealing with these things.
This is infuriating. It is absolutely infuriating. We are
allowing a city council to let havoc be wreaked in this town
because they do not like law enforcement. It is time for the
adults to come back in the room and make this country and this
city safe.
Questions to Mr. Pemberton.
Can you tell me what, when we are dealing with police
chases, what the policies are in this city?
Mr. Pemberton. The Metropolitan Police Department has very
strict policies on vehicle pursuits. The only vehicles we are
allowed to pursue would be when a violent felony is committed
and if we believe there is an imminent threat of serious bodily
injury or death if we do not pursue that person.
Dr. Murphy. Tell me about carjacking. What happens with
those?
Mr. Pemberton. In certain circumstances, officers would be
able to pursue those vehicles. In reality, most of those
pursuits are called off by management officials.
Dr. Murphy. Because of what reason?
Mr. Pemberton. The danger--the perceived danger that there
could be or possible bad public relations for a vehicle
pursuit.
Dr. Murphy. I had a condo here in town. There were five
shootings in 3 months. My wife would take our dog out just in
the median to relieve itself and it felt no longer safe for my
wife.
I will be damned if I am going to risk my life coming up
here to serve the people of North Carolina, serve the country,
and get shot doing it just because the city council here is
absolutely derelict in their duty to protect the citizens in
which they are charged.
Just following up with that. As far as jurisdictional
grounds, what happens if the police chase an individual outside
D.C. into Maryland or any of the surrounding communities? What
happens with that chase?
Mr. Pemberton. In certain circumstances, Metropolitan
Police officers would be permitted to pursue a vehicle into
other jurisdictions, but most often, in reality, those pursuits
are called off.
Dr. Murphy. When you have discussions with the city
council, what is the tenor of those? Are you immediately--
because of the role in which you are placed, are they
immediately adversarial?
Mr. Pemberton. Yes. Many of the meetings that we have made
with city council members that we thought would be productive,
they would send low-ranking staff members and not show up
themselves. Then we would try to have conversations with those
individuals, which I would imagine were not even related to----
Dr. Murphy. You know, it is interesting. D.C. wants
statehood, and this is the type of legislative body that they
demonstrate themselves to be.
How in hell could people want that, anything other than
reasons than being political, that they want two more votes in
the Senate? They have not shown the ability to protect their
citizens.
Our Capitol Police do a fantastic job. If our D.C. police
are handled?
What am I supposed to think if, God forbid, my wife gets
carjacked and the criminal who does that is literally slapped
on the wrist to go out and do it again? We are in our Nation's
capital for God's sake. I just do not get it.
What is the purpose of allowing criminals back on the
street to repeat their offenses? Can you give some examples? I
would love to hear this. The carjacking thing absolutely
destroys me.
We had a Member of our own body carjacked by three
individuals at gunpoint. The person got slapped on the wrist.
What am I--what are we supposed to do with this? What kind
of pursuit policies actually will allow our officers to
actually do something about it? God forbid we do it, we turn
them in to the prosecuting attorneys, and they just push them
right back on the street.
What does that do to the morale?
Mr. Pemberton. Officers do not want to work in an
environment where their work is meaningless. People join the
policing profession because they want to help their community.
This is not a job where you get rich. This is a municipal
government position, and people typically take this job because
they like what they are doing.
Dr. Murphy. They put their lives on the line for the safety
of the citizens that they protect, yet they are not--it is just
a circular firing squad.
I am not allowed to carry a gun unless I go through hoops
and hoops and hoops, but then I am only in a specific area. I
will be damned if I will let a criminal hurt my wife. God
forbid he tries to do something to me. I feel sorry for him, to
be truth be told, that this should happen.
This is absolutely against what the laws of the United
States should dictate, and here we are allowing our own
individuals to wreak crime across this Nation. Dammit, it is a
damn partisan issue, and I just do not get it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Loudermilk is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for having this hearing. Very timely and very important.
Thank you all for being here. Thank you for your service.
It is essential that we have the resources here to protect
the Members of Congress, the staff, even the visitors that come
to Capitol Hill here. The crime that is in the city has an
impact on that.
Let me say this: I have the greatest admiration for those
that wear the uniform of law enforcement, both in the city,
Capitol Police.
I am here today because of the bravery and heroism of one
of the Capitol Police officers on the baseball field in 2017
who on his own drew fire to allow me to try to get to one of
the players who had been already shot. David Bailey will remain
a hero not only to me, but to my family. I appreciate their
dedication.
Chief, good to see you again. It has been almost 16 hours.
I appreciate--I mean, you were at the Gershwin Awards last
night. I think it is important not only you be there, you were
in uniform.
To show--one thing is that, even though the jurisdiction
may be Capitol Hill, it really follows anywhere that we go as
Members, whether it is somewhere else on Capitol Hill or
whether it is we are traveling in a codel or we are traveling
somewhere else.
It is not just what happens on Capitol Hill, but it is the
crime in the area because--I was even thinking of this last
night as we spoke about this hearing. Here we are, not on
Capitol Hill, but we are in D.C. with a significant number of
Members of Congress that are there.
I know that the police budget request for Fiscal Year 2024
was 841 million, and that has increased substantially over the
past 5 years.
Chief, can you speak to the challenges that the department
is facing that led to that increase in your request?
Chief Manger. It really comes down to our mission and our
workload. Our mission has expanded, and our workload has gone
up dramatically.
You have heard me talk many times about the number of
threats against Members of Congress, and you have heard me talk
about the number of demonstrations that we handle and the
tactics that these demonstrators seem to--that seem to
escalate, which requires a commensurate response from Capitol
Police.
One of the things that I have done since I got here was to
take a more--a broader approach to the safety of our community.
When I say ``our community,'' I am talking about the Members of
Congress, your staff, the visitors, and not--so when they cross
the street and they are no longer on the Capitol complex, OK,
well, that is somebody else's problem. No, we take
responsibility for our community as best we can.
A good example is Union Station. There is a lot of activity
over at Union Station. Some of it is great and some of it is
criminal. We assist Amtrak Police, we assist Metro Transit
Police, and we assist MPD to the best of our ability.
We monitor the radio. When we hear 911 dispatches come out
over MPD's radio, if we are close by, our cops respond, because
we want to be able to help. Again, MPD is the best partner we
have, and they always come to help us when we have the need.
We want to be better partners, good partners as well, and
make sure that folks that are in and around Capitol Hill, when
our community is at an event, you are going to see us there.
Mr. Loudermilk. All right. I know it is beyond just Capitol
Hill because in our recent policy conference several members of
the Capitol Police were there securing us. We have conventions
coming up that I am sure that you are going to be involved in
both of those.
Chief Manger. Hundreds of officers, yes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Yes, there is a big draw on the force.
Mr. Pemberton, does MPD face similar challenges that
necessitate more funding? Is it true that you are at the lowest
level of officers that you have been in in 50 years?
Mr. Pemberton. That is correct, the lowest staffing levels
we have had in 50 years. Funding would be a problem if we did
not have a shortage of 500 police officers. Not paying those
500 cops that are supposed to be here, I think, is saving the
city a lot of money.
Even when the city has thrown money at this--right now they
are offering $25,000 signing bonuses to become a Metropolitan
Police officer, and that is not moving the needle. The reason
is, is because of this climate and this environment that has
been created by the city council. It is not an attractive place
to work for current employees or potential future employees.
Mr. Loudermilk. All right. Thank you. I see my time has
expired.
I also want to thank you for your response on January 6th.
You guys were an integral part of that. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Mrs. Bice is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I first want to say a heartfelt thank you to Capitol Police
and Metro Police for the jobs that you do.
I come from a State that we respect law enforcement and we
abide by the letter of the law. Every week that I get on a
plane and I fly to D.C., my husband wonders if something is
going to happen to me while I am here working, serving the
people of Oklahoma's Fifth Congressional District.
It is absolutely infuriating to me what is happening to the
Nation's capital right now. People call my office excited to
come this summer to tour the monuments, to bring their
children. One of the questions they are asking my office is:
Can you tell me about safety?
Why in the world do we have to have a conversation with
visitors to the U.S. Capitol, the heart of this country, we
have to worry about safety? It is just appalling.
I think it should be noted, the majority of the Members
have been popping in and out, but we have not seen the majority
of the Democrat side attend this hearing, nor did they offer up
a Dem witness to be able to ask questions to.
As my colleague Dr. Murphy mentioned, this is not a
partisan issue. This is a safety issue.
It was brought up at the beginning of this hearing by the
Ranking Member. There was a discussion about gun violence. This
is not a gun violence discussion. This is a prosecute the
crimes that the individuals are committing in this city
problem. It was referenced that we are arresting young people
under the age of 24 and not prosecuting them.
The D.C. City Council and the Mayor of D.C. should be held
fully accountable for the crime that is happening in this city.
It is infuriating to me.
Chief, I want to start with you. How is the USCP trying to
suppress or deter crime in the Capitol Hill area?
Chief Manger. We have the advantage of having a much
smaller jurisdiction than other police departments. As I have
said, we certainly understand that we can be of service and we
can be of help to the neighborhoods in and around Capitol Hill.
We respond to calls that we hear come out in this area. I think
it is important that we work in partnership with MPD to help
them.
I talk all the time about us being a protection agency,
which we are, but we cannot ever walk away from our police
responsibilities. We are still cops, and we still fight crime.
On this campus, if you took the crime rate of things that
happen on this campus, it is very low. There is not a lot of
crime on this campus. Not nonexistent, but there are not a lot.
To the extent that we can branch, push that out to the
surrounding neighborhood, certainly push it out where we have
congressional events, we are going to continue to do that. It
is just understanding that we need to continue to take our
police responsibilities very seriously.
Mrs. Bice. It was mentioned by a couple of my colleagues
that we have a 50-year low for the number of officers on the
MPD currently.
Is your USCP trying to help augment some of the 500-police-
officer shortage that the MPD is seeing currently?
Chief Manger. To the extent we can, absolutely, especially
in the area where we are patrolling. We would offer them the
help, the same way they offer us help every day of the week.
Yes, we are doing our best to work hand in hand with them, yes.
Mrs. Bice. If I can also just ask, what do you think are
the proactive measures that can be taken by either Members or
staff to try to protect the safety of people in and around the
Capitol? What should we be doing?
Chief Manger. We offer a fair number of services in terms
of escorts, in terms of what we call law enforcement
coordinations. It still frustrates me that the participation
rate, the request rate for those services is very low.
Just encouraging your colleagues, encouraging staff
members, encouraging at any event that you all might have to
let us know so that we can help either coordinate with the
State and locals who are in the jurisdiction or we can be there
ourselves.
Mrs. Bice. The last thing I think I want to read, which I
think really gets to the heart of the problem, has to do with
some of the police reforms that have come forward.
I would say that D.C. is not prosecuting the crimes, not
just these individuals that are being classified as youth that
are under 24, but a myriad of other crimes as well.
There were over 15,000 crimes committed, according to the
report that I have in front of me, but more than 10,000 were
not actually prosecuted, and I think that is part of the
problem.
Maybe the D.C. City Council should look at changing their
statutes to allow for an elected DA to be able to hold a DA
accountable.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
The gentleman from the State of Ohio, Mr. Carey, is now
recognized.
Mr. Carey. I want to thank the Chairman and also the
Ranking Member for having this hearing today.
I do want to point out a couple things.
I happen to be one of those Members that actually lives in
a neighborhood very similar to Capitol Hill in Columbus, Ohio.
We have seen the uptick, of course, and I have talked to our
police officers there. The recruiting efforts that they are
facing are equal to what I think is consistent with what I am
seeing across the country.
I also do want to point out that when you reach a certain
age, a lot of your staff tend to be about the same age as your
children.
We had three of our young staffers that were just walking
back on Capitol Hill--one of them is here with us today--that
were attacked by a homeless guy with a knife.
As a father, you hear that and you view these young
staffers as professionals, but you are mindful.
Anyway, along those lines, I do have a few questions.
Chief, I would like to kind of start with you.
As we know, the Capitol Police expanded jurisdiction
reaches beyond the Capitol campus itself into some of those
surrounding neighborhoods.
You mention this in your written testimony, you also
highlighted it, and you describe some of the multiple
incidences that you have responded to and the crimes in the
nearby area.
What are the greatest challenges that you face with the
jurisdiction of these neighborhoods?
Chief Manger. The biggest challenge for us is that once you
get beyond that extended jurisdiction zone--and oftentimes we
are patrolling beyond there because we have got a building
where 30 Members of Congress live. We are patrolling that
three, four, five times a night.
The fact that we--if something happens, oftentimes we would
have to call for MPD to take some sort of action, because we do
not have the authority that we need.
Mr. Carey. Well, with that, what would you say the
coordination with MPD, what is that typically like?
Chief Manger. It is great. A very quick example.
At the congressional softball game last year, it was beyond
our extended jurisdiction zone. We had a group of demonstrators
walk into center field and stop the game.
We called for MPD because we did not have the authority to
arrest them, because it was outside the extended jurisdiction
zone.
What I would like is to have a memorandum of agreement--we
have several memorandums of agreement with MPD--to be able to,
at a congressional event, that we would, in fact, have the
authority to take police action at something like that so we
would not have to wait for them to arrest--make the arrests.
Mr. Carey. I appreciate that.
Something else. Like I mentioned, I live in a neighborhood
very similar to Capitol Hill. It is in the city of Columbus. Of
course, many Members do across the country.
Chief, can you describe how the Capitol Police work with
our local law enforcement agencies nationwide to ensure Member
security in our own districts?
Chief Manger. I appreciate that question.
We have dozens--and that number is growing exponentially--
dozens of memorandums of agreement that have been signed with
State and local police departments from around the country so
that we can request their assistance and they will provide that
assistance for an event in a Member's home district, so that
they will provide additional security, and we will reimburse
them for any cost of that assistance.
We work very well with State and local agencies from around
the country. As you may know, we have nationwide jurisdiction
to investigate threats against Members of Congress.
The fact is we do not have the staffing to investigate, to
go all over the country to do so. We work with State and
locals, and we have great relationships all over the country.
Mr. Carey. Last, and I only have a minute left.
How many arrests does the Capitol Police make in a typical
week from DUIs or other criminal suspects coming from D.C. into
the nearby campuses?
Chief Manger. Traffic offenses, including DUIs, we probably
make a dozen or so every week. I will tell you that the number
of arrests over the last couple years has gone up each year.
Mr. Carey. As somebody who was a staffer here in the
1990's, I can tell you it has definitely changed, in many ways
for the better, but obviously we are seeing this uptick.
Really appreciate your testimony, and I appreciate the work
that you do with our local security teams. I know we have a
person on our staff that coordinates with you guys, and you
guys have done a fantastic job, and I appreciate that.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
A former law enforcement officer, Mr. D'Esposito, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here today.
This is rare, but I have to disagree with my colleagues
when they say that this is not partisan.
This is actually, in fact, partisan, because Democrats and
their legislation have created this issue, whether it is here
in Washington, D.C., in our Nation's capital, or if it is home
in New York.
They have passed and promoted pro-criminal, anti-law
enforcement legislation that has led us to this situation.
Law enforcement officers actually wear handcuffs on their
gun belts to use them against criminals, but Democrats in
places like New York and Washington, D.C., have allowed those
handcuffs to be put on us to not do our jobs.
I know that in the beginning of the hearing we heard that
the beginning of this year it seems that crime is down in
Washington, D.C.
Chief Manger, Mr. Pemberton, you guys have been in law
enforcement for how many years?
Chief Manger. Forty-five.
Mr. D'Esposito. Forty-five.
Mr. Pemberton. Nineteen.
Mr. D'Esposito. Nineteen. That is 64. We will add mine in.
Let us say almost 80 years, all right? Eighty years on the job.
What season do we usually see the least amount of crime
committed, especially those on the street? Probably be the
winter, right? When the weather gets nicer, crime tends to
spike.
Now, I know that we also talked about guns. One of the
issues that we are facing with guns throughout this country is
that people are getting arrested with illegal firearms and they
are not getting prosecuted.
We see guns being taken off the streets, but very often the
criminals who tote those firearms are able to walk the streets
freely again before the cops are actually done with their
paperwork.
Now, Mr. Pemberton, I know that you were in the Violent
Crimes Unit, similar to the work that I did. If you had to take
a guess, an estimation, how many firearms, how many gun arrests
have you been a part of in your career?
Mr. Pemberton. I would have to say it would be over a
thousand.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. My number is probably a little less.
You have some more time on the job.
My next question is this. Out of the over a thousand gun
arrests that you were part of, how many of those individuals
when you went to arrest them presented you with a license to
carry that gun?
Mr. Pemberton. Zero.
Mr. D'Esposito. Gun licensing really would have nothing to
do with the carrying of firearms, because those who are
breaking the law really do not care about what gun laws are,
correct?
Mr. Pemberton. That is correct.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Now, in all of the guns that you have
recovered--I guess we should focus more recently here in
Washington, D.C., because it seems like the other side of the
aisle wants to talk about assault weapons, they want to talk
about high-capacity firearms, when, in fact, much of the time
the people who speak the most--and I am not talking about Mr.
Morelle at all. I have great respect for him.
There are people who love to speak about high-capacity
weapons. They love to talk about guns that are in mass
shootings. In fact, they really do not know much about firearms
and they do not even know about the guns that they are speaking
of.
In the arrests that have been made by the MPD, how many of
the guns over the last year would have been handguns? You could
give an estimate. I am sure you do not have the number off the
top of your head.
Mr. Pemberton. Yes, I do not. I know that last year we
recovered 3,200 firearms. I do not know how many were handguns,
but I would venture a guess that it was at least 90 percent.
Mr. D'Esposito. 90 percent of the guns recovered last year
in Washington, D.C., you said 3,200 were recovered, so 90
percent of them were handguns, illegal firearms. Not one of
those people probably presented a license to carry it.
Mr. Pemberton. I think that is fair, yes.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. A lot of those individuals were repeat
offenders, right? They have been arrested. They have been part
of the criminal justice system.
Why? Because over the last few years, legislation
implemented by Democrats throughout this country has made this
country less safe. It is a fact.
Mr. Mangual, I know that you mentioned in your opening
statement about the dwindling number of police officers. Why do
you think we have a dwindling number of police officers?
Mr. Mangual. I think a lot of it has to do with the
rhetoric and the environment that is been created by policy,
and I have some personal experience with this.
Mr. D'Esposito. That is exactly right. It is the rhetoric
and it is the policy that has been created. It is the rhetoric
that is being spewed by Democrats here on Capitol Hill, by
anti-cop people throughout this country.
It is the policies. Not only policy, because now we are
talking about laws, actually things that are on the books.
People took pens, put them to paper, and passed legislation to
make this country less safe, to make the jobs of law
enforcement harder, and to give criminals free rein to do
whatever it is they want without any repercussions.
It is why right here on Capitol Hill you cannot go to CVS
and get batteries because they are locked up. Why? Because
people go into stores, take whatever they want, and walk right
out.
That is the country, that is the city that Democrats have
created. I blame it, and I say it is partisan, because they are
the ones who have carried this banner, they are the ones who
have passed this legislation, and they are the ones who have
doubled down and said: We are going to continue to do this.
My time is expired, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Lee is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to our witnesses who have joined us here today
for your important testimony and also your efforts to fight
crime, to fight violent crime, and your work to ensure that
those who live and visit our Nation's capital can do so in a
way that is safe.
I would also like to discuss today a program with the
Capitol Police, Chief Manger, the Special Assistant United
States Attorney program, and how that is a program that you are
utilizing to actually help ensure that you are keeping Members
of Congress, other Government officials, and the public safe.
Would you please describe for us the Special Assistant
United States Attorney, or SAUSA, program that you are using in
field offices in Tampa, Sacramento, and D.C.?
Chief Manger. DOJ has provided us with the authorization to
have these SAUSAs to prosecute cases nationwide and to assist
in prosecuting threats against--involving Members of Congress.
The Department of Justice has also designated our SAUSAs as
subject matter experts on threats cases.
We have had great success with them. Our SAUSA in Tampa has
worked multiple cases in the Middle District of Florida,
leading to guilty pleas in threat cases involving a threat
against a Member of Congress, other Federal officials, and in
one case a threat against a Supreme Court Justice.
We have had, again, great success. The SAUSA in D.C., their
primary portfolio includes managing the threat portal for the
U.S. Attorney's Office in the District of Columbia.
A number of cases involving Members of Congress as victims,
congressional staff members as victims, or crimes that occurred
on Capitol Grounds, we have our own prosecutor that makes sure
those cases go forward.
Ms. Lee. Do you foresee or would you hope to see an
expansion of the SAUSA program into additional cities across
America?
Chief Manger. I think as the workload presents itself, it
is a very efficient way for us to handle a lot of these cases
so that not every investigator, not every attorney is flying
out from D.C., we have got folks around the country that can be
on the scene working these cases.
Ms. Lee. I believe the SAUSAs also provide training to case
agents and investigators within the threat assessment section.
Could you describe for us that section and how the SAUSAs
are working to help train case agents and investigators?
Chief Manger. They are the subject matter experts on threat
cases. We get, as everybody here knows, you get threats and
concerning calls and directions of interest that are very
concerning.
These attorneys train our officers to know when it crosses
that line from being just free speech or being just something
concerning to something that is a criminal threat.
Ms. Lee. In your assessment, has the program, as
implemented thus far, been successful in addressing some of the
rise in threats against Members in Congress?
Chief Manger. Absolutely. We have better success in terms
of prosecution now than we did before we had this program.
Ms. Lee. Can you tell us why you think that change, why
that better rate of success is happening?
Chief Manger. I think it is because this is their primary
job. Prior to this, we were competing with attorneys that had a
huge caseload. Sometimes they just looked at our case and said:
OK, not sure this is going to rise to the level of being a
priority for me, because I am prosecuting much more serious
cases.
This way, we have folks that their priority is working
threats against Members of Congress.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Chief.
Mr. Mangual, last fall the Committee on House
Administration held a briefing for Members and staff regarding
the rise in crime in Washington, D.C. It included safety tips
and advice for how best to protect oneself against carjackings
and the proliferation of other things, like assaults and
robberies, that we have been seeing here in the District.
Would you like to provide any additional insight or advice
on how residents or visitors to our Nation's capital can
protect themselves from these types of violent crimes?
Mr. Mangual. Unfortunately, I cannot say that I have any
expertise in terms of giving advice on personal security. The
one piece of advice that I would give residents is to urge
their policymakers and their representatives in the D.C.
Council and in Congress to push harder on anti-crime measures.
As I mention in my testimony, it is very, very clear that
the criminal justice system's capability of dealing with repeat
offenders has been eroded, and it has been eroded for quite
some time. That is why you see the most heinous crimes
consistently committed by people who have 10, 15, 20, 30 prior
arrests.
To my mind, one of the most effective uses of time that
citizens can make with respect to this issue is putting
pressure on their elected officials to make some changes and
stop that problem where it is.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
We are in the homestretch here of our hearing, but I would
like to recognize the Ranking Member for brief closing remarks.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, thank you all for being here. This is a complicated
and nuanced issue, no doubt, and more resources would clearly
be helpful.
Ms. Lee pointed out an interesting point as relates to the
U.S. Attorneys, which, again, is why I am so strongly opposed
to the proposed $320 million cut that was proposed by House
Republicans for U.S. Attorneys, who do great work all across
this country, including prosecuting crimes here in Washington,
D.C.
I am sorry that Mr. D'Esposito left, but since he raised a
couple things.
First, as it related to 2024 crime statistics, he talked
about seasonality. I was actually comparing the same period of
time of year from January 1 to March 21.
Basic statistics, you want to compare like things, and that
is what I did. I understand there will be seasonal adjustments.
He raised another thing, which he said this was a partisan
issue and basically condemned Democrats and blamed us for the
crime issue.
I was not going to raise this, but I am going to now, which
is violent crime, as I said, in D.C. is obviously of concern to
all of us.
I know, according to a study by Third Way that looked at 21
years of crime data, at the peak of the violent crime spike in
2020 murder rates were 40 percent higher in red States, defined
as States that voted for former President Trump in 2020, as
opposed to blue States, defined as those States that voted for
Joe Biden in 2020.
The murder rate in States that voted for Donald Trump
exceeded the murder rate in the States that voted for Joe Biden
every year for two decades, from 2000 to 2020.
Over the course of those 21 years, the per capita murder
rate in Trump States was 23 percent higher than the murder rate
in Biden States.
Even if you remove murders in the largest cities in red
States from the equation, those dominated by Democrats, murder
rates in Trump-voting States were 12 percent higher across the
21-year period than Biden States, which included those
Democratic-controlled areas.
I ask unanimous consent to enter this study entitled ``The
Two-Decade Red State Murder Problem'' into the record.
Chairman Steil. Without objection.
[The article referred to follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Morelle. I would say again, this is nuanced.
Look, I have strongly, as a Democrat, supported more
resources for law enforcement. I will continue to do that. I
believe we should have zero tolerance for crime in general. I
do not disagree with many of the comments made about
prosecution.
It is impossible to look at the crime problem in the United
States without looking at gun safety measures that are common
sense. We have 400 million guns in the United States today.
That is more than a single gun for every man, woman, and child
in the United States.
I have a family of hunters and people who take this very
seriously, and most people do take gun violence seriously and
gun safety. We have a problem. Not to acknowledge it and to
suggest that the only reason that we have a problem is because
of Democrats in urban areas I think is just irresponsible and I
think is beneath the really learned approach that needs to be
taken by the Congress in addressing these problems.
Again, thank you for the hearing, Mr. Chair.
Thank you again to the witnesses for your service.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
I thank you for your attendance.
I will note, if we are debating if this is a partisan
issue, I think it is telling one Democrat showed up willing to
defend the soft-on-crime policies of the D.C. City Council. The
rest of the entire Democrats on this Committee ducked out.
Why? Because it is pretty darn tough to defend a 24-year-
old male who uses a gun to carjack someone being treated as a
youth, and that is the policy here in our Nation's capital
because of soft-on-crime policies.
It is pretty tough to defend the fact that the average
homicide suspect in our Nation's capital has been arrested 11
times before.
It is pretty hard to defend the massive rise on crime we
have seen in Washington, D.C., over the last 4 years after in
2020 the D.C. City Council and the Mayor cut the budget for the
law enforcement officers in our Nation's capital.
It is not surprising to me that only one Democrat on this
Committee showed up. It is partisan because we see Democrats
and the radical left have driven through soft-on-crime
policies, and what we have seen here is the empirical data of
what happens when you do that.
You combine that with the anti-police rhetoric from those
on the left that we documented here today, shared by Mr.
Pemberton, what the impact is on the morale of law enforcement
officers and how hard it is to recruit men and women to join
the law enforcement community, to put a badge over their heart,
to walk out the door every day not knowing what the call will
be, but knowing that they are going to answer the call on all
of our behalf.
Everyone, visitors, staff members, Members of Congress,
have a right to feel safe in our Nation's capital. Right now,
far too many do not feel safe. They do not feel safe because of
the policies put forward by liberals on the D.C. City Council
that have allowed crime to spike in our Nation's capital.
As the Chairman of the Committee on House Administration, I
can tell you, I am committed to making sure that you, Chief
Manger, have the resources that you need to be able to do your
job and to be able to make sure that we continue to put
pressure and pass laws, as we have, to overturn soft-on-crime
policies in our Nation's capital.
We have been successful once. We have been vetoed by the
President of the United States another time. We are going to
continue our efforts to make sure that everyone, visitors,
staff members, Members alike, are safe here in our Nation's
capital.
I want to, on behalf I think of all the Members who showed
up, I want to say thank you to the law enforcement officers of
the Metropolitan Police Department, the men and women of the
U.S. Capitol Police, who are out there every day, whose jobs
are darn hard, in particular darn hard because of the policies
and the soft-on-crime policies that have been advocated by this
City Council.
I will pause there, and I will just once again thank our
witnesses for appearing before us today. Your comments were
very helpful. The Members of the Committee may have some
additional questions for you, and we ask that you please
respond to those questions in writing.
Without objection, each Member will have 5 legislative days
to insert additional materials into the record or to revise and
extend their remarks.
Now, pursuant to paragraph (c) of rule 14 of the rules of
the Committee, I will hereby appoint March Bell as
parliamentarian of the Committee on House Administration and
Thomas Lane as assistant parliamentarian on the Committee on
House Administration.
In addition, pursuant to paragraph (b) of rule 14, I hereby
appoint Annemarie Cake as deputy clerk of the Committee on
House Administration.
Without objection, letters announcing both appointments
will be placed in the record, and a copy of these letters will
be available to all Committee Members.
[The letters referred to follow:]

LETTERS OF APPOINTMENT
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. There being no further business, I want to
thank the Members for their participation.
Without objection, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:01 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
