- AMERICAN CONFIDENCE IN ELECTIONS: PROTECTING POLITICAL SPEECH

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AMERICAN CONFIDENCE IN ELECTIONS:
PROTECTING POLITICAL SPEECH

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

MAY 11, 2023
__________

PART 1 OF 2
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov
www.cha.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-213                    WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin, Chairman

BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOSEPH MORELLE, New York,
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia              Ranking Member
GREG MURPHY, North Carolina          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             NORMA TORRES, California
MIKE CAREY, Ohio                     DEREK KILMER, Washington
ANTHONY D'ESPOSITO, New York
LAUREL LEE, Florida

Tim Monahan,  Staff Director
Jamie Fleet,  Minority Staff Director

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

PART 1
Opening Statements

Chairman Bryan Steil, Representative from the State of Wisconsin.     1
Prepared statement of Chairman Bryan Steil...................     3
Ranking Member Joseph Morelle, Representative from the State of
New York.......................................................     3
Prepared statement of Ranking Member Joseph Morelle..........     5

Witnesses

Harmeet K. Dhillon, managing partner, Dhillon Law Group Inc......    32
Prepared statement of Ms. Harmeet K. Dhillon.................    35
Audrey Perry Martin, partner, The Gober Group....................    48
Prepared statement of Audrey Perry Martin....................    50
Justin Riemer, principal, Riemer Law, LLC........................    55
Prepared statement of Justin Riemer..........................    57
Bradley A. Smith, chairman and founder, Institute for Free Speech    61
Prepared statement of Bradley A. Smith.......................    63
Stephen Spaulding, Vice President for Policy and External
Affairs, Common Cause..........................................    71
Prepared statement of Stephen Spaulding......................    73

Submissions for the Record

Santos Indictment................................................     8
New York Times article...........................................    28
NAACP v. Alabama article.........................................    88
Social Media Review..............................................   179

PART 2

Social Media Review [continued].................................. 1,079
Letter of parliamentarian appointment............................ 2,119

Questions for the Record

Bradley A. Smith answers to submitted questions.................. 2,121
Stephen Spaulding answers to submitted questions................. 2,133

AMERICAN CONFIDENCE IN ELECTIONS:
PROTECTING POLITICAL SPEECH

----------

May 11, 2023

Committee on House Administration,
House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:35 a.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Bryan Steil
[chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Steil, Loudermilk, Griffith,
Murphy, Carey, D'Esposito, Lee, Morelle, Sewell, and Torres.
Also present: Representatives Johnson of Louisiana and
Sarbanes.
Staff present: Tim Monahan, Staff Director; Caleb Hays,
Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel, Parliamentarian;
Hillary Lassiter, Clerk; Jordan Wilson, Director of Member
Services; Alex Deise, Assistant Parliamentarian and Counsel;
Khalil Abboud, Minority Deputy Staff Director, Chief Counsel;
Eddie Flaherty, Minority Chief Clerk; Jamie Fleet, Minority
Staff Director; Sarah Nasta, Minority Elections Counsel; Owen
Reilly, Minority Shared Staff; and Sean Wright, Minority Senior
Elections Counsel.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRYAN STEIL, CHAIRMAN OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WISCONSIN

Chairman Steil. The Committee on House Administration will
come to order. I note that a quorum is present. Without
objection, the chair may declare a recess at any time.
Also without objection, the meeting record will remain open
for 5 legislative days so Members may submit any materials they
wish to be included therein.
Today we will be having Congressman Mike Johnson joining
us, and he has waived on to the Committee to participate in
today's hearing.
I thank Ranking Member Morelle, Members of the Committee,
and our witnesses for joining today's Americans' confidence in
elections hearing on the importance of political speech.
Political speech is protected speech. Our Founding Fathers
enshrined the First Amendment in the Constitution.
Unfortunately, in our highly politicized political culture
and climate, the First Amendment has been under attack through
the use of misinformation czars and cancel culture.
As a result, many Americans have grown concerned that their
voices will be suppressed or that their beliefs will be
weaponized against them.
That is exactly what we saw 10 years ago, nearly to the
day, with the now infamous scandal at the IRS involving then
Acting Director of Exempt Organizations Lois Lerner. On May 10,
2013, the IRS had to apologize to conservative organizations
for inappropriately targeting their applications for tax-exempt
status. The Federal Government admitted to targeting a group of
people because of their political beliefs. This is un-American
and anti-democratic.
Over a decade later, we are still having conversations
about the weaponization of the IRS and DHS, the need to protect
donor privacy, and other free speech and freedom of association
issues.
I am committed to upholding Americans' First Amendment
right to support candidates, causes, organizations of their
choice without fear or retribution. That is why I am focused on
introducing the American Confidence in Elections Act, or the
ACE Act.
The ACE Act is our Federalist approach to election
integrity and voter confidence, which in turn boosts voter
participation.
One thing we can do to build voter confidence is prevent
another Lois Lerner scandal from occurring. The ACE Act will
finally prohibit the IRS and any other Federal agencies from
asking for an organization's donor lists, creating ad hoc
standards, and applying them to ideologically opposed groups.
This will help to protect individuals from retribution,
harassment, or intimidation based on their beliefs.
In addition to protecting donor privacy, the ACE Act will
also bring greater transparency and accountability into the
Federal campaign finance system. Last Congress every single
House Democrat voted to allow Federal funds to be used toward
their political campaigns. The ACE Act will specifically
prevent this from happening.
It also encourages federalism by strengthening State
political parties. Instead of being centers for voter
organization and messaging, State parties are currently some of
the most highly restricted organizations in our system.
Voters already think our political parties can work
directly with their candidates with few restrictions,
Republican Parties with Republican candidates, the Democratic
Party with Democratic candidates.
In reality, the outdated campaign finance system means that
there is all sorts of hoops to jump through for this simple
political process to work as expected. In many ways it does not
make sense.
Making the law work as voters expect will increase
transparency in the campaign finance system, which will boost
voters' confidence in our elections.
As we begin today's hearing, I look forward to discussing
some of these provisions and identifying what additional
campaign financial reforms and donor privacy protections are
necessary in restoring voter confidence.
I will also note that John Sarbanes will also be waived on
to this Committee in recognition of a request by the minority.
I thank you for participating.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Steil follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION BRYAN STEIL

Political speech is protected speech. Our Founding Fathers
enshrined the First Amendment in the Constitution.
Unfortunately, in our highly politicized political culture
and climate, the First Amendment has been under attack through
the use of misinformation czars and cancel culture.
As a result, many Americans have grown concerned that their
voices will be suppressed or that their beliefs will be
weaponized against them.
That is exactly what we saw 10 years ago, nearly to the
day, with the now infamous scandal at the IRS involving then
Acting Director of Exempt Organizations Lois Lerner. On May 10,
2013, the IRS had to apologize to conservative organizations
for inappropriately targeting their applications for tax-exempt
status. The Federal Government admitted to targeting a group of
people because of their political beliefs. This is un-American
and anti-democratic.
Over a decade later, we are still having conversations
about the weaponization of the IRS and DHS, the need to protect
donor privacy, and other free speech and freedom of association
issues.
I am committed to upholding Americans' First Amendment
right to support candidates, causes, organizations of their
choice without fear or retribution. That is why I am focused on
introducing the American Confidence in Elections Act, or the
ACE Act.
The ACE Act is our Federalist approach to election
integrity and voter confidence, which in turn boosts voter
participation.
One thing we can do to build voter confidence is prevent
another Lois Lerner scandal from occurring. The ACE Act will
finally prohibit the IRS and any other Federal agencies from
asking for an organization's donor lists, creating ad hoc
standards, and applying them to ideologically opposed groups.
This will help to protect individuals from retribution,
harassment, or intimidation based on their beliefs.
In addition to protecting donor privacy, the ACE Act will
also bring greater transparency and accountability into the
Federal campaign finance system. Last Congress every single
House Democrat voted to allow Federal funds to be used toward
their political campaigns. The ACE Act will specifically
prevent this from happening.
It also encourages federalism by strengthening State
political parties. Instead of being centers for voter
organization and messaging, State parties are currently some of
the most highly restricted organizations in our system.
Voters already think our political parties can work
directly with their candidates with few restrictions,
Republican Parties with Republican candidates, the Democratic
Party with Democratic candidates.
In reality, the outdated campaign finance system means that
there is all sorts of hoops to jump through for this simple
political process to work as expected. In many ways it does not
make sense.
Making the law work as voters expect will increase
transparency in the campaign finance system, which will boost
voters' confidence in our elections.
As we begin today's hearing, I look forward to discussing
some of these provisions and identifying what additional
campaign financial reforms and donor privacy protections are
necessary in restoring voter confidence.

I now recognize Ranking Member Morelle for 5 minutes for
the purpose of making his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH MORELLE, RANKING MEMBER OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
NEW YORK

Mr. Morelle. Good morning. Thank you all for being with us.
Thank you, Chairman Steil, for welcoming us all today.
Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis famously said over a
century ago, ``Sunlight is said to be the best of
disinfectants.''
This observation supporting transparency and good
governance remains true today. Transparency about who is
seeking to influence Federal elections is critical to
democratic self-governance.
Yet, a common refrain from our colleagues on the other side
of the aisle is that campaign finance laws--and disclosure laws
in particular--have an unlawful chilling effect on political
speech.
I would find this a baffling argument if it were not for my
suspicion that it is rooted in cynicism.
A central aim of the Constitution is to ensure meaningful
self-government by the citizens. The First Amendment protects
the right to engage in the public sphere. Disclosure laws do
not silence speech, they simply ask you to stand by it.
You do not have to have a law degree to understand this
fundamental principle. In its campaign finance decisions, the
Supreme Court, comprised of folks who do have law degrees, has
repeatedly acknowledged the connection between political
transparency and democratic self-governance.
In 1976, Buckley v. Valeo recognized that disclosure,
quote, ``provides the electorate with information `as to where
political campaign money comes from and how it is spent by the
candidate' in order to aid the voters in evaluating those who
seek Federal office.'' Aiding ``the voters in evaluating those
who seek Federal office.'' End quote.
Similarly, in 2010, Citizens United v. the FEC described
how disclosure promotes self-governance by supplying
information that, quote, ``enables the electorate to make
informed decisions and give proper weight to different speakers
and messages.''
Indeed, while Citizens United supercharged dark money in
American elections, the decision held by an 8 to 1 vote that
campaign disclosure rules are not only constitutional, they are
preferred to many other forms of regulation.
Justice Clarence Thomas, however, parted ways with even his
fellow conservative Justices when it came to the law's
disclosure requirements, casting the lone dissenting vote.
Given recent reporting, Justice Thomas' allergic reaction
to transparency and disclosure is no surprise. He has failed
for years to disclose lavish gifts from Harlan Crow, a wealthy
conservative donor. Those gifts include luxury vacations,
tuition for a grand nephew at a private boarding school, and
even the purchase of the Justice's mother's house, where she
remains able to live free of charge.
Justice Thomas' personal decisions to receive such lavish
gifts without reporting them publicly are a quintessential
example of why we need disclosure.
Another example is the just unsealed 13-count indictment
against Representative George Santos. According to the
indictment, Representative Santos engaged in a fraudulent
scheme to solicit large donations to a fictitious 501(c)(4)
organization and a super-PAC. This scheme's fraudulent premise
is the product of our post-Citizens United era where wealthy
special interest donors try to call the shots.
I would repeat my call for his resignation.
A remedy to this onslaught of dark money is disclosure. The
Supreme Court has consistently recognized that disclosure laws
enhance rather than constrain the free speech necessary to
sustain our democracy.
The Court has opined that disclosure laws directly serve
the democratic values animating the First Amendment, quote,
``securing the widest possible dissemination of information
from diverse and antagonistic sources and facilitating
uninhibited, robust, and wide open public debate.''
In another 8 to 1 decision, again with Justice Thomas
dissenting--we see a pattern here--the Supreme Court upheld the
disclosure of referendum petitions. Rejecting requests for
anonymous political speech, Justice Antonin Scalia, that noted
progressive bulwark, observed that he does not look forward to
society which, thanks to the Supreme Court, campaigns
anonymously, hidden from public scrutiny, and protected from
the accountability of criticism. He famously said that such a
future does not resemble the home of the brave.
I agree with Justice Scalia.
House Democrats will continue advancing pro-voter, pro-
transparency measures in bills like the Freedom to Vote Act,
DISCLOSE Act, and Honest Ads Act among them.
Strong disclosure requirements can help educate voters
about candidates, policies, and sources of political speech,
promoting informed decision making in the electoral process--
everything we should want in American elections.
Likewise, disclosure provides the public with information
to monitor elected leaders and hold them accountable.
For that reason, there is also work to be done to advance
stock trading reforms and the need to pass reforms that
strengthen disclosure around conflicts of interest in our own
house and in the courts--transparency measures that inspire
confidence in voters and confidence in the American public.
I would also note, American taxpayers under our bill will
not pay a single penny to fund the campaigns of candidates
participating in the small donor system. There are surcharges
on fines. They are not paid for by the American taxpayer,
despite repeated suggestions that that is not the case.
Let me, before I close, I seek unanimous consent that the
unsealed 13-count indictment against Representative Santos be
entered into the record.
I also ask unanimous consent that a New York Times piece
published yesterday by David Firestone titled ``George Santos's
Spectacularly Dumb Alleged Scheme,'' which highlights the
consequences of the post-Citizens United era, notably
deregulation and underenforcement of our campaign finance laws,
be added to the record.
With that, I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Morelle follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION JOSEPH MORELLE

Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis famously said over a
century ago, ``Sunlight is said to be the best of
disinfectants.''
This observation supporting transparency and good
governance remains true today. Transparency about who is
seeking to influence Federal elections is critical to
democratic self-governance.
Yet, a common refrain from our colleagues on the other side
of the aisle is that campaign finance laws--and disclosure laws
in particular--have an unlawful chilling effect on political
speech.
I would find this a baffling argument if it were not for my
suspicion that it is rooted in cynicism.
A central aim of the Constitution is to ensure meaningful
self-government by the citizens. The First Amendment protects
the right to engage in the public sphere. Disclosure laws do
not silence speech, they simply ask you to stand by it.
You do not have to have a law degree to understand this
fundamental principle. In its campaign finance decisions, the
Supreme Court, comprised of folks who do have law degrees, has
repeatedly acknowledged the connection between political
transparency and democratic self-governance.
In 1976, Buckley v. Valeo recognized that disclosure,
quote, ``provides the electorate with information `as to where
political campaign money comes from and how it is spent by the
candidate' in order to aid the voters in evaluating those who
seek Federal office.'' Aiding ``the voters in evaluating those
who seek Federal office.'' End quote.
Similarly, in 2010, Citizens United v. the FEC described
how disclosure promotes self-governance by supplying
information that, quote, ``enables the electorate to make
informed decisions and give proper weight to different speakers
and messages.''
Indeed, while Citizens United supercharged dark money in
American elections, the decision held by an 8 to 1 vote that
campaign disclosure rules are not only constitutional, they are
preferred to many other forms of regulation.
Justice Clarence Thomas, however, parted ways with even his
fellow conservative Justices when it came to the law's
disclosure requirements, casting the lone dissenting vote.
Given recent reporting, Justice Thomas' allergic reaction
to transparency and disclosure is no surprise. He has failed
for years to disclose lavish gifts from Harlan Crow, a wealthy
conservative donor. Those gifts include luxury vacations,
tuition for a grand nephew at a private boarding school, and
even the purchase of the Justice's mother's house, where she
remains able to live free of charge.
Justice Thomas' personal decisions to receive such lavish
gifts without reporting them publicly are a quintessential
example of why we need disclosure.
Another example is the just unsealed 13-count indictment
against Representative George Santos. According to the
indictment, Representative Santos engaged in a fraudulent
scheme to solicit large donations to a fictitious 501(c)(4)
organization and a super-PAC. This scheme's fraudulent premise
is the product of our post-Citizens United era where wealthy
special interest donors try to call the shots.
I would repeat my call for his resignation.
A remedy to this onslaught of dark money is disclosure. The
Supreme Court has consistently recognized that disclosure laws
enhance rather than constrain the free speech necessary to
sustain our democracy.
The Court has opined that disclosure laws directly serve
the democratic values animating the First Amendment, quote,
``securing the widest possible dissemination of information
from diverse and antagonistic sources and facilitating
uninhibited, robust, and wide open public debate.''
In another 8 to 1 decision, again with Justice Thomas
dissenting--we see a pattern here--the Supreme Court upheld the
disclosure of referendum petitions. Rejecting requests for
anonymous political speech, Justice Antonin Scalia, that noted
progressive bulwark, observed that he does not look forward to
society which, thanks to the Supreme Court, campaigns
anonymously, hidden from public scrutiny, and protected from
the accountability of criticism. He famously said that such a
future does not resemble the home of the brave.
I agree with Justice Scalia.
House Democrats will continue advancing pro-voter, pro-
transparency measures in bills like the Freedom to Vote Act,
DISCLOSE Act, and Honest Ads Act among them.
Strong disclosure requirements can help educate voters
about candidates, policies, and sources of political speech,
promoting informed decision making in the electoral process--
everything we should want in American elections.
Likewise, disclosure provides the public with information
to monitor elected leaders and hold them accountable.
For that reason, there is also work to be done to advance
stock trading reforms and the need to pass reforms that
strengthen disclosure around conflicts of interest in our own
house and in the courts--transparency measures that inspire
confidence in voters and confidence in the American public.
I would also note, American taxpayers under our bill will
not pay a single penny to fund the campaigns of candidates
participating in the small donor system. There are surcharges
on fines. They are not paid for by the American taxpayer,
despite repeated suggestions that that is not the case.
Let me, before I close, I seek unanimous consent that the
unsealed 13-count indictment against Representative Santos be
entered into the record.
I also ask unanimous consent that a New York Times piece
published yesterday by David Firestone titled ``George Santos's
Spectacularly Dumb Alleged Scheme,'' which highlights the
consequences of the post-Citizens United era, notably
deregulation and underenforcement of our campaign finance laws,
be added to the record.

Chairman Steil. Without objection, so ordered.
[The Santos indictment and New York Times article referred
to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
All other Members' opening statements will be made part of
the hearing record if they are submitted to the Committee clerk
by 5 p.m. today.
Pursuant to paragraph b of Committee Rule 6, the witnesses
will please stand and raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Steil. Let the record show that the witnesses
answered in the affirmative and may be seated.
I will now introduce our witnesses.
Our first witness is Ms. Harmeet Dhillon, a nationally
recognized lawyer with a passion for justice, a zeal for
attacking legal challenges, and an intense sense of
satisfaction in helping her clients realize creative and
practical solutions to seemingly intractable problems.
From an early interest in constitutional litigation to a
stint at the Department of Justice, a decade of practice at
prestigious international law firms, and founding her own firm
in 2006, Ms. Dhillon has developed a niche practice in
representing clients across California in election and campaign
finance law matters.
In addition, Ms. Dhillon is the founder and chief executive
officer of the Center for American Liberty, a nonprofit
organization dedicated to defending the civil liberties of
Americans.
Our next witness is Ms. Audrey Perry Martin, a national and
California political law expert with over 15 years of
experience who currently serves as partner of The Gober Group's
Sacramento office.
Ms. Martin has extensive Presidential election campaign
experience, serving as FEC counsel for the McCain-Palin
campaign, deputy general counsel for the Romney for President,
and a consultant on the 2012 campaign.
Between 2005 and 2006, Ms. Martin also served as legal
counsel to the Committee on House Administration, where she
focused on issues such as HAVA implementation, election
integrity, congressional ethics, and campaign finance.
Our next witness, Mr. Justin Riemer, is principal at Riemer
Law and has been advising clients and high-ranking public
officials on election administration, voting rights, and
campaign finance matters for nearly 50 years.
Previously Mr. Riemer served as chief counsel of the
Republican National Committee and as counsel to the U.S. Senate
Committee on Rules and Administration.
Mr. Riemer also served as deputy secretary of the Virginia
State Board of Elections, where he has coordinated
implementation of the 2011 redistricting process, the
administration of the 2012 Presidential election, and the 2013
gubernatorial elections, which included a statewide recount for
attorney general.
Our next witness, Mr. Bradley Smith, is the chairman and
founder of the Institute for Free Speech and previously served
as Chairman for the Federal Election Commission. As an FEC
Commissioner, Mr. Smith was praised for his integrity and
refusal to put partisan interests ahead of his duties, as well
as his steadfast support for free speech.
Mr. Smith currently serves as the Josiah H. Blackmore/
Shirley M. Nault Designated Professor of Law at the Capital
University Law School in Columbus, Ohio. I will also note that
is a heck of a long name.
Finally, Mr. Stephen Spaulding is the vice president for
political and external affairs at Common Cause. Mr. Spaulding
has served in senior staff positions on Capitol Hill in both
the House and Senate, most recently as the policy director for
the U.S. Senate Rules Committee, where he advised his chair,
Senator Amy Klobuchar.
In addition, Mr. Spaulding was previously the senior
elections counsel to the Committee on House Administration
under the leadership of Chairwoman Zoe Lofgren.
We appreciate all our witnesses being here today and look
forward to your testimony. As a reminder, we have read your
written statement and it will appear in full in the record.
Under Committee Rule 9, you are to limit your oral presentation
to a brief summary of your written statement, unless I, in
consultation with Mr. Morelle, extend that time.
Please remember to switch on your microphone in front of
you so that the Members can hear you. When you begin to speak,
the light on the timer will turn green. After 4 minutes it will
turn yellow. When the red light comes on, we will ask you to
wrap it up.
I now am honored to now recognize Ms. Harmeet Dhillon for 5
minutes for the purpose of making an opening statement.

STATEMENTS OF MS. HARMEET K. DHILLON, MANAGING PARTNER, DHILLON
LAW GROUP INC.; MS. AUDREY PERRY MARTIN, PARTNER, THE GOBER
GROUP; MR. JUSTIN RIEMER, PRINCIPAL, RIEMER LAW, LLC; MR.
BRADLEY A. SMITH, CHAIRMAN AND FOUNDER, INSTITUTE FOR FREE
SPEECH; AND MR. STEPHEN SPAULDING, VICE PRESIDENT FOR POLICY
AND EXTERNAL AFFAIRS, COMMON CAUSE

STATEMENT OF HARMEET K. DHILLON

Ms. Dhillon. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Steil,
Ranking Member Morelle, and Members of the Committee. I
appreciate your invitation to testify today on a topic that I
believe to be an existential threat to our democracy and
corrosive to our core values as a Nation.
I am referring to the pervasive, coordinated efforts
between our Government and private actors to influence the
outcomes of our elections.
Whether in my role as chairman of the Center for American
Liberty, chairman of the Republican National Lawyers
Association, or representing 5 million California Republicans
at the Republican National Committee, it is probably the No. 1
thing that citizens want to learn more about and do something
to stop.
I would like to address two separate but related examples
of the ever-expanding public-private alliances directly
impacting public trust in American elections. First, the
expanding Government efforts to censor core political speech
online. Second, the increasing use of private funds to run
public election operations.
Reporting over the last year has revealed the extensive
coordinated efforts between Government actors, big tech,
nonprofits, and academics to identify and censor what they
collectively deem to be, quote, ``misinformation.'' What we
know about the scope of this Government-dictated and privately
facilitated speech-killing machine is truly staggering, and we
certainly do not know the full picture yet.
An Intercept article by Ken Klippenstein and Lee Fang
reported that the Department of Homeland Security made
combating election misinformation a top priority. The article
describes the formalized process that social media platforms,
including Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter, created in the 2020
election, allowing Government officials to quickly flag content
for removal and a vast network of nonprofit organizations
working in concert with the Federal Government and social media
companies to police online speech.
There is also a Missouri-Louisiana lawsuit filed by then
Attorney General Eric Schmitt and Attorney General Jeff Landry.
The allegations rely on extensive documentation that describes
at a granular level how private social media platforms, hand in
hand with Government officials, worked together to define and
then suppress so-called misinformation.
The Twitter Files reporting by Matt Taibbi, Michael
Shellenberger, and others--certainly not conservative
journalists--revealed extensive coordination with the FBI and
other Federal agencies. They aided the intelligence community
in its work overseas and they reveal extensive shadow banning
to limit certain opinions that are disfavored by the
Government. Twitter relied on Government actors and nonprofit
partners to identify the speech it then chose to censor.
I have experienced this in my law practice. Our client,
Rogan O'Handley, at the Center for American Liberty was a
victim of Government censorship in 2020 election. The posts
that he was censored for were core political speech about an
election that are protected by the First Amendment of the
United States Constitution.
The censorship campaign was led by a State agency with a
mission to identify and censor Government-labeled
misinformation and then not only suppress the speech, but
silence the speaker himself from speaking on social media.
The State coordinated with a partisan consulting firm,
SKDKnickerbocker, which was also a consultant to the Biden
campaign, to help with its efforts. The State coordinated with
the National Association of Secretaries of State to develop a
special process for notifying social media companies what
speech it should censor and remove from the internet.
Communications Decency Act Section 230 has also had a major
impact on censoring speech online. 230's traditional editorial
function test has been repeatedly misinterpreted by Federal
courts to protect social media platform censorship online. The
statute has been weaponized by big tech to fend off lawsuits by
those who have fallen victim to coordinated censorship
campaigns, like Mr. O'Handley.
Congress should act to clarify Section 230 to ensure that
it does not protect discriminatory censorship practiced by the
big tech companies, whether in concert with Government agencies
or not.
A lack of private cause of action against big tech for
discriminatory censorship is a gap in our free speech regime
and it does threaten confidence in elections.
In conclusion, I am going to talk about Zuckerbucks.
States are grappling with the phenomenon of so-called
Zuckerbucks. This is a shorthand reference to private entities
and individuals injecting hundreds of millions of dollars into
local election administration battleground precincts that often
determine the outcomes of important races.
It had a major impact in the 2020 election, with 2,500
election offices across the country receiving grants in varying
amounts from CTCL and CEIR, both funded by the Zuckerberg Chan
Initiative. While a handful of State legislatures have taken
action to ban Zuckerbucks, many Governors have vetoed these
measures.
Distrust in elections is not a partisan issue. Both
Republicans and Democrats today have expressed a historic level
of distrust in our elections. I hope that a renewed commitment
by Congress to protecting freedom of speech in elections will
help alleviate that trend and increase public confidence in
America's elections.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dhillon follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HARMEET K. DHILLON

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you, Ms. Dhillon.
I now recognize you, Ms. Audrey Perry Martin, 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF AUDREY PERRY MARTIN

Ms. Martin. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Steil and
Ranking Member Morelle, for having me today. I appreciate this
opportunity to talk about the critical importance of protecting
political speech in U.S. elections.
I want to focus my comments today on the necessary and
primarily nonpartisan modernization changes outlined in Section
3 of the ACE Act and the importance of updating Federal
campaign finance laws to put them in line with our modern era.
Although campaign finance policy is the subject of intense
debate and public interest, current Federal campaign finance
laws are woefully outdated. Significant changes have occurred
in campaign finance policy, in technology, and in the political
landscape since the last time Congress passed a substantial
amendment to the campaign finance law over 20 years ago with
the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act, or BCRA.
Since 2002, Congress has only made really minor changes to
Federal statutes, although the Federal Election Commission has
attempted to fill this gap with regulations.
Many provisions of the Federal Election Campaign Act of
1971, or FECA, need modernization to keep the law in line with
current political realities.
First, most campaign finance reports filed with the Federal
Election Commission, or the FEC, are required to be done
electronically for anyone who is raising or spending over
$50,000. However, electioneering communication reports are not
currently required to be filed electronically.
This does not make a lot of sense in our modern era.
Reports that are filed electronically are available much sooner
to voters and it is a lot easier for staff to process them.
Second, the lack of legislation focused specifically on
online campaign activity has led to much uncertainty in the
regulated community about how to report communications made
over the internet and what type of disclaimers are required for
internet political ads.
This issue has not just affected campaigns and political
committees. Private citizens expressing their opinion over the
internet can unknowingly run afoul of Federal campaign finance
laws by expressing their political views online.
As a result, it has been left to the FEC to attempt to
modernize these rules through the regulatory process. Although
somewhat helpful, this regulation did not address several
important issues.
The ACE Act addresses most of these issues. The bill
codifies the FEC's 2006 internet rulemaking by exempting unpaid
internet communications from the definition of a contribution
and expenditure, even when they are coordinated with a
candidate.
Furthermore, the ACE Act expands the media exemption to
include electronic and internet-based news companies, clearing
up confusion over which companies were eligible for the
exemption.
Under this Act, a news organization that is not owned or
controlled by a party, a political committee, or a candidate
should qualify for the media exemption.
These technical amendments to the FECA are needed to
modernize the law for the current era.
Third, the proposed bill updates the law to align with
inflation. Under FECA, certain contribution limits are indexed
for inflation every 2 years based on the change in the cost of
living.
However, not all of them are, and FECA does not tie the
qualifying threshold for political committee qualification.
Rapid inflation in the past decades resulted in an extremely
low qualification threshold for filing reports with the FEC.
For example, under current law, an entity will become a
political committee after spending only $1,000 to support a
candidate. This is not indexed for inflation, so every year it
gets worse.
The proposed bill addresses these outdated limits by
increasing them and tying the qualification thresholds to
inflation, avoiding the need for Congress to address this again
in 20 years. This would help avoid chilling grassroots
political speech by setting too low of a trigger to qualify as
a committee or to file FEC reports.
Finally, Section 3 of the ACE Act includes several
additional significant nonpartisan changes. It implements the
FEC legislative recommendations to make permanent the extension
of administrative finds for qualified disclosure requirement
violation, which for years has just been extended temporarily.
It raises the annual rate of pay for staff and adjusts it
for inflation in the same manner as other positions in the
Executive Schedule, allowing the FEC to attract and retain
qualified employees.
It also clears up the rules regarding what happens if a
candidate dies and no one is at the helm of the campaign. It
codifies recent Supreme Court decisions, simplifies joint
fundraising, and sunsets the unused Presidential public funding
program.
Current Federal campaign finance laws need to be updated
and require modernization to keep up with the changing
political and technological landscape of our day. The
modernizing sections of the ACE Act are a critical update to
Federal election law to address these important issues.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Martin follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF AUDREY PERRY MARTIN

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you, Ms. Perry Martin.
I now recognize Mr. Justin Riemer for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JUSTIN RIEMER

Mr. Riemer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the
Committee. I am grateful for the opportunity to discuss overdue
reforms to help strengthen our Nation's local and State
political parties.
As former chief counsel to the RNC, I saw firsthand how
campaign finance restrictions are hollowing out our State
parties. This is bad for our political system, but fortunately
even modest reforms can provide meaningful relief, ensure
better legal compliance, and decrease political polarization.
BCRA weakened our local parties by choking off their
ability to fundraise and engage in grassroots political
programs and saddling them with Byzantine regulations.
Do not take my word for it. Experts from across the
ideological spectrum know both the positive role parties play
in our system and how BCRA weakens them.
A few suggestions on how Congress can help.
First, State parties have suffered because their ability to
fundraise has steadily eroded since the enactment of BCRA in
2003. This is due to Congress' failure to index for inflation
when setting State party contribution limits, even though it
did do so for national parties and Federal candidates.
State parties today are stuck with the same $10,000
contribution limit they were in 2003. Not indexing for
inflation means that a $10,000 contribution made in 2003 is
worth just over $6,000 today. For comparison, in 2003 the
national party committees had $25,000 limits and today they are
over $41,000.
BCRA left State parties behind at the same time the law
imposed other fundraising and spending restrictions. Meanwhile,
campaign costs have increased, even when accounting for
inflation, due to numerous factors, including increased early
and mail voting.
Yes, the emergence of super-PACs has contributed to
increased spending and helped reduce parties' influence, but
their inability to remain competitive preceded Citizens United.
Congress should raise State party limits and account for
inflation or these disparities will only grow worse. There is
little downside since State parties are also one of our most
transparent political entities.
There is another reform that would help. State parties are
permitted to have separate State election accounts which in
theory should help them remain competitive. BCRA's
federalization of our elections has made these accounts largely
irrelevant.
BCRA requires State parties to fund most of their
activities in Federal election years from their already
inflation-depleted Federal accounts. This includes voter
registration drives and basic Get Out the Vote activities that
do not even reference a Federal candidate. Thus, a State party
with few or no competitive Federal races but several State and
local ones must use only Federal funds even if they are flush
with State dollars.
Compliance with these regulations is also difficult, State
parties are the most regulated political entities in our system
because they have to comply with both State and Federal
campaign finance laws. Ironically, BCRA made things the most
complicated for the least resourced political committees.
It is hard to fathom how any of this prevents corruption.
In practice, it only stifles parties' ability to engage in core
First Amendment-protected speech and time-honored grassroots
activities.
It is common sense to reduce these regulatory burdens by
not only raising contribution limits, but also giving State
parties flexibility in financing these grassroots activities.
2022's ACE Act would have done just that by exempting certain
State party functions from Federal regulations so long as they
were not coordinating with candidates.
Finally, another overdue reform would be to increase the
spending threshold for when local grassroots organizations must
register and report to the FEC. For example, groups must do so
if they spend more than $1,000 in supporting Federal candidates
in a year. Like the State party limits, this threshold has
remained static and unindexed for inflation, in this case since
the early 1970's.
Compliance is also unrealistic. I am sure there are dozens
of local groups out there that have unwittingly triggered these
limits and have not reported, nor can the FEC police
enforcement.
No wonder both Democrat and Republican FEC Commissioners
have consistently called on Congress to raise those limits and
index them.
This would avoid entrapping local groups that raise and
spend comparatively little but are still important participants
in our political process.
These are all seemingly technical issues in the overall
campaign finance landscape, but I can assure you, as a
practitioner in this area, they are important.
State and local parties are essential to our political
system. Not only do they allow Americans to come together and
exercise their First Amendment rights, they are also
instrumental in nominating and electing our future
officeholders.
Even the Brennan Center, an organization I rarely agree
with, noted in its call to ease these burdens that parties are
an essential element of our democracy and a moderating force
responsive to public opinion.
Easing regulatory burdens on them will not solve all of
their problems, but it will give them a fighting chance.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Riemer follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF JUSTIN RIEMER

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Riemer.
Mr. Smith, I understand your flight just made it in on
time, so we appreciate you hustling to be with us today. You
are now recognized, Mr. Smith, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRADLEY A. SMITH

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Chairman Steil and Ranking Member
Morelle and Members of the Committee.
Campaign finance is fundamentally different from most
Government regulation in the sense that it concerns the heart
of democratic self-governance: when and how we discuss issues
of public policy and public affairs and candidates for office.
For that reason, the Supreme Court has noted that the First
Amendment has its fullest and most urgent application precisely
to the conduct of campaigns for political office. I would add
to that broader discussion again of public affairs and issues.
The Government should not constrain the right of the
American people to discuss candidates and politics lightly. The
Supreme Court has recognized only one permissible grounds for
restricting speech--political speech--and that is the
prevention of quid pro quo corruption or its appearance, and
constantly rejected attempts to restrict campaign speech based
on other legislative aims.
The ACE Act legislation should begin as it does by
modifying and modernizing the disclosure regime and simplifying
regulation. In the 2022 midterms, the average candidate for the
U.S. Senate raised about $13.8 million, the average candidate
for the U.S. House about $1.8 million. On top of this, you have
about $7.4 billion spent by Federal political action committees
and another $1.1 billion by independent expenditures.
In order to prevent people from improperly influencing
candidates, contributions are limited to $3,300 per election.
Any group of people that bands together to talk with the major
purpose of defeating one or more Federal candidates or electing
one or more such candidates and spends more than $1,000 is
required to register and file burdensome reports with the
Federal Election Commission. Anyone spending money to
independently try to elect or defeat a Federal candidate has to
file at just $250.
Now, to the average citizen even $250 seems like a pretty
good chunk of change, let alone $5,000 that a group might
contribute as a PAC. In the context of a $1.8 million House
campaign, it is hard to envision that this has any corrupting
effect on the Members of this Committee or their colleagues on
the House.
These numbers, we should note, have not been adjusted even
for inflation since the 1970's, these numbers on disclosure,
which includes donors of as little as $200.
Now, free societies thrive on the public exchange of ideas.
The First Amendment protects not only the brave, but it also
protects the meek, the weak, and minorities of all kind.
For example, today we see people often publicly hounded for
their association with groups, sometimes years in the past,
that have for one reason or another become controversial. I
could just give one high-profile example or I could give many
others, including examples of people who we would view as much
more ordinary citizens.
The high-profile example would be California's Proposition
8, which passed in 2008 in California, a very liberal State,
representing the votes of over 7 million people.
Now, whether one agrees with the proposition or not, it was
hardly outside of mainstream political discourse in 2008. Yet,
nearly 6 years later, Mozilla CEO and founder Brendan Eich was
pressured into resigning from his company due to the
controversy surrounding a small contribution of $1,000 he had
previously made supporting Proposition 8, again, close to a
decade before.
If anything, our political culture is becoming more
unforgiving in the decade since Mr. Eich's resignation. Faced
with this minefield, many people will simply refrain from
supporting political or policy groups rather than risk the
backlash that may come years later. These low reporting
thresholds and excessive reporting requirements chill protected
speech.
Now, we should also note that disclosure of public debate
has been sanctioned by the Supreme Court, but the Supreme Court
has never sanctioned disclosure of anything related to public
affairs or political issue discussion.
It has only sanctioned disclosure in the context of
political committees; that is, organizations that exist for the
primary purpose of electing or defeating candidates for office
or for speech which is expressly advocating the election or
defeat of those candidates or its functional equivalent.
Talk about dark money seems to hide this. We should note
that so-called dark money consists of well under 5 percent of
total spending in Federal political races. Most of that dark
money is, in fact, relatively well-known to people.
For example, large dark money groups, groups that identify
as dark money groups, include the Natural Resources Defense
Council, the National Association of Realtors, the U.S. Chamber
of Commerce. I do not think that most Americans are scratching
their heads desperately trying to figure out what the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce or the Natural Resources Defense Council
stand for.
In the end, I think the ACE Act makes good steps. One thing
that I would emphasize here as I conclude is that it is
important for the ACE Act to get out of the campaign finance
regulation business, other agencies, such as the Internal
Revenue Service, which led to the Tea Party scandal, the SEC or
the FCC, and leave this to the agency designated by statute to
interpret campaign finance law, the FEC.
Thank you for your time. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF BRADLEY A. SMITH

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Smith.
Mr. Spaulding, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN SPAULDING

Mr. Spaulding. Good morning, Chairman Steil, Ranking Member
Morelle, distinguished Members of the Committee. Thank you for
the opportunity to be here this morning.
Our north star must be a democracy that lives up to its
promise, one where everyone participates and everyone is heard.
It is why we have the freedom to vote.
The late great American hero, Representative John Lewis,
said it best: ``It is the most powerful nonviolent tool we have
in a democratic society.''
The freedom to vote is political speech. It is the power to
have a voice in our democracy. Political speech has been under
attack. Voter suppression, gerrymandering, and the undue
influence of big money in politics form a trifecta that
silences voters.
Today we are focusing on money in politics. The Supreme
Court's decisions in Citizens United and McCutcheon ripped a
massive tear in the fabric of laws that Congress passed to stop
corruption and bring transparency to our elections.
Just a hundred people, enough to fit into this hearing
room, contributed nearly three-quarters of the $1.2 billion
people contributed to super-PACs in the last cycle. Put another
way, a hundred people pumped 60 percent more money into our
elections than millions of small donors combined.
This money is coming from a tiny and highly unrepresented
segment of the public. Americans have good reason to think that
their voices are being drowned out. It is made worse because
much of it is undisclosed.
Since Citizens United, according to the nonpartisan Open
Secrets, at least $3 of every $10 in outside spending reported
to the FEC since Citizens United can be traced to dark money
groups.
Justice Kennedy wrote in Citizens United, in a provision to
the opinion that had the support of eight out of nine Justices,
that, quote, ``Disclosure enables the electorate to make
informed decisions and give proper weight to speakers and
messages and lets voters make informed choices in the political
marketplace.''
Transparency in campaign spending protects voters' right to
know who is speaking to them and who is trying to influence
their votes on election day so that they can give proper weight
to different speakers and messages, as Justice Kennedy wrote.
It stops corruption. It makes sure we can enforce our finance
laws in the first place.
Consider a scandal that has rocked Ohio. Imagine you are an
executive at a power company on the verge of bankruptcy. If you
can spend the company's money to elect some handpicked
candidates to the statehouse, including the Speaker of the
House, you have a good chance of securing an eye-popping return
on your investment, like a billion-dollar bailout of two of
your power plants. One of your lobbyists slips a $400,000 check
across the table to further the scheme, made out to the dark
money group controlled by the future Speaker.
This is not just made up. In March, a former Speaker of the
Ohio House of Representatives was convicted in a racketeering
trial that involved $60 million in bribes in exchange for a
$1.3 billion power plant bailout. Ohioans could not follow the
money to get to the root of the scandal. It does not have to be
this way and it is solvable and there is momentum in the
States.
Take Arizona. Just last fall, voters there approved the
Voters' Right to Know Act by a vote of 72 percent to 27 percent
in Arizona so that Arizonans can see who is behind big campaign
spenders there.
The House has passed the DISCLOSE Act several times to
shine a light on secret money in elections. It is also passed
the bipartisan Honest Ads Act to help voters know who is behind
political advertisements they see online.
Of course these were all passed as part of the Freedom to
Vote Act, a bill that puts people first.
They stand in sharp contrast to the ACE Act as introduced
last Congress. Provisions in the ACE Act would open the door to
more secret money in our elections and further empower the
wealthy few to spend even more money purchasing access and
influence.
The other day I was looking at the most recent turnout
statistics that came out from the Census Bureau. About half of
eligible voters sat out the election last year. In 2020, a high
water mark for turnout, roughly a third of eligible voters sat
it out. Their political speech went unspoken at the ballot box.
As we hold ourselves out as democracy's gold standard, we
have to do more to ensure that everyone can participate and
everyone can be heard, where our Government is representative
and reflective and responsive to the people that it serves.
That is what will strengthen confidence in elections and
vindicate the most fundamental freedom that we have--the
freedom of one person, one vote.
Thank you, Chairman Steil.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Spaulding follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF STEPHEN SPAULDING

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Spaulding.
I will now recognize Mr. Griffith for 5 minutes for the
purpose of asking the witnesses questions.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I greatly appreciate
that.
I will ask this to all witnesses today. It is almost 10
years to the day after the fateful announcement by Lois Lerner
of the IRS that the agency was disfavoring groups when granting
tax-exempt status. While Congress has passed language on a
bipartisan basis each year since 2013 to prevent another Lois
Lerner situation, it is time to make those protections
permanent.
Would you agree? I will start with you, Ms. Dhillon. Yes or
no?
Ms. Dhillon. Yes, sir, I do agree.
Mr. Griffith. Ms. Martin?
Ms. Martin. I do agree, yes.
Mr. Griffith. Mr. Riemer?
Mr. Riemer. I do, yes.
Mr. Griffith. Mr. Smith?
Mr. Spaulding?
Mr. Spaulding. 501(c)(4)'s should not be vehicles for dark
money in our elections.
Mr. Griffith. You agree.
Mr. Spaulding. I agree that 501(c)(4)'s have been abused,
particularly after Citizens United, to form dark money----
Mr. Griffith. Do you agree or disagree? I am just trying to
get a yes or no.
Mr. Spaulding. I believe that 501(c)(4)'s have an important
role to play to promote social welfare----
Mr. Griffith. I am going to take that as a no. Unless you
say yes, I am taking it as a no. OK? All right.
Mr. Spaulding. What they shouldn't be is avenues to cloak
dark money spending.
Mr. Griffith. I will move on to the next question.
Mr. Spaulding. They should be promoting social welfare.
Mr. Griffith. Mr. Riemer, I am going to agree with you,
because you said it in your opening statement. I had it written
down as a question, so I am going to rearrange it a little bit.
State parties are the most highly regulated organizations
in the political sphere. We have so severely limited how they
can operate that in some States they barely exist.
I agree with you that we should remove restrictions on
State parties that do not make sense and put States on a solid
footing to be able to organize voters and support their
candidates without the heavy weight of the Federal Government.
I say that having been a 17-year member of the Virginia
State Central Committee of the Republican Party. I saw a lot of
this happening over time.
That being said, I note in the ACE Act, so would like to
get your thoughts on this, that it looks like even in the ACE
Act the penalties are higher on a State and local party that
violate the rules, but the penalties are higher than they are
on a foreign national who violates the rules.
Do you think that is right?
Mr. Riemer. I am not familiar with that particular
provision, Congressman.
I mean, the fact of the matter is these State and local
organizations have a hard enough time paying any FEC
enforcement fees or anything like that. I mean, it is very
difficult for them. They do not have much money to begin with.
I think the punishment should be reflective of the
infraction, and I think oftentimes it is not.
Mr. Griffith. Yes. I think that is true. I think you
touched on this in your opening as well.
A lot of times, particularly with the local party
officials, they are just doing the best job they can. That does
not mean that there should not be some kind of a sanction if
they violate the rules, but it ought to be rational and based
on what their mental State was and whether or not it was
something they were doing to play games, to try to do things
they were not supposed to do, or whether it was the mere fact
that they just did not understand and it was confusing.
I think you have stated and you can elaborate more that we
need to make these laws and rules related to local and State
parties easy to understand so they do not inadvertently cross
some tripwire.
Mr. Riemer. Absolutely, Congressman.
As I have mentioned, the State parties are the most
regulated entity, and they have to deal with this sort of Venn
diagram of Federal and State law and having to comply with
both.
At the RNC we really do not have to do that. We are
basically a Federal committee and it is regulated by Federal
law, but the States have to deal with both. Even where those
two things come together there is all sorts of blurry lines and
it is just--it is almost impossible for them.
I can tell you that, in dealing with dozens of State and
local parties over the years, that any FEC issues that I have
seen, noncompliance or whatever, have been out of maybe a lack
of sophistication, inability to hire expert compliance people,
attorneys, to get them through this stuff. It is just--it is
difficult.
Mr. Griffith. That is why I suspect you would favor having
a legal fund for the State parties and a building fund, one, so
that they can be better educated and prepared for the rules and
regulations that are reasonable.
Two, if anybody's been to the Obenshain building in the
last 10 years, which is, for those who do not know, it is the
State party headquarters in Virginia, there are parts of it I
am not sure are safe anymore. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Riemer. I agree with you, Congressman. I have been in
many State party headquarters across the country and--well, I
do not need to say any more. They are in rough shape.
Mr. Griffith. You would agree that having a building fund
and a legal fund would both benefit the following of the law
and benefit the State parties even to a minimal extent of
keeping their property in a better fashion.
Mr. Riemer. Absolutely. There is no reason why you should
not allow the State parties to have these additional accounts.
They are not being used for TV ads. They are not being using
for anything that needs to be further regulated. Litigation has
become a much bigger concern on both sides of the aisle,
whether it is them being sued for something or needing to hire
compliance attorneys.
I think it is an absolutely great idea.
Mr. Griffith. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Appreciate it.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
The Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank all of you for being here, for testifying, for your
participation today and in the electoral process.
In terms of full disclosure, I am a former county
Democratic Party chairman. I served for 9 years. Much of I
think what was said by the witnesses I think we could put
together in a bipartisan approach to addressing some of the
things that you raise, which I think are reasonable.
I would, however, since the bottom line rationale for the
hearing was to talk about free speech and disclosure and
transparency, I do want to focus on that.
Before I do that, I want to just ask Ms. Dhillon, did Joe
Biden win the 2020 Presidential election?
Ms. Dhillon. Joe Biden is the President of the United
States, yes.
Mr. Morelle. That is not the question I asked you. Did he
win the Presidential election?
Ms. Dhillon. He won a deeply flawed election. Yes, he is
the President.
Mr. Morelle. I am sorry. I did not hear that.
Ms. Dhillon. He won a deeply flawed election. He is the
President of the United States.
Mr. Morelle. He won the election.
Ms. Martin, did Joe Biden win the 2020 Presidential
election?
Ms. Martin. He did. He is the President.
Mr. Morelle. Mr. Riemer--did I pronounce that right, sir?
Mr. Riemer. Yes.
Mr. Morelle. Did Joe Biden win the 2020 election?
Mr. Riemer. Yes.
Professor Smith?
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Morelle. Did Joe Biden win the 2020 election?
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Morelle. Mr. Spaulding, did Joe Biden win the 2020
Presidential election?
Mr. Spaulding. Yes, fair and square.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you.
Mr. Spaulding, the Supreme Court observed in Buckley:
Safeguarding the ability of the citizenry to make informed
choices among candidates for office is crucial.
Can you expand on the value that transparency and
disclosure requirements have in aiding the electorate? Because
this is ultimately about giving the tools to voters to make
informed decisions. Can you just expand upon that?
Mr. Spaulding. Absolutely. Thank you, Ranking Member
Morelle.
That is exactly what the Court said in Citizens United, as
I mentioned, in a provision of the opinion that was endorsed
eight to one, that when they were going to declare this First
Amendment right of corporations to spend unlimited amounts of
money in politics, Justice Kennedy essentially wrote: Do not
worry about the corruption interest there because it will be
disclosed. The electorate will be able to evaluate the strength
of messages, will be able to evaluate who is speaking. Actually
talked about shareholders being able to hold corporations
accountable.
I think he said something about how until today a
disclosure regime essentially has not existed to shine a light
on politics.
It still has not existed. Thirteen years after the
decision, our disclosure laws have not kept pace with how money
is spent in elections. It has deprived voters of their First
Amendment interest in knowing who is speaking to them, in
knowing who is behind the messages that they are seeing online.
The other thing I will point out too is there are secret
spenders who know where the money--recipients of secret
spending who know where that money is coming from. Look at that
Ohio example with the former Ohio Speaker of the House who was
indicted. He knew exactly where that $60 million was coming
from. It was coming from a power company that was backing in
part his election and in people to the statehouse that would
support his role as Speaker and eventually as part of a
billion-dollar bailout for the power company.
Mr. Morelle. Well, let me expand on that. The bill that has
been referenced, the ACE Act, would loosen disclosure
requirements. In your opinion, the example you cited, would the
enactment of the ACE Act make it more or less likely that the
example you have cited could be replicated?
Mr. Spaulding. Well, given that the ACE Act is dealing with
Federal elections, it would absolutely curb the chance of that
happening at the Federal level.
There are provisions of this bill, I mean, Section 325,
repeal requirement of persons making independent expenditures
to report the identification of certain donors. Section 341,
prohibit regulations on political contributions. Directs the
Securities and Exchange Commission to not finalize, issue,
implement any rule, regulation, or other order regarding the
disclosure of political contributions.
That directly contravenes what Justice Kennedy wrote in
Citizens United, which was about shareholders being able to
hold their corporations accountable through disclosure. This
bill would be a big step backward in that respect.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you for that.
I did note, and I will, because my seconds are quickly
ticking away, but, Mr. Smith, you had indicated that it is not
only trying to protect the home of the brave, but you said the
home of the meek and others.
It seems to me that many of the people putting hundreds of
millions of dollars or billions of dollars into dark money and
trying to influence elections without disclosure hardly would
be termed the meek.
I would just finish by saying, certainly some of the low-
level amounts that you have talked about I think could be
raised. I think there is a way to reach this in a bipartisan
consensus.
The real, real, real threat to American democracy remains
large, large amounts of money being put into American elections
without any disclosure and the presence of dark money, and I
personally want to make sure that that does not happen.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here today.
First question. Ms. Dhillon, are Americans who donate to
nonprofit organizations receiving the protection they deserve
under the law today?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, I think a lot of donors are deterred
from making donations when they look at the Lois Lerner
example.
Indeed, even though protections for donor privacy date back
to the NAACP era and concerns by African Americans of hounding
by their Government, today it is donors across the board, but
mostly conservatives, who are concerned that if they express
their political speech through contributions to nonprofits that
are disfavored by the Government in power or State actors, what
have you, they will be punished for their speech through
audits, investigations, harassment, et cetera. The last couple
of decades in our country have provided many examples of that.
Mr. Loudermilk. Well, I appreciate that.
It is interesting you brought up Lois Lerner. I think we
are in about a decade now, 10 years since that was made public.
With that in mind, besides Government intimidation, is not
there a real possibility that donor lists that feature the
names, addresses, and sometimes contribution amounts might be
leaked to the public?
Ms. Dhillon. Not only is there a possibility, we have seen
this happen. With the acceleration of mob-type behavior through
social media, it can put donors at real risk when their privacy
is not respected. This should not be the case when donors are
contributing to legitimate nonprofit ends.
I think it is critical, and I say this as the CEO of a
nonprofit, to encourage and protect core First Amendment speech
through contributions to nonprofits, that donor privacy be
respected.
Mr. Loudermilk. Especially in this woke culture that we
find ourselves--or cancel culture, I should say--where
retribution has been and is taken on to people because of their
political beliefs, their religious beliefs, their thoughts.
That is totally outside of the scope of American ideas and
principles, is that you do have a right, not only to free
speech but right to thoughts and beliefs. Our Government and
our laws are set up to punish bad behavior, not thought.
In an instance like the leak that you have described that
causes hundreds, if not thousands of Americans to be harassed
for the crime of giving money to groups that they agree with,
is there not personal risk in that as well? I mean, we have
seen incidents where people have lost their jobs because of
something that they posted on social media.
Ms. Dhillon. Absolutely. I would say not only have people
lost their jobs, they have lost job opportunities. They have
been forced to retreat from their homes due to mob threats.
This is a bipartisan problem, and so I think that everyone
should have an interest in donor privacy for these reasons.
Cancel culture run amok, accelerated by social media and by
the heavy hand of Government acting in concert with social
media, is a significant risk to First Amendment speech in the
United States, both with respect to donations to nonprofits as
well as, I would say, simply people expressing their views,
expressing their right to consume or participate in a free
press, to gather together. Every aspect of the First Amendment
is under threat through these types of issues that we are
discussing here today.
Mr. Loudermilk. I have heard from constituents myself they
are afraid to get involved in politics, and this has just come
about in the last 3 to 4 years, and especially donate, because
they are afraid that their name may be disclosed, even if they
gave to an individual candidate, not as much as what the
Government may do, but what others may do in putting pressure
on their employers.
In fact, I know a firsthand account, a gentleman right now
who has already lost a job because his identity was, in my
opinion, illegally disclosed by the January 6th Committee for
doing nothing wrong, and he cannot get a job at this point.
In this culture that we live in is to punish people who do
not agree with you politically. That is really what it comes
down to.
In your opinion, is the end goal of all this to ensure that
these groups never receive funding again because of donor fear
that their personal information might be disclosed to the
public? Is that the end goal?
Ms. Dhillon. It is certainly a goal. Ironically, what we
have seen in California, a liberal jurisdiction, is it actually
has a very good law with respect to employment, which protects
individuals from political retribution on the basis of their
political viewpoints or associations. I think that that is a
laudable statute that should actually be replicated in many
other States.
At the end of the day, the use of--the exposure of donor
information poses a significant risk nationally to liberty and
privacy.
Mr. Loudermilk. That information is used for intimidation.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Sewell is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Sewell. First, I would like to thank our witnesses for
their testimonies today.
As the Ranking Member of the Elections Subcommittee and as
the author of the John Robert Lewis Voting Rights Advancement
Act, ensuring that Americans have the resources they need to
make well-informed decisions at the polls is something that I
am deeply, deeply concerned about.
Voting is a cornerstone of our democracy, and for far too
long States have placed barriers in front of the ballot box.
According to a recent study by the Brennan Center, State
lawmakers in at least 32 States pre-filed or introduced 150
restrictive voting bills. These bills create stricter voter ID
laws, cut voting times, restrict registration, and purge voter
rolls. The bills also make it harder for people of color, poor
people, young people, disabled people, elderly people, to have
access to their right to vote.
Campaign spending has swayed elections in the last 13 years
by allowing secret donors to funnel over $1 billion into
elections that are influencing the way voters vote and picking
winners and losers.
In 2014, Energy 2002, Arizona's biggest utility company,
paid more than $10 million for attack ads that helped defeat
consumer-oriented candidates for a seat on a State commission
that oversees the State utilities. As a result, residents saw a
grave price hike shortly after the new commission was
established.
Voters deserve transparency, I think all of us should be
behind that, based on the facts and not on disinformation.
Voters have a right to know who the secret funders are that may
be influencing candidates' political interests.
There is a common misconception, however, that by hiding
dark money we are helping to shield donors from some sort of
harm or their privacy being invaded. Those that support that
often use the NAACP v. Alabama case as a point to prove this
point.
NAACP v. Alabama was a 1958 case. It was based on the fact
that in 1956 the Alabama Secretary of State required the NAACP
to disclose the names and addresses of all of its Members in
the State. Again, this is 1958.
The NAACP refused to release those membership lists because
they feared that members would be in danger of losing their
lives. The Supreme Court agreed with the NAACP because Black
civil rights activists faced severe threats from raids of Ku
Klux Klan members that included the church bombings, shooting
up their houses, and shooting them as they drove, rode on buses
and in taxis.
NAACP v. Alabama, I believe, is not the blueprint for
hiding information on who wealthy donors, special interest
groups, and corporations are funneling money into campaigns
behind the scenes.
In fact, would like to move for unanimous consent, Mr.
Chairman, to submit an article for the record. That article is
``One of These Things Is Not Like the Other: The NAACP v.
Alabama is Not a Manual for Powerful, Wealthy Spenders to Pour
Unlimited Secret Money Into Our Political Process,'' end quote.
Chairman Steil. Without objection.
[The NAACP v. Alabama article referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Sewell. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Spaulding, you spent your time and your testimony
talking about the Citizens United case. The Citizens United
case, as it was decided, really has allowed, as you said, at
least $3 out of every $10 in outside money since Citizens
United can be traced to dark money.
What impact does a deluge of undisclosed electoral funding
have on the information available to voters? Why should this be
safeguarded?
Mr. Spaulding. Thank you, Ms. Sewell.
One, again, it crowds out and obfuscates who is speaking to
voters. They cannot separate fact from fiction, they cannot
evaluate the message, because they do not know who is speaking
to them. It is unclear where their money is coming from.
I also think it really increases a lot of cynicism in
politics. People throw up their hands and they say, ``My voice
does not matter.''
You know whose voice does matter? It is the corporation,
the wealthy special interests, that are dumping unlimited
amounts of money into our politics and hiding behind fake front
groups and fake names.
People throw up their hands, and they sit out the next
election, and they say, ``My voice does not matter.'' That is
un-American.
Ms. Sewell. I would agree.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
Dr. Murphy from North Carolina is recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Everybody here, thank you all for coming.
I will tell you, it is honestly embarrassing for the United
States of America to have to be dealing with this. We are
supposed to be the paragon of excellence with voting, and we
are supposed to go into other countries and make sure that they
do it right, and we just cannot do it right in our own damn
country. It is embarrassing.
I am saying this for Republican and Democrat. This has no
allegiance one side or the other. It is embarrassing.
I appreciate what everybody is doing here as trying to keep
free and fair elections. Every voice should be heard who wants
to be heard. There is also a thing called personal
responsibility, getting up off your own derriere and making
sure that you could do something.
Let me just play a quick round robin about--ask questions,
and we will go through.
Should dead people be on voter rolls?
Ms. Dhillon. No.
Ms. Martin. Absolutely not.
Mr. Riemer. No.
Mr. Spaulding. No.
Dr. Murphy. All right. Good. No dead people. They are in
heaven. They do not need to vote.
Voter ID. Is voter ID--is it repressing the vote?
Ms. Dhillon. It is not.
Ms. Martin. No.
Mr. Riemer. No. The data is clear that it is not.
Mr. Smith. I agree with Mr. Riemer.
Mr. Spaulding. It depends on the ID. No one opposes ID.
What people oppose are the types of ID.
Dr. Murphy. Is voter ID--is voter ID suppressing the vote?
Yes or no? Let us just--let us stop there.
Mr. Spaulding. It depends on the ID. It is much more
complicated.
Dr. Murphy. If I pull out an ID--yes or no? You did this
again. Is it yes or no? Is voter ID suppressing the vote?
Mr. Spaulding. It depends on the ID. No one opposes voter
ID. What people oppose are specific types of ID----
Dr. Murphy. All right. I am going to take that as you do
not agree.
Mr. Spaulding [continuing]. that politicians are requiring
people----
Dr. Murphy. All right. Listen.
Mr. Spaulding [continuing]. that many communities of
color----
Dr. Murphy. Mr. Spaulding, I am running this thing right
here.
Let me ask--well, let me, since you are talkative, let me
ask you a question.
You said half of the people sat out the 2020 election,
correct? Do you believe it is a person's personal
responsibility to vote?
Mr. Spaulding. Yes, I think it is everyone's freedom and
responsibility to make their voice heard.
Dr. Murphy. Right. Half the people voted, and so half the
people said, ``I do not want to vote,'' and that is their
personal responsibility. I agree with you that we should have
everybody vote, a hundred percent.
Mr. Spaulding. I appreciate that. I appreciate that. I do
not think that we know that 50 percent said, ``I do not want to
vote.''
Dr. Murphy. Well----
Mr. Spaulding. That is where I might disagree.
Dr. Murphy. Yes, OK.
Ballot harvesting, for example, do you agree with that?
Mr. Spaulding. Can you define ballot harvesting?
Dr. Murphy. Going and having a kid walk through a
neighborhood and pull on houses. ``Here is your voter thing. I
will help you fill it out, and I will hand it in.''
Mr. Spaulding. What if my grandmother was in----
Dr. Murphy. No, no. Yes or no? You just asked for my
example.
Mr. Spaulding. I am sorry. Could you please repeat the
hypo?
Dr. Murphy. All right. A teenage kid that is paid to go and
knock on doors and say, ``Here is a ballot. I will help you
fill it out if you do not understand it and take it in and turn
it in.''
Mr. Spaulding. If the ballot is lawfully voted, I would not
have a problem if a teenager--perhaps they----
Dr. Murphy. OK.
Mr. Spaulding [continuing]. they are 18 and they work for
the post office. I do not have a problem with someone----
Dr. Murphy. All right.
Mr. Spaulding [continuing]. taking a voted ballot from
somebody who may be homebound and wants to make their----
Dr. Murphy. What if they went to a nursing home?
Mr. Spaulding. Sure, if you are in a nursing home, you have
a right to make your voice heard.
Dr. Murphy. OK. You do not think there is anything that
could go wrong with that where that voter could be influenced?
Mr. Spaulding. What voter? By voting from--by voting from
home?
Dr. Murphy. No. Some person coming around and saying,
``Here, you vote this way,'' and they could not be influenced.
Mr. Spaulding. Well, there are laws against voter
intimidation. That is illegal.
Dr. Murphy. No, I am just saying, do you think there is
anything that could go wrong? It is ripe for fraud. It is ripe
for fraud.
Mr. Spaulding. That is just not--that just is not right.
That is just not----
Dr. Murphy. It is ripe for fraud. I mean, my gosh, if
somebody--the American public oftentimes does not have any clue
as to what is going on.
Mr. Spaulding. I think we should----
Dr. Murphy. All right. Let me ask--Mr. Smith, I was just
informed of this. I am not an attorney. I am just a dumb
surgeon. I am just trying to figure this stuff out.
In the American Confidence in Elections Act there is a
provision to require unanimous consent of the FEC Commission
members in order to refuse to defend actions against the
Commission. In other words, they are trying to be sued. It is
my understanding that the Commission was often deadlocked 3-3
when voting on the FEC could even defend itself in cases.
Based on your experience with campaign law and litigation,
can you speak to and share your thoughts as to why this
provision would be needed? Why would we prevent the FEC from
trying to defend itself if it was being sued?
Mr. Smith. Sure. I would begin by noting that I do not
think the FEC is often deadlocked. I think that is vastly
overstated. That is sort of a whole 'nother issue. It does
deadlock. You are right there. At times, there is a 3-3 vote.
Dr. Murphy. It deadlocks as to whether they could defend
themselves?
Mr. Smith. There is a 3-3 vote not to investigate or to
find--not to find a reason to believe that a person has
violated the law.
Dr. Murphy. OK.
Mr. Smith. What has been happening on the Commission in
recent years is, typically, after the Commission votes not to
proceed to enforcement or not to fine a party, if the vote
comes 3-3 and you need a four-vote bipartisan majority to carry
on, so if the Commission goes 3-3, the Commissioners who voted
not to proceed are the controlling group. That has been
recognized by the Court. Their decision controls the
Commission.
What has happened in recent years is that Democrats on the
Commission have, in some cases, refused to vote to close the
file, which is what is necessary in order to notify the
parties, ``Hey, we have exonerated you, or at least we are not
going to pursue this any further.''
The parties do not even know that the FEC is no longer
pursuing a complaint against them.
Then what happens is the private group--typically a
partisan group such as CREW or something like that--that has
brought the complaint can then go into court and sue the FEC
for not acting on the complaint, even though the FEC actually
has----
Dr. Murphy. All right. We are going to have to wrap up. We
are getting gonged by the chairman.
Mr. Smith. We need--and what happens then is that the
Democrats then refuse to allow the Commission to appear in
court to explain what it has done, thus trying to trigger a
default judgment.
Dr. Murphy. All right. Thank you for your reply. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Mrs. Torres is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you.
Mr. Spaulding, since the 2020 election, the country has
seen a wave of restrictive voting laws, many of which, it has
now been reported, were backed by billionaire-funded groups
that were trying to suppress the votes of people whose opinions
they disagree with. They are doing this behind closed doors and
with clear political intentions.
For example, Heritage Action, an arm of the Heritage
Foundation, is reportedly spending tens of millions of dollars
pushing for restrictive voting laws.
The ability of every eligible voter to cast the ballot is a
fundamental principle of democracy.
January 6 was a really dark day in Americans' history. When
folks in my community say how brave we were to go back and
finish our job and certify the election that had been already
certified by 50 States, I push back and I say the bravery did
not come from the Members casting a vote to certify the
election.
The bravery comes and defending our democracy comes from
every voter being able to cast their vote and having the
courage to stand in line for 6 hours, to have the courage to
pass by an armed member of their community who is standing
there in an effort to stop them from voting.
That is the bravery of and the decency of democracy that we
need to uphold.
What we do here is the easiest part of that. We do have a
responsibility to ensure that the people who are funding
campaigns disclose themselves so that the people that are
paying attention, whether it is to a mailer that comes in the
mailbox, a yard sign that has been posted, a TV commercial,
whatever campaign paraphernalia is posted out there in the
community, the voters have a right to know who paid for that.
They have a right to know who paid for that because America has
a dark past in preventing people who they do not agree with
from voting.
The ability of every eligible voter to cast the ballot,
again, is fundamental.
Have we experienced a wave of election-related conspiracy
theories and misinformation, Mr. Spaulding?
Mr. Spaulding. Absolutely. We have seen a wave of
disinformation, misinformation that has deeply, deeply poisoned
our democracy.
As you brought up January 6, when a former President,
relying on a big lie, summoned people to Washington, incited an
insurrection, turned them to march up here and ransack the
people's House in an attempt--we want to talk about cancel
culture--in an attempt to cancel the votes of more than 100
million Americans?
That was inspired by a big lie and disinformation that, to
this day, including last evening, up until the second that I am
sitting here, continues to poison our democracy.
Mrs. Torres. Yet we have yet to see justice on that case. I
mean, we have seen many gullible people go to prison and are
going to do some hard time for their responsibility and their
actions on that day--assaulting our police officers, using the
American flag, their attempt to kidnap Members of Congress,
their attempt to hang Vice President Pence.
Has that fed a backlash against an increased voter
participation when they see those images?
Mr. Spaulding. It has. I think people throw up their hands.
I do think that it has also led to determination. There are
hundreds of bills after 2020 that were introduced in
statehouses across the country to make it harder to vote. At
the same time, we are seeing people stand up and say, ``That is
not how we want our democracy in this country. We are going to
expand access to the ballot box. We are going to do whatever we
can to lift up every voice in our democracy and make sure it is
heard.''
Mrs. Torres. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
Ms. Lee of Florida is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith, I would like to return to your testimony and
some of the questions that Dr. Murphy was covering with you.
When that testimony left off, you were discussing the
subject of the FEC failing to close files, even after a
determination not to pursue a complaint and after deciding not
to find a violation.
Could you go back to that and elaborate on why that is
significant, why it matters?
Mr. Smith. Yes. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the
opportunity.
As I was explaining, the FEC sometimes reaches a 3-3 vote
not to investigate or not to find a party guilty of a
violation. Again, it needs a bipartisan majority, and that is
one of the protections that is built into the FEC. Other people
have been trying to destroy that by creating a partisan
majority, but that is another issue.
The Commission votes 3-3 not to proceed, but then the
Democratic Commissioners have refused to vote to close the
file, meaning nobody is notified of their decision.
Then, eventually, the group that brought the complaint has
a statutory right to sue the FEC for inaction. The FEC has
acted, but nobody knows it.
They sue, and then the Democratic Commissioners have voted
not to allow the FEC to defend itself in court. It cannot go up
and defend the decision of the controlling Commissioners there.
You get a default judgment against the Commission, which
essentially then enacts the theory of the law and the belief
and the facts that the complaining party has rather than having
the Commission do it.
Ms. Lee. Right there, I want to be sure we make this point
very clear for everyone, including some who maybe have not
spent as much time in the courtrooms as others.
Would you explain, please, what is a default judgment? If
the FEC is sued, fails to show up, fails to respond to a
complaint, the court enters a default judgment. Would you
explain, please, the significance of that and what it means?
Mr. Smith. Yes. I mean, a default judgment essentially is
the court saying, ``Nobody showed up to defend, so we take the
allegations, basically, and the legal position of the plaintiff
as correct.''
What this does is it has the effect of farming out the
interpretation of Federal election law to groups on the
political left that file complaints with the FEC and get the
three Democratic Commissioners to go along and refuse to allow
the FEC to even explain its reasoning and that it has, in fact,
acted. It is really a fraud on the court.
Ms. Lee. In that circumstance, then, the FEC is not
disputing, filing an answer to the complaint, or putting
anything into the court record that would contradict the
allegations in the plaintiff's lawsuit, correct?
Mr. Smith. Exactly. It does not show up.
Ms. Lee. Now, is not there also a potential consequence
related to sanctions, attorney's fees, or other things for the
failure to respond in the case of an action being filed?
Mr. Smith. There can be.
Ms. Lee. Moving on to a different subject. Going back to
your prior testimony, you touched on the subject of IRS
official Lois Lerner and the issues attendant with her.
Will you talk a bit about the consent decree that the IRS
entered with the Tea Party groups?
Mr. Smith. Sure. Eventually, the IRS did enter a consent
decree about 5 years after, 4 years after the scandal broke. In
it, the IRS admitted that its treatment of conservative
organizations during the tax-exempt determination process,
including screening their applications based on their names and
policy positions, subjecting those applications to heightened
scrutiny and inordinate delays, and demanding of some
plaintiffs information that the U.S. Treasury Inspector General
for Tax Administration had determined was unnecessary to the
determination of proper tax status, was nonetheless used to
delay status here.
Ms. Lee. As we sit here today all these years later, do you
feel like we are still vulnerable to such action occurring
again?
Mr. Smith. We clearly are. As has been pointed out, the
Congress has blocked the IRS from moving forward in this
direction, but it has been on an ad hoc basis, on a sort of a
year-by-year device.
Really what we need to do is get the IRS out of enforcing
campaign finance law. The reason it got into this was precisely
because the bipartisan FEC was not engaging in enough
partisanship.
The IRS is under control of the President. The President at
the time made a number of statements about how these groups
were destroying America and they were a threat to democracy and
all this kind of thing, and the IRS picked up the cue. It did
not have a direct order, but they are not stupid. They picked
up the cue, ``Who will free me of these troublesome priests?''
and they began harassing these conservative organizations.
There is some evidence that it cost Republicans possibly as
many as 5 to 8 million votes in the 2012 Presidential election.
Ms. Lee. What action, if any, do you think Congress could
take, or what legislation could be enacted, to prevent further
abuses of this nature?
Mr. Smith. It gets a little bit complex. Again, basically,
it says that the FEC, the bipartisan FEC, which is supposed to
interpret campaign finance law, will determine whether a group
is engaging in political activity under the law, and the IRS
merely administers the tax side of things.
Ms. Lee. All right. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
Mr. D'Esposito is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, everyone.
Ms. Dhillon, over a year ago, the Department of Homeland
Security established a Disinformation Governance Board charged
with, quote, ``review questions of privacy and civil liberty
for online content,'' close quote. This board, fortunately, was
short-lived and dissolved in August 2022.
I have a few questions based on the Governance Board.
The first is, should the Federal Government be in the
business of censoring political speech?
Ms. Dhillon. Absolutely not.
Mr. D'Esposito. Second is--I am pretty sure I know the
answer to it, but just to get it on the record--what about big
tech? Should they be in the business of censoring any political
speech?
Ms. Dhillon. I believe that, of course, corporations have
their own speech rights, but when you come to a consumer
platform like this, I do believe that the law should be
expanded to allow protections--a bill of rights, if you will--
for users of social media because, today, they seem to be the
consumers with the least rights in any industry in America.
Mr. D'Esposito. I guess the final question is probably the
one as to why we are actually here today.
What do you believe--what impact do you believe censorship
has of political speech in both the online, the platforms, as
well as other censorship? What is its overall effect on general
elections?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, we can take the 2020 election as an
example. The use of Government funds and Government coercion
hand-in-hand with regulated industries--that is the social
media companies--had a tremendous impact on citizens' ability--
that their speech was not going to be punished by the
Government.
We saw hundreds, perhaps thousands just in California alone
who had their posts or their speech about the 2020 election--
which is, of course, core protected political speech--removed.
This has caused many of those citizens to believe that
their voice no longer matters. It deters them from voting. It
certainly deters them from speaking. It deters their friends
from speaking as well. This is un-American.
I think that the First Amendment is the First Amendment for
a reason. It is the fundamental premise on which we Americans
act. It is a beacon for the rest of the world as well. When in
America our Government works hand in hand with corporations to
suppress speech, I believe that violates the First Amendment.
Courts have been reluctant to recognize that to date due to
an outdated Communications Decency Act, Section 230. That is
within the power of Congress to fix, and I urge you to do that.
Beyond that, even citizens who do not speak on social media
are afraid that they will be punished at work, that they will
be hounded by a mob, that they will suffer physical
consequences for speaking.
Censorship is antithetical to freedom. The antidote to
speech that you do not like is more speech, and this is a
fundamental premise of the First Amendment.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you. Thank you for your work. Thank
you for being here today. I think the most important part of
your answer was the fact that it is un-American. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Sarbanes is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity
to waive on the Committee.
I wanted to talk a little bit about campaign financing----
Chairman Steil. If the gentleman will yield just for a
minute for tech support? I just want to make sure that those
viewing online are able to hear you. Just give me--let us take
1 second here for tech support.
Mr. Sarbanes. How about now?
Chairman Steil. Much better.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity
to waive on the Committee.
I wanted to take the opportunity to talk a little bit about
another dimension of campaign finance. There was an allusion to
it earlier. This is the idea of empowering small donors so
their voices can be heard because, oftentimes, the average
citizen out there feels like they cannot compete against deep-
pocketed donors, against the super-PACs, and so forth. They
want to be on the field of their democracy. They want to feel
like they have some power within their own democracy.
One of the proposals that was included in the Freedom to
Vote Act was to establish a small donor matching system. If a
small donor gave $20, $50, there would be a corresponding
match, like a multiple match. It would come in, lift that up,
and allow them to feel like they are the ones that are
supporting campaigns and, frankly, they are the ones to which
the candidates and Members of Congress ought to be accountable.
The evidence from this being implemented and tried across
the country at the State level and the local level is, when you
do that, people feel much more invested in their democracy.
They feel like they are the ones that own the outcomes, not
some shadowy, dark money figure that is hidden behind the
curtain.
It is a really important dimension.
Having said that, I want to try and nip in the bud before
it gets distorted this notion that the fund that would provide
these matching dollars will be a taxpayer fund. In fact, if you
look at the language of the Freedom to Vote Act--and I think
there was a reference to the bill earlier that maybe missed
this--it explicitly says, with respect to the fund that would
provide these matching dollars, quote, ``No taxpayer fund may
be deposited into the fund.''
That same no taxpayer fund requirement actually applies to
this entire State election assistance fund that would cover all
kinds of innovations that could happen at the State level.
We were very intentional about making sure that taxpayers
would not be on the hook. Well, the question is, ``Well, then,
where are you going to get the funds?'' We came up with an
elegant proposal on that, and that is to put a very tiny
surcharge on settlements with high-end tax cheats and corporate
lawbreakers.
Let me give you an example. In 2019, Facebook was ordered
to pay approximately $5 billion to the Federal Government
because they mishandled users' personal information. You take a
tiny little surcharge on that. You put it into the fund.
In 2017, Volkswagen--remember this?--paid a $4.3 billion
fine to the Federal Government for cheating on diesel emission
tests. You take a tiny piece of that, you put it into the fund.
This is how you would actually resource this ability of
average citizens to get their voice amplified. I just wanted to
put that on the record because it seems that there is some
misunderstanding about where the dollars come to support this
matching effort. We were very explicit, we will continue to be,
that not one dollar of taxpayer money will go toward that
purpose.
Mr. Spaulding, I do not have a lot of time. I got 30
seconds. Speak to me quickly about why it is so important for
the average person who wants their voice to be heard to know
that big money is having to be accountable in terms of
disclosure and transparency.
Mr. Spaulding. People want to be heard. When they see that
so much of the money that is funding our elections is coming
from such a--as I mentioned in my statement--such a tiny,
unrepresentative segment of the population.
You know, I was looking at--we have talked a lot about the
political parties and contribution limits. One person, one
donor, could give to the political party committees in one
election cycle up to $2 million, a $2 million check. Everyday
Americans are saying, ``What about my voice? My voice has a
role to play here, too.''
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much. We appreciate you
coming to House Administration, the most important Committee in
the House, as you well know since you joined us today. I
appreciate your testimony. Yield back.
Mr. Carey is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the witnesses for your testimony today.
I do want to--I am going to talk a little bit about--Mr.
Riemer, I want to focus a little bit more on your role with the
RSC, your experience there.
I kind of want to, if we could maybe--I do not think we
were doing the same type of position back in 1976--but what was
the impetus behind changing the amount, the donations back in
1976.
Then, when McCain-Feingold was enacted, why was the limit
set to what it was? Was there ever any discussion at that time
to raise it with inflation?
Mr. Riemer. That is a great question, Congressman. I am not
an expert on the legislative history of McCain-Feingold.
What I do know is that, for some reason, the limits were
indexed for inflation for everybody but PACs and the State and
local parties. I think for PACs now, that is largely a
nonissue, because we have super-PACs, and I think PACs have
waned in their influence.
For State parties, I have not seen and I actually in
researching for this hearing tried to find some rationale for
why they would exclude State parties. Maybe Professor Smith
knows. It very well could have been an oversight.
I do think, overall, McCain-Feingold was trying to
eliminate what was known as soft money, which was money flowing
into the parties that was unregulated. Perhaps that was it.
That does not make any sense because they were Federal limits,
and all that money is disclosed, and all the money that is
raised or spent is disclosed. I am honestly not sure.
Mr. Carey. Well, let me ask you, Professor Smith. I mean,
do you have any historical reference to that?
Mr. Smith. Just a touch more.
The State party provisions in McCain-Feingold were
basically kind of last-minute sorts of thing.
There was a concern that, ``Oh, my gosh, we are putting all
these new limits on the national parties and that sort of
thing. And, oh, now what will happen? Well, State parties can
influence elections for Federal office, so maybe we will try to
control them as well.''
I just do not think there was much thought given to it.
Like, on the indexing side, that was a last-minute compromise
that worked primarily at that time just on donations to
candidates' campaigns.
It is just one of those things that was an afterthought,
because the goal of McCain-Feingold was to basically reduce the
amount of political speech. They were not thinking about trying
to help State parties.
Mr. Carey. To that, Mr. Riemer, I am going to just say it
again.
Why is it so important--I have my answer, but I am going to
defer to you on this--why is it so important that we have, both
on the Republican and the Democratic side, why is it so
important that we have strong State parties?
Mr. Riemer. Absolutely. There are philosophical reasons,
and I think there is concrete reasons, I think. Let us go more
practical.
One, they recruit, nominate, and elect our candidates. That
goes down from school board or county council, let us say, all
the way up to President. State parties have an integral role in
electing delegates that go to the national convention, who
ultimately select the next leader of our country.
In many ways they are sort of the farm team as well. I am
sure lots of Members on this Committee came up through the
local party system. It is incredibly important.
I think another thing is we are talking about all these
outside groups and super-PACs and everything else. 50 years
from now that super-PAC is probably not going to exist. 50
years from now that State party is going to exist. It is
permanent, it is always there, and it is not going away.
Mr. Carey. Thank you, Mr. Riemer. I would agree with my
colleague from Virginia that, while the party may still be
there, some of our buildings may not be.
Let me address you, Mr. Smith, on this.
What are some changes you think could strengthen the State
and local parties? What are some changes to the laws that you
think could strengthen both the State and the local parties?
Mr. Smith. Well, I appreciate you asking me. It might
actually be a better question for Mr. Riemer.
I would say the biggest thing is that currently there is
this provision called Levin funds, and local parties are
prohibited from engaging in communications that might have the
incidental effect of helping Federal candidates for office. It
just creates a colossal regulatory burden for State parties to
figure out what they can do and to raise and spend money for
their own State and local races.
If they spend money in their State and local races, but it
might influence a Federal race--and it will because Federal
candidates are on the ballot--they get subject to all these
regulations.
Mr. Carey. Mr. Chairman, I want to, again, thank the
witnesses, all of the witnesses, for your testimony today. It
was very insightful.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for the purpose of
asking questions.
Ms. Perry Martin, do you know, when we pay--when the
Federal Government pays Social Security, does that come out of
the U.S. Treasury?
Ms. Martin. I do not believe so.
Chairman Steil. If a check was cut to build a road or a
bridge in the United States or fund our military or pay for the
men and women who are wearing the United States military
uniform, does that come from the United States Treasury?
Ms. Martin. I actually do not know the answer to that.
Chairman Steil. It does.
Ms. Martin. OK.
Chairman Steil. It comes from the United States Treasury.
Under the Democrats' H.R. 1 from last Congress, where they
would take Federal dollars and put it in politicians'
reelection campaigns, would that come from the U.S. Treasury?
Ms. Martin. It would, yes.
Chairman Steil. It would come from the U.S. Treasury. It
would all come from the same pile.
When we see the Democrats' bill from last Congress that
every Democrat Member voted for that puts Federal dollars into
politicians' reelection campaigns, it comes from the U.S.
Treasury, the same U.S. Treasury that pays Social Security. Is
that accurate?
Ms. Martin. Yes, it does.
Chairman Steil. I think that is important to know.
Let me shift gears to you, Harmeet Dhillon, if I can.
When we traditionally think about free speech problems, we
think about Government censorship. Today we see Government
working hand in glove with private businesses to censor speech.
Ms. Dhillon, based on your litigation experience, is it
unprecedented for the American Government to reach into private
organizations to censor Americans' speech?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, I do not know what happened in prior
days, but I can say that the advent of social media has made
speech a multibillion, even trillion-dollar corporate endeavor,
which is a good thing in a way. It has actually allowed many
citizens whose voices never would have been heard by people in
different States or around the world to speak. That is only
true if they are allowed to speak and be heard, if they are not
being censored by the heavy hand of the Government.
Today the impact of Government cooperation with liberal
organizations and liberal executives at big tech companies in
San Francisco has had a negative impact on speech in America.
Chairman Steil. Thank you.
Let me shift gears slightly. In the 2020 election, we saw
jurisdictions, including in my State of Wisconsin, municipal
government jurisdictions, accept private funding for elections,
commonly referred to as Zuckerbucks. Again in 2022, we saw a
similar pattern of private funding for elections, and in
particular in the city of Milwaukee. Milwaukee Votes 2022
campaign, again, took private funding.
Could you comment on how Zuckerbucks influenced the 2020
election?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, absolutely. You have seen, in addition
to the States you mentioned, Pennsylvania, Georgia
specifically, CEIR used its funding to embed individuals in
county election operations----
Chairman Steil. How did it impact the election?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, those employees turned out the vote more
in high-density urban areas; that is, Democrat jurisdictions.
The impact was tens of thousands of votes in swing States that
would otherwise not have been cast being cast on a partisan
fashion.
Chairman Steil. So, in your opinion, it had a partisan
impact on the election. Is that accurate?
Ms. Dhillon. Absolutely. In swing States.
Chairman Steil. Should nongovernment--in your professional
opinion, should nongovernment entities that provide funding for
elections be able to receive tax deductible contributions?
Ms. Dhillon. Absolutely not. Zuckerbucks should be banned,
and certainly these activities, if they were allowed, not be
tax deductible.
Chairman Steil. Ms. Perry Martin, do you think they should
also not be tax-deductible donations?
Ms. Martin. I do believe that, yes. I think a lot of States
have--there are 25 States that have already passed this. State
legislatures have recognized this problem.
Chairman Steil. Half the States have recognized this and
successfully blocked it, half the States have not.
Ms. Martin. Yes.
Chairman Steil. Including my State of Wisconsin has room
for improvement here.
Can you comment, Ms. Martin, about how we could improve our
campaign finance system for parties and candidates to make it
more transparent for voters?
Ms. Martin. That is a very good question.
Right now, there are so many provisions in our campaign
finance laws that are overly complicated and honestly do not
make a lot of sense. Modernizing and simplifying certain
provisions of the law would make campaign finance laws more
transparent for voters.
For example, the limit on party-coordinated expenditures.
Voters know that parties exist to promote candidates and
political philosophies they espouse. It does not make any sense
to have this limited amount of money that they can spend.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much.
I want to jump to you, if I can, Mr. Spaulding, with the
final minute that I have here.
Are you employed by Common Cause?
Mr. Spaulding. Yes.
Chairman Steil. Do you know the tax status of your
employer, Common Cause?
Mr. Spaulding. Well, we have a 501(c)(4) and a 501(c)(3).
Chairman Steil. Are you employed by both the 501(c)(4) and
the 501(c)(3)?
Mr. Spaulding. Actually--I am actually--well, I am employed
by the 501(c)(3), Common Cause Education Fund.
Chairman Steil. You are employed by the 501(c)(3)----
Mr. Spaulding. Correct.
Chairman Steil [continuing]. not the 501(c)(4)?
Mr. Spaulding. Correct.
Chairman Steil. OK. Under the DISCLOSE Act passed out of
the House last Congress--strongly supported, I believe, by
President Biden--it would have required Common Cause to reveal
its top donors, contrary to privacy protection under current
law. Is that accurate?
Mr. Spaulding. Did you say the DISCLOSE Act?
Chairman Steil. Yes, sir.
Mr. Spaulding. No, it is not accurate.
Chairman Steil. The DISCLOSE Act would not require the
disclosure?
Mr. Spaulding. The DISCLOSE Act would require organizations
that spend $10,000 on certain campaign-related disbursements,
like IEs, electioneering communications, other--we are a
nonpartisan organization. We do not support candidates.
Chairman Steil. Common Cause is not engaged in that
activity?
Mr. Spaulding. Neither Common Cause nor Common Cause
Education Fund endorse candidates. We do not do campaign-
related work. We are a nonpartisan advocacy organization.
Chairman Steil. Very good. Thank you.
Recognizing the time, I am going to yield back and
recognize the gentleman who has joined our Committee, from the
great State of Louisiana, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, for inviting
me to participate. I would be so blessed to be on your
Committee, but I serve on House Judiciary, on Armed Services,
and on the Select Committee on the Weaponization of the Federal
Government.
Before I got to Congress, I spent 20 years in the courts
defending free speech, religious freedom, and the like. This is
an issue that is near and dear to my heart. It is also near and
dear to the hearts of our constituents.
When I am back home in my district holding town halls,
probably the first or second question I get in every open forum
is, ``Can we trust our election system?''
This is no game. We all know that it is one of the most
pressing issues that we have because America's trust in our
institutions is wavering. It is at all-time lows. If we do not
have this, you cannot maintain a constitutional Republic.
Here is the problem that our constituents can see with
their own eyes. It has become common practice now for various
groups and even Federal agencies to pursue retribution against
Americans for simply exercising their First Amendment right to
participate in the political process.
In the Weaponization Committee, we have uncovered alarming
information about, for example, the IRS targeting conservative
groups. The name-and-shame tactics of the radical left. We know
that none other than the FBI itself quite literally colluded
with the social media platforms during the last two election
cycles to censor and silence viewpoints they disagreed with.
This is un-American activity and it is deeply concerning.
There is also a lot of confusion about the law. Let me just
ask Mr. Smith first.
For about a half-century, the Supreme Court has been
crystal clear that spending money in the context of political
activities qualifies as protected speech under the First
Amendment. Can you briefly describe just for the record today
why that is?
Mr. Smith. Sure. It is one of those things, if you ask the
average person, ``Is money speech?'' of course they say no. The
Supreme Court does not say that money is speech. As you put it,
they say that spending money affects speech.
Let us imagine we said, well, The New York Times cannot
spend more than $3,300 a year to publish, which is the amount
an individual can give to a campaign. It would be a very small
newspaper very, very quickly. To communicate with a large
audience you have to spend money.
Or let us suppose that we said, well, you have freedom of
religion, but you cannot spend any money to build a church or
buy hymnals or pay a pastor. Clearly, that would impact the
First Amendment freedom of religion, and it is the same thing
with speech.
Mr. Johnson. Yes, because a candidate or an advocacy group
obviously cannot get their message out without spending money.
This is the way it works. That is reality.
Isn't it true also that the Supreme Court has also said
that the only constitutional basis for restricting money in
politics is to prevent a quid pro corruption or the appearance
of that? Isn't that right?
Mr. Smith. That is correct. Sometimes people say that the
appearance of corruption is sort of just anything people think
is corrupt about the Government. They spend too much money, you
know. It is not. By corruption, the court was very clear. It
meant the appearance of, as you put it, quid pro quo
corruption.
Mr. Johnson. I mean, we have had Justices on the right and
the left acknowledge this and agree with it and embrace it.
Every election cycle, we hear about the pernicious effects
of Citizens United. It is like a curse word now on the left.
Did not that decision simply reaffirm basic First Amendment law
that corporations have a First Amendment right to speak on
political issues?
Mr. Smith. I agree. It did.
I also want to point out that on the disclosure side that
dealt only with express advocacy of the election or defeat of
candidates. That was the issue there. That was not some broad
license to pass anything you want to call disclosure and say
you can interfere with people's privacy.
Mr. Johnson. Here is an interesting footnote. Isn't it true
that during the Citizens United oral argument, the Obama
administration actually argued before the Supreme Court that it
had the authority to ban books, movies, and speech if it was
made close to an election?
Mr. Smith. Yes. Even one line.
Mr. Johnson. Ms. Dhillon, I wish I had more time, but let
me ask you real quickly.
Could you briefly describe some of the litigation that you
have been involved in that relates to the Government telling
private businesses to censor viewpoints the Government sees as
wrong or dangerous?
Ms. Dhillon. Well, one example--thank you for your
question--one example is the case of Rogan O'Handley, who was
banned from social media for questioning the number of votes
that President Biden received and even posting a photograph of
barbed wire around the Capitol and highlighting the
irregularities--multiple irregularities--in the 2020 election.
He is just one of hundreds that we know of in California, and
we have since learned that there were thousands nationally.
I think the most chilling thing to me was learning that the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, which comes from a Government
that regulates these companies. A company is not free to simply
say ``yes'' or ``no'' or take a meeting with the FBI when the
FBI asks you to do something.
That chilling effect, I think, has really come--has been
highlighted thanks to a change in control at Twitter. Without
the change in control at Twitter we never would have learned
the extent to which our Federal Government is threatening the
freedom of American citizens to speak freely on our election.
Mr. Johnson. Exactly right.
Unfortunately, I am out of time. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much. We appreciate you
being here, Mr. Johnson. I know sometimes Judiciary does not
have the robust intellectual debates that we get to have in the
Committee on House Administration. You are welcome to join us
anytime.
Mr. Johnson. For the record, I did not say that.
Chairman Steil. We appreciate you being here.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle, for 2
minutes for closing remarks.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for all the witnesses for joining us this
morning.
The Supreme Court has repeatedly stated that disclosure
requirements are essential to safeguarding the ability of the
citizenry to make informed choices. House Democrats will
continue to combat the rampant use of dark money with
legislation like the Freedom to Vote Act, DISCLOSE Act, and
other measures to strengthen our campaign finance laws.
I just, in my last moments, just want to ask for unanimous
consent to enter into the record a report published by the
former chair of this Committee, Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren, who
reviewed public social media posts by Members of the House who
were sworn in January 2021 and who voted to overturn the 2020
election.
These are posts on Twitter. I note that they were allowed
to post on Twitter, even though they were posting what
essentially were untruths. They are on Twitter. I just want to
make that point.
I also want to just note, Twitter is a private company.
They are able to post whatever they choose to post. I am not
aware that the Supreme Court has ever ruled that they are bound
to observe and post everyone or to validate anyone else who has
the freedom to speak out.
I also ask unanimous consent to enter into the record the
decision in ProtectMarriage.com v. Bowen finding that the
groups involved in Proposition 8 were not small, persecuted
groups, but part of what they call in the decision a massive
movement.
With that, again, Mr. Chair, thank you for bringing
everyone together. I think this is an important topic. We look
forward to continuing to work together on this.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Without objection, both will be entered into the record.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
