- AMERICAN CONFIDENCE IN ELECTIONS: PREVENTING NONCITIZEN VOTING AND OTHER FOREIGN INTERFERENCE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

2024

AMERICAN CONFIDENCE IN ELECTIONS:
PREVENTING NONCITIZEN VOTING
AND OTHER FOREIGN INTERFERENCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

MAY 16, 2024
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov
www.cha.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-237                     WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin, Chairman

BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOSEPH MORELLE, New York,
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia              Ranking Member
GREG MURPHY, North Carolina          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             NORMA TORRES, California
MIKE CAREY, Ohio                     DEREK KILMER, Washington
ANTHONY D'ESPOSITO, New York
LAUREL LEE, Florida

Mike Platt,  Staff Director
Jamie Fleet,  Minority Staff Director

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Opening Statements

Chairman of the Committee on House Administration Bryan Steil,
Representative from the State of Wisconsin.....................     1
Prepared statement of Chairman Bryan Steil...................     3
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on House Administration Joseph
Morelle, Representative from the State of New York.............     4
Prepared statement of Ranking Member Joseph Morelle..........     6

Witnesses

Cord Byrd, Florida Secretary of State............................     7
Prepared statement of Cord Byrd..............................    10
Hans von Spakovsky, manager, Election Law Reform Initiative, and
senior legal fellow, Edwin Meese III Center for Legal and
Judicial Studies, the Heritage Foundation......................    12
Prepared statement of Hans von Spakovsky.....................    14
J. Christian Adams, president and general counsel, Public
Interest Legal Foundation......................................    23
Prepared statement of J. Christian Adams.....................    25
Caitlin Sutherland, executive director, Americans for Public
Trust..........................................................    33
Prepared statement of Caitlin Sutherland.....................    35
Michael Waldman, president and CEO, Brennan Center for Justice at
NYU law school.................................................    40
Prepared statement of Michael Waldman........................    42

Submissions for the Record

Reuters article..................................................    59
Project 2025 document............................................    74
People United for Privacy report.................................   967
The Hill article.................................................   979
Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights and the
Declaration for American Democracy Coalition letter............   995
Washington Post article..........................................  1000
Votebeat article.................................................  1002
NBC article......................................................  1021
Law and Crime article............................................  1034

AMERICAN CONFIDENCE IN ELECTIONS:
PREVENTING NONCITIZEN VOTING
AND OTHER FOREIGN INTERFERENCE

----------

May 16, 2024

Committee on House Administration,
House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:17 a.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Bryan Steil
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Steil, Loudermilk, Murphy, Bice,
Carey, Lee, Morelle, Sewell, Torres, and Kilmer.
Staff present: March Bell, General Counsel and
Parliamentarian; Jackie Bossman, Counsel; Annemarie Cake,
Deputy Clerk and Professional Staff; Alexander Deise, Counsel;
Kristen Monterroso, Director of Operations and Legislative
Clerk; Michael Platt, Staff Director; Jordan Wilson, Director
of Member Services; Khalil Abboud, Minority Deputy Staff
Director; Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director; Nicole Hansen,
Minority Elections Counsel; Sarah Nasta, Minority Senior
Advisor and Director; Owen Reilly, Minority Professional Staff;
and Sean Wright, Minority Chief Counsel.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRYAN STEIL, CHAIRMAN OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WISCONSIN

Chairman Steil. The Committee on House Administration will
come to order. I note that a quorum is present.
Without objection, the chair may declare a recess at any
time. Also, without objection, the hearing record will remain
open for 5 legislative days so Members may submit any material
they wish to be included therein.
Thank you, Ranking Member Morelle, Members of the
Committee, and our witnesses for participating in today's
hearing.
The U.S. Constitution protects the rights of citizens of
the United States to vote in our elections. In fact, Federal
law makes it a felony for noncitizens to vote in Federal
elections.
Most but not all States outlawed noncitizen voting in their
elections. American elections are for American citizens, and we
intend to keep it that way.
Recently, we have seen Democratic-run cities allowing
noncitizens to vote in local elections. Washington, D.C., New
York, Maryland, California, and others have passed legislation
to allow noncitizens to vote in elections.
This causes a host of problems for a State to maintain
clean voter registration lists. Let me explain.
The National Voter Registration Act was enacted to help
increase the number of eligible American citizens that are
registered to vote. By giving applicants voter registration
forms when getting a driver's license, more individuals are
likely to register.
However, noncitizens here legally are entitled to Federal,
State benefits, including driver's licenses. That means, in
some circumstances, noncitizens also receive these same voter
registration forms.
My concern is that the interpretation of the NVRA makes it
difficult for States to maintain clean voter lists. We should
be giving States tools to ensure their voter rolls are clean as
we approach November's election.
Yet jurisdictions allowing noncitizens to vote, like
Washington, D.C., are only required to keep one voter list.
Maintaining one clean list, with U.S. citizens and noncitizen
voters, presents challenges.
Let us take a look at examples of these challenges where
NVRA was misinterpreted in Pennsylvania and in Ohio. In 2022,
the Public Interest Legal Foundation found Pennsylvania had
allowed noncitizens to register to vote for decades.
Pennsylvania later publicly admitted that, due to an
alleged programming glitch, that the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation had allowed noncitizens to register to vote.
Last week, Ohio's secretary of State, Frank LaRose, ordered
the State's voter rolls to be cleaned after a review found more
than a hundred noncitizens in Ohio were registered to vote.
These examples raise serious concerns.
In D.C., the Board of Elections says it is on the
noncitizen to understand they cannot vote in Federal elections.
Right now, in our Nation's Capital, roughly 500 noncitizens are
already registered to vote.
Let me be clear. Noncitizen voting reduces confidence in
our elections.
Washington, D.C., is setting a new standard that could soon
be applied across the country. We must stop noncitizen voting.
That is why our Committee passed my bill, the American
Confidence in Elections Act.
One section of the bill allows States to access Federal
data bases that contain citizenship information so noncitizens
can be removed from the voter rolls.
As we continue to see foreign actors interested in
influencing our elections, our current practices should cause
us all concern.
Since President Biden took office, over 7 million illegal
immigrants have crossed the Southern Border. We must ensure our
elections are secure and running properly without foreign
influence.
Yet, last month, Washington, D.C., mailed this--last month,
Washington, D.C., mailed this postcard across the city,
encouraging noncitizens to vote.
In response, I sent a letter to the D.C. Board of Elections
about the postcard. The D.C. Board is actively hosting virtual
town halls encouraging noncitizens to vote.
To vote in local elections in our Nation's Capital, you
only need to reside here for 30 days. That means any noncitizen
who moves to D.C. by October 5th can vote in this November's
election.
If any of the 7 million migrants moved to D.C. by this
October, they can vote in the upcoming election. In our
Nation's Capital, they do not even need a photo identification
to do it. This does not instill confidence in our elections.
The Committee on House Administration has broad oversight
of our Nation's Federal elections, including here in our
Nation's Capital. We have passed a bill to require citizenship
to vote in D.C. elections.
Republicans on this Committee are committed to ending
noncitizen voting.
We will also discuss the role foreign nationals play in our
elections by contributing to nonprofits. Federal law prohibits
foreign nationals from contributing to campaigns. However, we
have seen foreign nationals use a loophole to get around this.
Yesterday I introduced legislation to close that loophole.
When our Committee heard from all six commissioners on the
Federal Election Commission last year, Democrats and
Republicans alike, every Commissioner agreed that this loophole
should be closed, and I am hopeful that we can all agree that
only American citizens should be contributing and voting in our
elections.
I would like to thank our witnesses for joining us today to
discuss these important topics.
With that, I yield to the Ranking Member for 5 minutes for
his opening remarks.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Steil follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION BRYAN STEIL

The U.S. Constitution protects the rights of citizens of
the United States to vote in our elections. In fact, Federal
law makes it a felony for noncitizens to vote in Federal
elections.
Most but not all States outlawed noncitizen voting in their
elections. American elections are for American citizens, and we
intend to keep it that way.
Recently, we have seen Democratic-run cities allowing
noncitizens to vote in local elections. Washington, D.C., New
York, Maryland, California, and others have passed legislation
to allow noncitizens to vote in elections.
This causes a host of problems for a State to maintain
clean voter registration lists. Let me explain.
The National Voter Registration Act was enacted to help
increase the number of eligible American citizens that are
registered to vote. By giving applicants voter registration
forms when getting a driver's license, more individuals are
likely to register.
However, noncitizens here legally are entitled to Federal,
State benefits, including driver's licenses. That means, in
some circumstances, noncitizens also receive these same voter
registration forms.
My concern is that the interpretation of the NVRA makes it
difficult for States to maintain clean voter lists. We should
be giving States tools to ensure their voter rolls are clean as
we approach November's election.
Yet jurisdictions allowing noncitizens to vote, like
Washington, D.C., are only required to keep one voter list.
Maintaining one clean list, with U.S. citizens and noncitizen
voters, presents challenges.
Let us take a look at examples of these challenges where
NVRA was misinterpreted in Pennsylvania and in Ohio. In 2022,
the Public Interest Legal Foundation found Pennsylvania had
allowed noncitizens to register to vote for decades.
Pennsylvania later publicly admitted that, due to an
alleged programming glitch, that the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation had allowed noncitizens to register to vote.
Last week, Ohio's secretary of State, Frank LaRose, ordered
the State's voter rolls to be cleaned after a review found more
than a hundred noncitizens in Ohio were registered to vote.
These examples raise serious concerns.
In D.C., the Board of Elections says it is on the
noncitizen to understand they cannot vote in Federal elections.
Right now, in our Nation's Capital, roughly 500 noncitizens are
already registered to vote.
Let me be clear. Noncitizen voting reduces confidence in
our elections.
Washington, D.C., is setting a new standard that could soon
be applied across the country. We must stop noncitizen voting.
That is why our Committee passed my bill, the American
Confidence in Elections Act.
One section of the bill allows States to access Federal
data bases that contain citizenship information so noncitizens
can be removed from the voter rolls.
As we continue to see foreign actors interested in
influencing our elections, our current practices should cause
us all concern.
Since President Biden took office, over 7 million illegal
immigrants have crossed the Southern Border. We must ensure our
elections are secure and running properly without foreign
influence.
Yet, last month, Washington, D.C., mailed this--last month,
Washington, D.C., mailed this postcard across the city,
encouraging noncitizens to vote.
In response, I sent a letter to the D.C. Board of Elections
about the postcard. The D.C. Board is actively hosting virtual
town halls encouraging noncitizens to vote.
To vote in local elections in our Nation's Capital, you
only need to reside here for 30 days. That means any noncitizen
who moves to D.C. by October 5th can vote in this November's
election.
If any of the 7 million migrants moved to D.C. by this
October, they can vote in the upcoming election. In our
Nation's Capital, they do not even need a photo identification
to do it. This does not instill confidence in our elections.
The Committee on House Administration has broad oversight
of our Nation's Federal elections, including here in our
Nation's Capital. We have passed a bill to require citizenship
to vote in D.C. elections.
Republicans on this Committee are committed to ending
noncitizen voting.
We will also discuss the role foreign nationals play in our
elections by contributing to nonprofits. Federal law prohibits
foreign nationals from contributing to campaigns. However, we
have seen foreign nationals use a loophole to get around this.
Yesterday I introduced legislation to close that loophole.
When our Committee heard from all six commissioners on the
Federal Election Commission last year, Democrats and
Republicans alike, every Commissioner agreed that this loophole
should be closed, and I am hopeful that we can all agree that
only American citizens should be contributing and voting in our
elections.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH MORELLE, RANKING MEMBER OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
NEW YORK

Mr. Morelle. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Steil.
Thank you to each of our witnesses for being here this
morning.
Donald Trump's unprecedented attempt to stop the peaceful
transfer of power is an appalling stain on American history,
but it appears the lessons Republicans learned from the fiasco
that the former President caused in 2020 was not ``Don't steal
an election''; it was ``Just start earlier.''
For all else being said here today, here's the one takeaway
that you should remember, that we should be all very clear-eyed
about: MAGA extremists are laying the ground work to overturn
the 2024 election, to betray, once again, the will of the
American people.
Today's hearing is not actually about noncitizens illegally
voting in Federal elections. Even the Conservative Cato
Institute acknowledges this is not a problem.
What does Speaker Johnson have to say on the subject? Just
last week, he declared that he knows intuitively that a lot of
noncitizens are voting in Federal elections, but it has not
been something that is easily provable. Not provable, because
there is no proof.
The Washington Post has it right: Republicans have
increasingly acknowledged that their claims are all about the
vibes.
Republicans are not governing based on facts. Frankly, they
are not governing at all, and it's an embarrassment. This
hearing is about preemptively covering Donald Trump's lies.
The hearing is not about law and order. It is about laying
the foundation for the next big lie. It is about saying that
illegal voting is the cause of an election defeat.
We know this is untrue because we know the law is already
clear. I will read from 18 U.S.C. 611. Quote: ``It shall be
unlawful for any alien to vote in any election held solely or
in part for the purpose of electing a candidate for the office
of President, Vice President, Presidential elector, Member of
the Senate, Member of the House of Representatives,'' end
quote, or other Federal offices.
I will say it again: It is unlawful for noncitizens to vote
in Federal elections. A violation of this law is punishable by
up to a year in prison followed by deportation.
Additionally, 52 U.S. Code 20511 makes, quote, ``The
procurement or submission of voter registration applications
that are known by the person to be materially false,
fictitious, or fraudulent,'' end quote, a felony, which, by the
way, would result from a 5-year prison term and subsequent
deportation.
These laws are already on the books, and these laws work.
That is why Speaker Johnson had to publicly admit he has no
proof of fraud. Republicans know they work. My majority
colleagues know in their heart of hearts, that American
elections are secure, fair, and free. They know this truth.
Look at the parade of former Trump administration officials
who, when put under oath, when facing penalty of perjury by
Congress or other law enforcement officials, confirmed that
their claims about fraud in the 2020 election were false,
confirmed that President Trump lied to--and by the way,
continues to lie every day to the American people. This is the
public record.
MAGA Republicans are howling about this nonissue, not
because they believe American elections are insecure, but
because they are desperate to destroy American confidence in
elections.
They want Americans to be afraid. They want Americans to
believe Donald Trump's inevitable excuses, his torrent of lies
about fraud when he, once again, leads the Republican Party
down a path of insurrection.
It is unconscionable that the same cast of characters that
tried to steal an election 4 years ago are preparing to do it
again and are using this Committee, using this hearing to begin
that process.
The coup starts here. This is where it begins. When the
history of Donald Trump's attempt to steal the 2024 election is
written, and I assure you--I assure you--history will look
closely at each of us.
The Speaker's trip to Mar-a-Lago last month will stand out.
The Speaker's press conference on the Capitol steps last week
will stand out. This hearing today will stand out.
It is profoundly disappointing that my Republican
colleagues are comfortable with that. I certainly am not.
With that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Morelle follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION JOSEPH MORELLE

Donald Trump's unprecedented attempt to stop the peaceful
transfer of power is an appalling stain on American history,
but it appears the lessons Republicans learned from the fiasco
that the former President caused in 2020 was not ``Don't steal
an election''; it was ``Just start earlier.''
For all else being said here today, here's the one takeaway
that you should remember, that we should be all very clear-eyed
about: MAGA extremists are laying the ground work to overturn
the 2024 election, to betray, once again, the will of the
American people.
Today's hearing is not actually about noncitizens illegally
voting in Federal elections. Even the Conservative Cato
Institute acknowledges this is not a problem.
What does Speaker Johnson have to say on the subject? Just
last week, he declared that he knows intuitively that a lot of
noncitizens are voting in Federal elections, but it has not
been something that is easily provable. Not provable, because
there is no proof.
The Washington Post has it right: Republicans have
increasingly acknowledged that their claims are all about the
vibes.
Republicans are not governing based on facts. Frankly, they
are not governing at all, and it is an embarrassment. This
hearing is about preemptively covering Donald Trump's lies.
The hearing is not about law and order. It is about laying
the foundation for the next big lie. It is about saying that
illegal voting is the cause of an election defeat.
We know this is untrue because we know the law is already
clear. I will read from 18 U.S.C. 611. Quote: ``It shall be
unlawful for any alien to vote in any election held solely or
in part for the purpose of electing a candidate for the office
of President, Vice President, Presidential elector, Member of
the Senate, Member of the House of Representatives,'' end
quote, or other Federal offices.
I will say it again: It is unlawful for noncitizens to vote
in Federal elections. A violation of this law is punishable by
up to a year in prison followed by deportation.
Additionally, 52 U.S. Code 20511 makes, quote, ``The
procurement or submission of voter registration applications
that are known by the person to be materially false,
fictitious, or fraudulent,'' end quote, a felony, which, by the
way, would result from a 5-year prison term and subsequent
deportation.
These laws are already on the books, and these laws work.
That is why Speaker Johnson had to publicly admit he has no
proof of fraud. Republicans know they work. My majority
colleagues know in their heart of hearts, that American
elections are secure, fair, and free. They know this truth.
Look at the parade of former Trump administration officials
who, when put under oath, when facing penalty of perjury by
Congress or other law enforcement officials, confirmed that
their claims about fraud in the 2020 election were false,
confirmed that President Trump lied to--and by the way,
continues to lie every day to the American people. This is the
public record.
MAGA Republicans are howling about this nonissue, not
because they believe American elections are insecure, but
because they are desperate to destroy American confidence in
elections.
They want Americans to be afraid. They want Americans to
believe Donald Trump's inevitable excuses, his torrent of lies
about fraud when he, once again, leads the Republican Party
down a path of insurrection.
It is unconscionable that the same cast of characters that
tried to steal an election 4 years ago are preparing to do it
again and are using this Committee, using this hearing to begin
that process.
The coup starts here. This is where it begins. When the
history of Donald Trump's attempt to steal the 2024 election is
written, and I assure you--I assure you--history will look
closely at each of us.
The Speaker's trip to Mar-a-Lago last month will stand out.
The Speaker's press conference on the Capitol steps last week
will stand out. This hearing today will stand out.
It is profoundly disappointing that my Republican
colleagues are comfortable with that. I certainly am not.

Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Without objection, all other Members' opening statements
will be made part of the hearing record if they are submitted
to the Committee clerk by 5 p.m. today.
Today we have a one-witness (sic) panel. We welcome
Secretary Cord Byrd, Mr. Hans von Spakovsky, Mr. Christian
Adams, Ms. Caitlin Sutherland, and Mr. Michael Waldman.
Our first witness, Secretary Cord Byrd, serves as Florida's
37th secretary of State. Prior to serving as secretary, Mr.
Byrd served in the Florida State legislature, serving on the
Public Integrity and Elections Committee, serving 2 years as
vice chairman.
Our next witness, Hans von Spakovsky, is a senior fellow at
The Heritage Foundation. As the manager of the think tank's
Election Law Reform Initiative, Mr. von Spakovsky studies
campaign finance restriction, voter fraud, voter ID,
enforcement of voting-rights laws, administration of elections,
and voting-equipment standards.
Our next witness, J. Christian Adams, the president and
general counsel of the Public Interest Legal Foundation, a
public interest law firm. His firm is responsible for ensuring
States have clean voter rolls and holding them accountable
under the National Voter Registration Act.
Our next witness, Caitlin Sutherland, is the executive
director for Americans for Public Trust. Americans for Public
Trust has been at the forefront of reporting on foreign
influence in U.S. elections.
Our last witness, Mr. Michael Waldman, is president and CEO
of the Brennan Center for Justice at the NYU School of Law.
We appreciate you being with us today and look forward to
each of your testimony.
Pursuant to paragraph B of Committee rule 6, the witnesses
will please stand and raise their right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Steil. We appreciate you all being with us today
and look forward to your testimony. A reminder that we have
read your written statements and they'll appear in full in the
Committee record.
Under Committee rule 9, you are to limit your presentation
to 5 minutes. I will now recognize Secretary Cord Byrd for 5
minutes.

STATEMENTS OF HON. CORD BYRD, FLORIDA SECRETARY OF STATE; HANS
VON SPAKOVSKY, MANAGER, ELECTION LAW REFORM INITIATIVE, AND
SENIOR LEGAL FELLOW, EDWIN MEESE III CENTER FOR LEGAL AND
JUDICIAL STUDIES, THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION; J. CHRISTIAN ADAMS,
PRESIDENT AND GENERAL COUNSEL, PUBLIC INTEREST LEGAL
FOUNDATION; CAITLIN SUTHERLAND, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, AMERICANS
FOR PUBLIC TRUST; AND MICHAEL WALDMAN, PRESIDENT AND CEO,
BRENNAN CENTER FOR JUSTICE AT NYU LAW SCHOOL.

STATEMENT OF HON. CORD BYRD

Mr. Byrd. Good morning, Chairman Steil, Ranking Member
Morelle, and Members of the Committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to be here today.
To begin, the United States Constitution provides that
State legislatures prescribe the time, place, and manner of
holding Federal elections. Florida law states that, quote, ``A
person may become a registered voter only if that person is a
citizen of the United States.''
In 2020, Floridians amended the State Constitution to make
clear that, quote, ``only a citizen of the United States shall
be eligible to vote.''
Florida has approximately 13.5 million active registered
voters, and that number changes every minute of every day. A
person turns 18. A person passes away. Or a person becomes a
U.S. citizen and registers to vote for the first time.
According to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services,
94,100 Floridians became naturalized U.S. citizens in 2023. The
Federal Government has plenary authority over who becomes a
naturalized citizen.
The challenge States face is that there is not a Federal,
legal-status data base that is current and reliable. The
National Voter Registration Act, NVRA, of 1993, commonly known
as the motor voter law, introduced national procedures for
voter registration.
It mandates that any person who applies for a driver's
license may, if eligible, submit a voter registration
application for Federal elections. When potential voters fill
out a voter registration form, they must swear or affirm that
they are a U.S. citizen.
In Florida, it is a third-degree felony to falsely claim
U.S. citizenship when registering to vote.
Remarkably, however, Federal courts have interpreted the
NVRA to prohibit States from requiring proof of citizenship at
the time a person registers. In effect, Federal law forces the
States to use the honor system.
This is unacceptable. Because States are prevented from
verifying citizenship on the front end, they must do so on the
back end. Clean voter rolls become even more for necessary for
ensuring clean elections.
Florida has robust voter roll maintenance procedures to
identify registered voters who are not U.S. citizens. The names
of potential noncitizens who attempt to obtain or renew a
driver's license are reported to the Florida Department of
State, which then conducts a manual, case-by-case investigation
to determine whether the person has registered to vote and to
confirm whether the person is, in fact, a U.S. citizen.
Once the investigation is complete and if the Department
determines that the person is registered but is not a citizen,
the person cannot be removed from the voter roll without due
process as provided by Florida law.
Florida cannot verify the citizenship status of persons in
the United States without the assistance and cooperation of the
Federal Government. Indeed, the Federal Government is the only
source of accurate, up-to-date information on the citizenship
status of such persons.
In 2012, after filing a law against the United States
Department of Homeland Security, Florida became one of the
first States to receive access to DHS' Systematic Alien
Verification from Entitlement program, otherwise known as the
SAVE data base, for purpose of voter registration.
Florida relies on this data base to verify a person's
citizenship status, but to be frank, the SAVE data base is
woefully inadequate. It is neither time-nor cost-efficient and
it requires an alien registration number, which States
occasionally do not possess, to access the information.
Perhaps most importantly, the data base often lacks the
most current information, which requires further time-consuming
investigation.
Indeed, because of the lack of timely information, States
are sometimes unable to verify a person's citizenship status.
That too is unacceptable.
The Federal Government has a legal obligation to provide
up-to-date citizenship information to the States. I urge
Congress to address these deficiencies, which unfortunately can
leave a gap in the States' abilities to maintain clean voter
rolls.
At the very least, the Federal Government should provide
immediate notification when a resident of the State is
naturalized. DHS should also provide local election officials
access to the SAVE data base.
Despite conducting a fair, honest, and efficient election
in 2020, Florida did not rest on its laurels. In three
successive legislative sessions, the Florida legislature passed
substantial election-integrity legislation.
In 2022, for example, Governor Ron DeSantis signed a law,
creating the Office of Election Crimes and Security.
This office conducts preliminary investigations into
allegations of elections law violations or other election
irregularities. OECS has referred noncitizen-voting cases to
law enforcement for further investigation.
In 2004, the Baker-Carter report, prepared by former
President James Carter and former Secretary of State James
Baker, stated that, quote, ``Fraud in any degree and in any
circumstance is subversive to the electoral process,'' and
that, quote, ``the best way to maintain ballot integrity is to
investigate all credible allegations of election fraud and
otherwise prevent fraud before it can affect an election.''
Voter fraud includes voting by noncitizens in Federal
elections. Every illegitimate vote of a noncitizen negates the
legitimate vote of a citizen.
In 2000, only 537 votes in Florida determined the outcome
of the Presidential race. Floridians have changed our State's
constitution. We have strengthened our laws. We have engaged in
legislation, and we have an office dedicated to investigating
election crimes.
The only impediment to doing more is the Federal
Government. That is why States need action from our
congressional leaders so we can fulfill our constitutional
duties under the law.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Byrd follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. CORD BYRD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back. Thank you very
much.
Our next witness, Hans von Spakovsky is recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF HANS VON SPAKOVSKY

Mr. von Spakovsky. Protecting the ability of American
citizens to participate in our democratic process is one of the
most important duties of Congress. That requires that ensuring
that aliens, both those here legally and illegally, are not
unlawfully registering and voting, spending money to support or
oppose candidates in State referenda, or distorting and
diluting representation of citizens by being included in
apportionment and redistricting.
We know that aliens are registering and actually voting.
Although we do not know the extent of the problem since the
vast majority of States are not verifying citizenship. The
indicators that it is occurring are there, and it is important
to understand that every vote by an alien voids the vote of a
citizen.
To verify the accuracy of voter registration data, State
election officials should be given complete and easy access to
the SAVE system that Secretary Byrd mentioned but also to the
E-Verify system.
Federal courts obtain their lists of potential jurors from
State election officials. When someone is not a U.S. citizen,
they are excused from jury duty, yet the Federal courts are not
forwarding that information back to secretaries of State so
they can take appropriate action.
Congress needs to amend the NVRA to clarify that the NVRA
does not prohibit States from requiring applicants to provide
proof they are U.S. citizens.
Congress, also, because of its constitutional authority
over aliens, could make that a requirement for Federal
elections.
The Federal Government requires individuals to provide such
proof in order to be employed, and the right to work and earn a
living is just as important as the right to vote.
Barring States from requiring proof of citizenship makes no
sense, particularly when the Federal Government requires that
in order to be employed.
The Federal application for naturalization form asks
whether an alien has, quote, ``ever registered to vote or voted
in any Federal, State, or local election in the United
States.''
When an alien answers ``yes,'' DHS just sits on that
information. Federal law needs to be changed to require DHS,
when they get a ``yes'' answer, to forward that information to
the State election official where that alien registered or
voted, to the State attorney general, and to the U.S.
Department of Justice so that State election officials can take
that individual off the rolls and State and Federal prosecutors
can investigate and prosecute.
Federal campaign finance law prohibits Federal--governments
and aliens from participating in elections for candidates for
office, but the definition of ``elections'' in the Federal
Election Campaign Act does not include ballot referenda,
according to the U.S. Supreme Court. According to FEC, it also
does include recall elections.
That is a change that needs to be made in the law to keep
foreign influence out of our elections.
Reapportionment after the 2020 Census gave additional seats
to some States and reduced the number of seats held by seven.
Six States got more seats. Seven States had their
representatives reduced.
That reapportionment was based on the total population of
the U.S., which includes all aliens whether they are here
legally or illegally, even though they are not allowed to
participate in our democratic political process.
In addition to distorting representation in the House, it
distorts our Presidential election because, of course,
reapportionment determines how many electoral votes someone
has.
How bad is the distortion? A 2015 report by the
congressional Research Service estimated that apportionment
based on citizen population would give additional seats to
seven States and reduce the numbers of seats in four States.
Given the unprecedented influx of aliens into this country
in the last number of years, that distortion is obviously much
worse today.
We should provide both access and security in the election
process for all eligible U.S. citizens. Allowing aliens to
participate in the election process unfairly dilutes the votes
of all citizens regardless of their race or which political
party they affiliate with.
Congress and the States need to take steps to stop this
from happening. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. von Spakovsky follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HANS VON SPAKOVSKY

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Christian Adams is recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF J. CHRISTIAN ADAMS

Mr. Adams. Thank you, Chairman Steil, Ranking Member
Morelle, Members of the Committee. Thank you for the invitation
to testify.
In this polarized atmosphere, it would be wonderful if we
could agree on a few basic facts. Noncitizens are, in fact,
getting onto American voter rolls, and some of them are voting.
The data show that most often noncitizens are getting on
the rolls through the motor voter process or third-party
registration drives. Ignoring this problem ignores the harmful
impacts to both our elections but also to the aliens who are
caught in the system breakdown.
Because they have registered to vote, often at the behest
of third parties or bureaucrats, these well-meaning green card
holders face deportation.
When a foreigner registers to vote in the motor voter
system, as undeniably happened by the thousands in
Pennsylvania, every American should be concerned. Once upon a
time, fixing this problem would have been a bipartisan
priority.
We have identified four core elements that lead to
foreigners registering and voting. No. 1, a faulty, motor voter
system facilitates alien registration and then voting. We
discovered this most dramatically in Pennsylvania in 2017 where
every PennDOT customer was offered voter registration for an
estimated two decades regardless of citizenship.
Even worse, foreign-language customers were screened in
different written languages than the ones they speak. That
increase the number of foreign voter registrations.
Element two, when States do not or are prevented from
investigating prior claims of noncitizenship, foreign nationals
fill the rolls. In previous years, States like Florida and
Texas, have been disrupted by the courts from trying to study
indications of foreign citizenship among existing registrants.
Element three, when election officials do not carefully
review forms, foreigners get registered. The Federal form that
Congress approved 30 years ago requires an attestation of U.S.
citizenship via a checkbox. After 30 years of motor voter, we
can conclusively say the checkbox honor system has failed.
Unfortunately, my organization has found, in California,
Florida, Texas, Virginia, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and other
States, where applicants actually admitted on the registration
form they were not U.S. citizens and still got registered to
vote. We call these checkbox noes.
Litigation that the Public Interest Legal Foundation has
brought has revealed disturbing numbers of the checkbox noes,
registrations across the country where they tell the election
official they are not a citizen, and they still get registered
to vote.
Election officials are dropping the ball.
Finally, element four, a lack of transparency. Secrecy
preserves bad practices and fosters conspiratorial concerns.
When people do not know the truth, they think things up that
are not true, and that is why States have to comply with
section 8 of NVRA and disclose public records.
In 2024, it is no longer an open question whether foreign
nationals are registering and voting. Anyone who would try to
argue otherwise has not read the data. We have documented the
problems.
We have documented the Middle Eastern immigrant whose green
card was revoked in Pennsylvania after PennDOT offered him
registration in an unfamiliar language. He lost 7 years of his
life trying to clear his name until Pennsylvania admitted to a
mass glitch in the motor voter system.
We have documented the Sudanese refugee in Pittsburgh who
was given an English voter registration form at a time when he
needed an interpreter.
We found records of a San Francisco college student whose
coursework was disrupted because he mistook a Federal voter
drive for a campus election.
This is just a tiny sample of the stacks of documents that
we have available of victims, aliens who are in the green card
process, who have been sucked into the motor voter system,
registered to vote, and jeopardized their legal status in the
United States.
People are registering through a broken motor voter system.
They are victims to this broken system, and Congress can fix it
through a few basic simple fixes.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Adams follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF J. CHRISTIAN ADAMS

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
Ms. Caitlin Sutherland is recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CAITLIN SUTHERLAND

Ms. Sutherland. Chairman Steil, Ranking Member Morelle, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the invitation and
opportunity to testify before you today. My name is Caitlin
Sutherland, and I am the executive director of Americans for
Public Trust, a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization dedicated
to restoring trust in government by holding politicians and
political groups accountable.
Since our founding in 2020, APT has devoted extensive
resources to uncovering, mapping, and publicizing outside money
and influence in politics and policy.
Americans should have every confidence that their elections
are free from foreign interference and influence, but
unfortunately a significant source of foreign cash is flowing
into politics from a Swiss billionaire named Hansjorg Wyss.
Multiple press outlets have confirmed Mr. Wyss is a foreign
national, but do not just take their word for it. Listen to
what Mr. Wyss has said about the matter.
In 2011, Mr. Wyss told a Swiss newspaper that he, quote,
``never felt the need to become an American,'' end quote. He
claimed he found the process too, quote, ``complicated,'' end
quote, and instead preferred to call himself, quote, ``a
spiritual dual citizen,'' end quote.
Despite Mr. Wyss' disinterest in becoming an American
citizen, he made it a personal goal to influence American
politics. According to a biography written by his own sister,
Mr. Wyss' goal is to, quote, ``reinterpret the American
Constitution in the light of progressive politics,'' end quote.
How is Mr. Wyss, who is not a U.S. citizen and therefore
prohibited from directly and indirectly influencing our
elections, doing just that?
Well, first, in the 1990's and early aughts, he, seemingly
illegally, gave more than $100,000 directly to candidates and
committees. Mr. Wyss' direct giving pales in comparison to his
current and preferred method of influencing our politics: his
nonprofits.
Mr. Wyss uses his two nonprofits, the Wyss Foundation, a
501(c)(3), and the Berger Action Fund, formerly called the Wyss
Action Fund, a 501(c)(4), to fund liberal groups across the
Nation. He has used these two nonprofits to pump almost half a
billion dollars in the U.S. political system.
In his biography, Mr. Wyss' sister explicitly detailed his
ability to, quote, ``exert an influence on American domestic
politics through his foundations,'' end quote.
If this sounds like a staggering amount of money from a
reclusive foreign billionaire and organizations that are far
from being household names, that is because it is all by
design.
Again, while speaking to foreign media, Mr. Wyss admitted
that he was fighting laws in Arizona that, quote, ``give police
too many rights,'' end quote, working to nominate progressive
Federal judges, and funding abortion clinics.
The catch, he also bragged that his, quote, ``name never
appears,'' end quote, linked to his efforts.
In fact, the Associated Press described Berger Action Fund
as, quote, ``a nondescript name for a group with a rather
specific purpose: steering the wealth of Hansjorg Wyss, a Swiss
billionaire, into the world of American politics and policy.''
How exactly in his own words does he exert an influence?
According to The New York Times, Mr. Wyss', quote, ``political
activism is channeled through a daisy chain of opaque
organizations that mask the ultimate recipients of his money.''
The most opaque of those organizations is a little known group
called the Sixteen Thirty Fund, which, according to Bloomberg,
serves as, quote, ``a clearinghouse for the left,'' end quote,
and has also received $243 million from Mr. Wyss.
Sixteen Thirty Fund bankrolls efforts to elevate President
Biden's agenda, fund Supreme Court nomination fights, invest in
massive, voter-turnout operations, engages in issue-advocacy
campaigns against vulnerable Republican Senators and
Representatives, and has funneled nearly $100 million and
counting into State ballot issues across 25 States.
That is right: The same group that has received around a
quarter of a billion dollars from a foreign national turns
around and spends it on Geo TV, voter registration, super PACs,
and ballot issues.
These foreign influence loopholes must be closed. Foreign
nationals are already barred from donating to candidates
directly. Why should all these vehicles that influence our
elections be any different?
American elections should be for American citizens.
Stopping foreign nationals, whether they be a reclusive Swiss
billionaire or a Communist dictator, from funding U.S. policy
fights is a simple step to take.
In his 1796 farewell address, George Washington cautioned
that, quote, ``Foreign influence is one of the most baneful
foes of republican government,'' end quote. Over 200 years
later, that sentiment remains true. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sutherland follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF CAITLIN SUTHERLAND

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you. The gentlewoman yields back.
Mr. Michael Walden is recognized for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL WALDMAN

Mr. Waldman. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Morelle, Members
of the Committee, Americans are concerned about the health of
our democracy and rightly so.
Ever since our Nation was founded in the Declaration of
Independence on the idea that government is legitimate only
when it rests on the consent of the governed, we have
struggled, over decades and centuries, to live up to that
ideal, to make sure that our ability to have self-government
extends to all eligible Americans.
All of us, whatever our views, should care and fight for
elections that are free and fair and secure.
In the sweep of American history, the rise of the election-
denier movement is extremely disturbing. Never before has there
been an organized political force determined and devoted to
undermining public trust in our system and in our elections in
this manner.
Now, in 2020, we heard wild stories of voting machines
flipping votes, of boxes of ballots, of ballot paper that
supposedly had bamboo fibers in it to prove it came from China.
This year, we are hearing the beginning of wild stories
about widespread, huge numbers of noncitizens voting in Federal
elections. Let us be clear: This is an urban myth. It is a
conspiracy theory. It is not true.
Why is it happening now? It is being pushed preemptively, I
believe, to set the stage for undermining the legitimacy of the
2024 election. This year, the big lie is being predeployed.
It is the basis for the SAVE Act and what we believe is an
unnecessary and misguided piece of legislation.
As we have heard, it is illegal today for noncitizens to
vote in Federal elections--very illegal. States have a
multiplicity of procedures in place to detect and prevent it.
As a result, noncitizen voting in Federal elections is
vanishingly rare.
Now, this legislation would essentially require citizens,
eligible voters, to produce a birth certificate or a passport,
or a naturalization papers in some instances, to vote. These
are documents that many millions of Americans do not have--
eligible voters, citizens do not have.
Now, Speaker Mike Johnson, as we have heard, said recently
on the Capitol steps that we all know that intuitively this all
must be happening, as he said, quote, ``but it has not been
something that is easily provable.''
In fact, it is easily disprovable. Any individual who
illegally registers or votes in a Federal election leaves a
paper trail. They are handing the evidence of their crime over
to the government.
There is--these records are publicly available to all for
scrutiny, and as I said, governments have ample opportunity to
find, detect, and prevent this kind of action.
There are real problems in our electoral system--challenges
to our elections, disinformation and deepfakes driven by AI,
racially motivated voter suppression, a broken campaign finance
system, gerrymandering by both political parties.
Congress should act to address these and other real
challenges. We urge the Congress to enact the Freedom to Vote
Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Act. Together they would
modernize our elections, set national standards, address
gerrymandering and dark money and funds from outside the
country, and restore the full strength of the Nation's most
effective civil rights law.
At the very least, we urge Congress to act, on a bipartisan
basis, as it has before, to provide funds for election
officials to do the very work of securing election integrity
and securing accurate lists, voter rolls, and running these
elections in upcoming appropriations, as has been in the case
in previous years.
We can do this. We can bolster election integrity while
ensuring free and fair elections. We can do this if we rely on
facts--not fear--facts, not, quote, intuition.
Congress has done this before. It should do it again, and
we urge you to reject measures that would undermine faith in
our system and disenfranchise many eligible voters, and instead
come together for reforms that would improve our system and
continue our march toward that system envisioned by the
Constitution and the Declaration of Independence.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Waldman follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF MICHAEL WALDMAN

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
I will begin our questions today, followed by the Ranking
Member. We will then alternate between parties. I recognize
myself for 5 minutes for the purpose of asking our witnesses
questions.
Mr. Christian Adams, I want to start with you. Federal law
makes it a felony for noncitizens to vote in Federal elections.
Is that correct?
Mr. Adams. It is.
Chairman Steil. Federal law also makes it a felony to
submit a voter form with false info, like citizenship, correct?
Mr. Adams. Correct.
Chairman Steil. Under the NVRA, National Voter Registration
Act, States are required to provide voter-registration
materials at various State offices, including those providing
public assistance, right?
Mr. Adams. Yes, it has one, but it is limited, the burden
on the States, but----
Chairman Steil. OK. How does the NVRA deal with the
situation when noncitizens receive public benefits like
driver's licenses? Do they get voter-registration materials?
Mr. Adams. Well, some States have started to cram in voter-
registration materials with those public-benefit applications
which are going to citizens and noncitizens alike.
Chairman Steil. OK. With that background then, the
situation in Pennsylvania, what did your organization learn
about the voter rolls when you brought the lawsuit in
Pennsylvania?
Mr. Adams. Yes, this is a disaster what happened in
Pennsylvania that has not gotten enough attention. Steve Dinan
of The Washington Times has written about it.
Pennsylvania was registering noncitizens for 20 years, and
they admit it. This is not subject to debate. The question is,
was it 10,000 or 100,000?
Chairman Steil. That needs to be fixed immediately in
Pennsylvania, correct?
Mr. Adams. Well, we are suing to see what they did to fix
it, and we are in the Third Circuit Court of Appeals. We have
already won summary judgment to get the records of the fix, but
Pennsylvania's playing keep away.
Chairman Steil. Thank you for that.
Let me shift to you, Mr. Hans von Spakovsky if I can. Ohio
recently announced that they did a review and found a hundred
noncitizens on their voter rolls. Is that accurate?
Mr. von Spakovsky. Yes.
Chairman Steil. Then, sticking with the topic of noncitizen
voting, is not it true that, this November, noncitizens that
reside in D.C. for simply 30 days can vote in D.C. municipal
elections?
Mr. von Spakovsky. That is correct.
Chairman Steil. D.C. also mails every registered voter a
ballot, correct?
Mr. Adams. Correct.
Chairman Steil. You are telling me that, in Washington,
D.C., if there is even a small clerical mistake, noncitizens
could be mailed a ballot with Federal races on them?
Mr. von Spakovsky. That is correct.
Chairman Steil. We have heard and we know it is a felony
for noncitizens to vote in Federal races, but the D.C. Board of
Elections held a call a few weeks ago, encouraging noncitizens
to vote in municipal elections and told the public it was on
the noncitizen to understand they cannot vote in the Federal
election, correct?
Mr. von Spakovsky. That is correct.
Chairman Steil. Then I want to go back, because we heard
from one of our other witnesses that noncitizen voting is a
myth, that there is no evidence of this. Was there a case where
there was a close election in the House of Representatives, and
Congress went back and studied whether or not noncitizens
actually pertook in that election or not?
Mr. von Spakovsky. There was, and, in fact, I brought the
report. This is the House Oversight Committee report from 1998,
and it was the investigation of the race between--between Bob
Dornan and Loretta Sanchez. Margin of victory, 979 votes.
Because the INS refused to give the Committee records, they
had to subpoena them, and when they compared the INS records to
the Orange County Register, they found clear and convincing
evidence that 624 aliens had registered and voted. They found
circumstantial evidence of 196 aliens who had registered and
voted. That is 820----
Chairman Steil. What did they have to do to be able to
cross-check that?
Mr. von Spakovsky. They had to check--take the INS records
and check it against the voter registration records.
Chairman Steil. Is this done in every election?
Mr. von Spakovsky. No, it is not done--it is not done at
all.
Chairman Steil. Well, we were told there was a paper trail.
We were told by another witness that there was a paper trail.
You are telling me that this paper trail only came because
Congress subpoenaed the records in this case?
Mr. von Spakovsky. That is exactly right, and that is why,
as Secretary Byrd said, secretary of State need to be given
access to DHS records.
Chairman Steil. Secretary Byrd, if you were concerned--you
run solid elections in the State of Florida--but if you were
concerned that this was taking place, would you have the access
that Congress had in the review of the 1998 election?
Mr. Byrd. We do not have that access in a timely and
efficient manner.
Chairman Steil. Would you like the access to that?
Mr. Byrd. Absolutely.
Chairman Steil. It would make total sense to be able--we
were told that there is a paper trail--to allow you to go and
to review whether or not this is taking place, because as Hans
von Spakovsky just said, that, in the case where it was
reviewed, over 600 individuals were found to be noncitizens who
voted in that election. Is that correct?
I will come back to you, Hans von Spakovsky, on that.
Mr. von Spakovsky. It is, and it is against the law. I am
not aware that the U.S. Department of Justice investigated or
prosecuted a single one of those aliens who voted.
I have personal experience with this also. I was on the
Fairfax County Board of Elections, and in 2011, I asked the
General Registrar, ``Do you all check the DMV records to see
whether individuals who show up to get a driver's license''--
you know, here legally but they are aliens--``do you check to
see whether they've registered to vote.''
He said, ``Well, no, we do not do that.'' I said, ``You
need to do that.''
They checked; they found 278 individuals--this is just one
county in Virginia--who were aliens. They investigated; they
confirmed they were aliens. 117 of them had voted in prior
elections.
We took the 278 off the rolls, forwarded it to both the
local Commonwealth attorney because it is against the law in
Virginia. He did nothing about it.
Chairman Steil. The way that you are describing this sounds
a lot like, to me, that somebody's saying that there is nobody
speeding on the interState. I would say, ``Well, how do you
know then?'' They'd say, ``Well, it is very clear; the speed
limit is 70 miles per hour, so we know no one is going over 70
miles an hour, and the evidence of that is there are no
speeding tickets that have ever been issued,'' where if you
actually went and reviewed this, as was done in this case, what
we found was this is an actual and substantive problem,
exacerbated by the fact that places like Washington, D.C., are
allowing noncitizens to vote in municipal elections, do not
have proper controls to prevent them from voting in Federal
elections.
Then, as we look--a staffer on my Committee walked by this
ballot box in Washington, D.C., unlocked, unsecured. Does this
increase confidence in elections in your opinion, Mr. von
Spakovsky?
Mr. von Spakovsky. No. It implements a huge risk that
something could happen to those ballots. It could be stuffed
with ballots. Ballots could be stolen. I mean----
Chairman Steil. If Washington, D.C., Board of Elections, if
this is how they are operating their ballot box collection less
than 1 mile from where we sit right here, it gives me great
pause that there are not any clerical errors occurring as to
when they have noncitizens on the voting rolls in Washington,
D.C., being in a position to vote for Federal elections.
That should cause grave concern, which is why noncitizens
should not be voting in our elections, period, and it shows,
from the evidence here, is exactly why we should actually be
reviewing and enforcing the law as it relates to noncitizens
voting in our Federal elections.
Let me shift gears before I am done, quickly, to you, Ms.
Sutherland, on a slightly different topic about foreign funds
in U.S. elections.
Today, under current law, can foreign nationals pay for
activities like voter registration, ballot-harvesting, and get-
out-the-vote activities.
Ms. Sutherland. Yes.
Chairman Steil. That is really concerning. We already saw
the massive problems associated with Zuckerbucks in the 2020
election. We have held hearings on it here and flushed out
those concerns. Congress needs to close that loophole.
Now, does not Federal law generally prohibit foreign
nationals from directly or indirectly spending money in U.S.
elections?
Ms. Sutherland. That is correct.
Chairman Steil. As your organization has documented,
foreign nationals are using nonprofits as a pass-through to
give to, often Democratic, super PACs. Is that correct?
Ms. Sutherland. That is correct.
Chairman Steil. Can you explain that problem briefly?
Ms. Sutherland. Absolutely. foreign nationals are
prohibited from contributing to super PACs directly, but there
is nothing prohibiting a foreign national from contributing to
a 501(c)(4) that then turns around and gives to a super PAC.
In fact, in 2020, we saw that the Sixteen Thirty Fund, that
received tens of millions of dollars from a foreign national,
turned around and contributed $60 million to a pro-Biden super
PAC.
Chairman Steil. Exactly the problem. When we had the FEC
Commissioners in here, Democrats and Republicans alike, all
agreed that we should close that loophole.
I have introduced legislation to do just that, Preventing
Foreign Interference in American Elections Act. I would love to
see a full vote in favor by all 12 Members of this Committee.
I think it is essential, as we are looking at foreign
interference in our elections, that we come together to close
that loophole that you just identified, that every FEC
Commissioner that testified before us said should also be
closed.
This should be a no-brainer, and I hope to have that done
before this November's election.
I thank all of you for being here today. I yield back, and
I will now recognize the Ranking Member for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think this Committee
has already acted on that bill, I thought unanimously. I could
be mistaken, but I would be happy to work with you on it. I
think that is an important thing that we should work on.
I do ask for unanimous consent to enter into the record an
article published this morning by Reuters entitled ``Trump
Allies Laying the Ground Work to Contest Potential Election
Loss,'' which reports that Trump and his allies are laying--
planting seeds of doubt about the election, including the
introduction of this bill. I will ask for unanimous consent----
Chairman Steil. Without objection. Without objection.
[The Reuters article referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Morelle [continuing]. to include that in the record.
I said in my opening statement, and I will make clear
again, everyone watching should be clear. This hearing is not a
serious effort to stop noncitizens from voting, which does not
happen and is already illegal, as I think everyone has
testified.
We know it again because of what the Speaker said. He
admitted they have no evidence. Even what is being talked about
here, he did not suggest that as evidence during his press
conference.
He said we actually intuitively know it. I think--I think
others would agree--there is an effort to help the former
President capture the Presidency.
We should be clear about what a Trump Presidency would
bring to this country. To do so, we need to look no further
than Project 2025, which is an extremist 920-page manifesto,
embraced by the Trump campaign, to reshape the Federal
Government into an arch-Conservative Christian nationalist
autocracy.
Project 2025, organized by The Heritage Foundation, calls
on a second Trump administration to massively expand the power
of the Presidency and the power of the government over
Americans' daily lives, and it outlines how a future Trump
Department of Justice will prevent women nationwide from
accessing healthcare, including access to abortion.
In fact, Donald Ayer, a Republican Deputy Attorney General
of the United States under George H.W. Bush, said that Project
2025 is full of, quote, ``ideas that are designed to let Donald
Trump function as a dictator. He really wants to destroy any
notion of the rule of law in this country and is now preparing
to do a bunch of things totally contrary to the basic values we
have always lived by. If Trump were to be elected and implement
some of the ideas he is apparently considering, no one in this
country would be safe.''
That is a Republican former Deputy Attorney General of the
United States.
How does this all tie in to today's hearing? Well, the
majority has called one of the leading architects of Project
2025 to testify on behalf of their bill. I really have to give
you credit for saying the quiet part out loud.
My majority colleagues are not even trying to hide what
they intend to do. They invited the architects of a day one
dictator plan to this hearing, and I think it shows how extreme
and undemocratic the entire exercise is, and the American
public deserve a full transparency about what the Trump
campaign is planning, what the majority witness and his
organization is planning.
I would like to, with unanimous consent, introduce for the
record ``Mandate for Leadership, the Conservative Promise,
Project 2025,'' into the record.
Chairman Steil. Without objection.
[Project 2025 follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Morelle. Mr. Waldman, let me ask you, are you familiar
with Project 2025?
Mr. Waldman. I am.
Mr. Morelle. If this hearing is meant to help Donald Trump
contest the outcome of the 2024 election--and it most certainly
is--then plans like this Project 2025 and Conservative
activists, like those called by the majority, are preparing to
assist Donald Trump's administration implement catastrophic
policies that Americans fundamentally oppose.
By your estimation, how would Project 2025 damage American
democracy and the rule of law?
Mr. Waldman. Well, Project 2025 lays out, in audacious
detail, a blueprint for an expansion of Presidential power
unlike any we have seen in our history. It is not just a policy
agenda for Conservative policies on taxes or the environment.
It would fundamentally reshape checks and balances in the
constitutional system. It would give a blueprint for the
President taking control of the Justice Department and the FBI,
for the President taking control of independent agencies.
It would encouple with other agendas, such as schedule F,
which would involve the purging of the Federal workforce of
many civil servants to be replaced by political loyalists or
the use of the Insurrection Act as a basis either for crackdown
on opposition or as a basis for very aggressive seizing of
noncitizens, and as articulated by former President Trump, a
whole host of things, all taken together, would change the
nature of American Government to something very different from
what the Founders intended or what any of us would be
comfortable with.
Mr. Morelle. You know, the unsubstantiated fearmongering
about insecure elections, voter fraud, that we heard in the
days, weeks, and months leading up to the January 6th deadly
attacks on the Capitol, you know, we have heard this before,
and I wonder--again, Mr. Waldman, if you want to comment--do
you see any parallels between this effort now to suggest that
there is rampant fraud in Federal elections as a pretext for
2024?
Mr. Waldman. It is not a mistake that it is happening now.
It is, as I said, the big lie is being predeployed. In 2020,
the election deniers were improvisational and somewhat
slapdash.
Now it is very well organized, and it is very well funded,
and it is thought out well in advance to try to set the stage
for challenging the legitimacy of elections.
As we know, Donald Trump in 2016 said that he had really
won the popular vote if you could deduct the millions of
noncitizens who voted, he said. These were, evidently,
invisible people because nobody ever saw them, and there was
never any proof. That was an election he won.
He did the same thing with other charges in 2020, and it is
important to note too, that this myth of widespread, tens of
thousands, hundreds of thousands, of noncitizen voters, was
deployed in 2020 as well. Rudy Giuliani lost his law license in
part because of his lies about noncitizen voting in Arizona--
lies, I should note, that were repeated by President Trump on
the Ellipse as he sent the crowd up to the Capitol.
This was not the central argument then, but it is now.
Mr. Morelle. Very good. Thank you.
I thank you for giving me the extra time, Mr. Chair. I
yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Mrs. Bice is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I want to
address a comment that was made prior, in opening statements,
to Mr. Waldman.
You mentioned that you felt like there were not massive
numbers of illegals voting, and this should not be a focus. I
think with more than 7 million illegals crossing into the
United States in the last 3 or plus years, it is our duty that
we ensure that we are protecting the integrity of the election
system. That is why we are here today, is to ensure that that
does not happen.
Yes, we have identified--Mr. Adams has identified--areas
where this is occurring, but to suggest that we should not be
focused on this because it is not happening now, I think, is
misguided.
Mr. von Spakovsky, in jurisdictions that allow noncitizens,
like Washington, D.C., to vote, will noncitizens be on the same
voter-registration lists as citizens?
Mr. von Spakovsky. As far as I know, they will be. If I
could just quickly mention, the only requirement is to be a
resident for 30 days. That means the Ambassador from Russia, a
tyrannical regime trying to obliterate Ukraine, could easily
register and vote in that election.
Mrs. Bice. Should Federal law require these jurisdictions
to have two separate lists and two separate ballots to ensure
that this type of situation does not happen?
Mr. von Spakovsky. Yes, they should. Otherwise, aliens may
be voting, even when they should not be, in Federal elections.
Mrs. Bice. Can you talk a little bit about the proposal
that you have been championing which requires Federal district
courts to transmit the names of dismissed noncitizen jurors to
the State's chief election officials?
Mr. von Spakovsky. Sure. In 2005, I think it is, GAO
actually did a study on this. They were looking at information
that might help--be helpful to State election officials.
They surveyed a number of Federal district courts, and one
Federal district court said, well, I think it was a 2-year
period, about 3 percent of the individuals been called for jury
duty had been excused because they were not U.S. citizens.
Remember, you have to swear under oath, when you are
answering questions like that.
Obviously, that information should have been sent back to
State election officials because those district courts also all
confirmed, where were they getting their list of potential
voters in places like Atlanta and Arizona? From the State
election officials.
Clearly, these were all individual aliens who were
registered to vote, excused from Federal jury duty, yet the
information was not getting back to election officials.
Mrs. Bice. I want to pivot back just briefly with Ms.
Sutherland's discussion on foreign interference in our
elections through these (c)(4) organizations, and I want to
enter into the record--I ask unanimous consent to enter a
report from the People United for Privacy on the impacts of
foreign donor reporting schemes.
Chairman Steil. Without objection.
[People United for Privacy report follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Adams, I want to move over to you. The National Voter
Registration Act exempted two States from requirements for
registration. Can you tell us a little bit about that process?
Mr. Adams. Sure. I have had the pleasure, I guess, of
reading the congressional Record from 1993, and one of the
issues was an exemption. There were seven States at the time--
Maine has since been unexempted--but the seven States--New
Hampshire, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Idaho, Wyoming, and North
Dakota--were exempted from the NVRA originally because they
have same-day registration. They had same-day registration.
North Dakota does not even have voter registration. They were
exempted.
We actually brought a lawsuit in Minnesota and Wisconsin in
the last week to question that as an unequal sovereignty issue,
that we are trying to get public records, because you cannot
get public records in Wisconsin, especially from WEC and--not
easily at least. We are trying to get public records in
Wisconsin and challenging that exemption.
Mrs. Bice. If Congress were to amend the Voter Registration
Act, as some are thinking about doing, how would it work in
these States that are exempt?
Mr. Adams. Right. I think Congress should strongly consider
ending the exemption because these States are already doing the
motor voter registration generally, right. They are complying
with what the Democrats wanted in 1993, but they are not
complying with the Dole compromise of 1993, which was to make
them subject to public inspection and to have clean voter
rolls.
Those six States are exempted from the clean voter roll
obligation that I think Congress should seriously take a look
at.
Mrs. Bice. I think the big issue that I have is, as we are
looking at this holistically, is that the voter rolls are not
being cleaned up, which is causing some of the issues that we
are seeing, and certainly, we need to be addressing that.
With that, Mr. Chairman, my time is about up. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
Ms. Sewell is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Sewell. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here.
As the author of the John Robert Lewis Voting Rights
Advancement Act and as the Ranking Member of the Election
Subcommittee, there is nothing more important to me than making
sure that every eligible American has a right to vote and equal
access to the ballot box.
Having said that, it is quite disturbing to me to listen to
some of the allegations that are going on but, more
importantly, the concerted, intentional effort, as you said,
Mr. Waldman, to actually well-fund efforts to subvert the will
of the people for the 2024 election.
I know that in Alabama, where I am from, there is this
belief that there is widespread fraud, and I know that the
Brennan Center has done multiple studies about the fact that
that is rare.
You, in fact, said that the incidence of non-Americans
voting--I do not like to say illegal aliens--just non-Americans
voting is miniscule and rare, yet other witnesses have
suggested that it happens in Virginia, and it happens in
Florida. I wanted to know what your rebuttal is to that.
Mr. Waldman. Over the decades, there have been billions of
votes cast by Americans, and, overwhelmingly, our system is
secure. As the Department of Homeland Security, Donald Trump's
own Department of Homeland Security, said in 2020, it was the
most secure election in American history.
There is a multiplicity of systems in place that have been
developed over the years to ensure that noncitizens are not
voting in Federal elections, to ensure that only eligible
citizens are.
Unfortunately, we continue to see, over and over again,
proposals that would make it harder for eligible citizens to
vote. I will note that----
Ms. Sewell. Especially after the Shelby v. Holder decision
where we saw a flood of States making it harder for people to
vote, Americans to vote.
Mr. Waldman. We have now new evidence compiled by political
scientists at the Brennan Center from a dataset of a billion
voter records, nearly a billion voter records, that the States
that used to be covered by the strong Voting Rights Act----
Ms. Sewell. Like Alabama.
Mr. Waldman. Alabama and other States before Shelby County
in 2013 have seen a much wider growth in the gap between voter
participation rates by White voters and non-White voters, which
suggests the impact of that decision.
Ms. Sewell. Let us talk about the SAVE Act that is
currently being discussed. I personally think that it is trying
to delegitimize votes by those who are of color, whether that
is Black, Latino, Asian, Native American, let alone to allow
them to cast a vote.
Can you talk a little bit about the SAVE Act and why you
think that this is so destructive?
Mr. Waldman. Well, you are exactly right. We all should be
making sure that our voter rolls are secure and accurate and
that only eligible people can vote.
Ms. Sewell. To be clear, all of us want to make it easier
to vote and harder to cheat. Don't we all?
Mr. Waldman. We all do, among many other things.
The ERIC system, where States compared voter rolls, was the
most effective way to assure accurate rolls, and other
conspiracy theories and other scare stories prompted States to
pull out of that, actually setting back the cause of election
security.
When you look at the proposal for documentary proof of
citizenship, which sounds like a kind of an anodyne idea,
again, what that means in practice is a certified birth
certificate or a passport or maybe naturalization papers, and
many millions of Americans just do not have that.
We did a study in 2006 and, at that point, found it was 13
million Americans. When you think about not only that people do
not have these--most Americans--or at least about half
Americans do not have a passport. They are not summering to the
south of France.
Ms. Sewell. You know, my State, along with a lot of other
States, imposed photo ID laws, and they prescribed in their
State laws which photos are acceptable and which are not. I
found it to be appalling that my State refused to take a
student's license but would accept a gun permit license, and
yet we are choosing winners and losers.
At the end of the day, I have had lots of my constituents
talk to me about--especially the elderly or the disabled who do
not drive anymore, who do not have valid IDs, according to
these papers, but yet they have a validly Federal ID, which is
called a Social Security card that everybody has that is an
American, and I think that it is really appalling that we are
spending our time talking about this effort when the reality is
we need to fully fund Federal elections.
I think you touched upon that. We have the Federal
Elections Commission, but we also have the Election Assistance
Commission, and they are not funded. Actually, we zero out
their budget. Can you talk a little bit about that in the time
remaining?
Mr. Waldman. Yes. Over the years, Congress, on a bipartisan
basis, has provided support, robust support for State election
administration, which is so vital to our country. It has not
done so recently, and we think that the next appropriations
bill----
Ms. Sewell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, sir.
I wanted to also just ask for unanimous consent to add four
things to the record: an article in The Hill by Ranking Member
Morelle published today entitled ``Republicans Are Already
Trying to Undermine the 2024 Election''; a letter from the
Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights and the
Declaration for American Democracy Coalition opposing the SAVE
Act; as well as an article from The Washington Post entitled
``Mike Johnson's Telling Comment on GOP's Lack of Voter Fraud
Evidence''; and, last, an article from the Votebeat entitled
``Documents Show Republican-Led States Struggling to Clean
Voter Rolls After Leaving ERIC.''
Can I please submit them?
Chairman Steil. Without objection.
[The articles and letter referred to follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Loudermilk is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Election integrity ranks in the top three issues that are
most important to Americans across the board. I mean, this is
Republicans, Democrats, and independents. This is not a
partisan issue. This is an election integrity issue.
When we allow someone who is not legally authorized to vote
in this country to make decisions that are incredibly important
to the safety, the security, and the economic viability of
Americans, we undermine and undercut the value of each and
every individual vote, whether Republican, Democrat,
Independent, or whatever.
This is extremely important to both sides. This is not a
political issue, or it should not be. This should be an issue
that I would venture to say, 10 years ago, 20 years ago, we
would not be having this debate on a partisan basis. We would
be looking for solutions to make sure every American,
regardless of race, creed, religion, whatever, that their vote
counts and is not discredited by someone who should not be
voting.
We have a couple of bills that are trying to address these,
and Mr. von Spakovsky, I want to ask you about your thoughts
regarding Representative Roy's recently introduced SAVE Act. I
know he is trying to address this. We have the ASAC that we
have worked on for a long time in this Committee.
Regarding the SAVE Act, do you think it gives States the
right tools to prevent noncitizens from registering to vote?
Mr. von Spakovsky. Yes, of course, they do. The impediments
that have been put in their way to prevent them from doing that
need to be eliminated.
By the way, can I just say very quickly, all of these
claims that, for example, States requiring proof of citizenship
is somehow going to suppress and keep people from voting, that
is exactly the same kind of mythical claims that have been made
against voter ID for more than a decade. Yet the turnout
numbers show, particularly in your State of Georgia, first time
in Presidential election ID 2008, the turnout numbers show it
did not suppress votes. You had record registration, record
voting of all voters, including minority voters in your State.
Mr. Loudermilk. If I may add on to that, the voter ID
requirement, my understanding, and you may confirm this, is
that is a bipartisan issue. It ranks very highly among Democrat
voters as well. Am I correct?
Mr. von Spakovsky. The polling universally, it does not
matter whether you go to a Rasmussen poll or Washington Post
poll, the polling shows that Americans simply do not believe
this idea that somehow it is going to keep people from voting.
Overwhelmingly, voters say that is a commonsense
requirement, and it does not matter which political party they
are a member of or what their race or ethnicity is.
Mr. Loudermilk. Voter rolls I think are the key to most of
this, and we still, I hear quite often people telling me they
have moved out of State. I hear from people that have moved
from Georgia, from another State, and they are still getting
ballots from their previous State.
Does the SAVE Act go far enough with their mandatory list
provisions, maintenance provisions?
Mr. von Spakovsky. Oh, I think it is a good start on
helping to fix that problem. There are more things that States
could be doing. As Secretary Byrd can tell you, Florida, for
example, is now entering into agreements with other States to
compare and share their voter registration data to, in fact,
find people who are registered in more than one State, which
that is a problem, and more States need to be encouraged to do
that.
Mr. Loudermilk. You touched on this a few minutes ago, and
it is regarding data bases. Are there additional data bases
that States should have access to, to get the information they
need to remove non-citizens from their rolls? I mean, you have
already talked about jury duty, but what data bases should they
be able to access?
Mr. von Spakovsky. Well, we have mentioned the SAVE system.
We have also mentioned E-Verify. Those who think that is
enough, it is not, and the reason for that is, look, DHS is
going to have in its records aliens who are here legally,
aliens who are here illegally who have been detained. Aliens
who have gotten into the country, have never been detained,
never been processed, are not going to be in it.
In fact, again, if you look at this report from 1998, the
Committee says, ``Look, we found 820 aliens who were in the INS
records who were registered to vote, but this only''--
documented aliens. They said that leaves open the question,
well, how many aliens were registered who had never been
processed or caught by the INS?
Mr. Loudermilk. Well, thank you. I appreciate that.
Let me just close with this--my time is up--that what we
are trying to do here is to ensure that an election not only
cannot be stolen but the accusation of that will never happen
again.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Kilmer is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Chairman.
My first question is for Mr. Waldman. I appreciate the
concerns you raise in your testimony about the capacity of
foreign adversaries to interfere in American elections. You
know, one of the things that I have been looking at quite a bit
is the fact that, right now, if any of us run ads on TV or ads
on the radio, there are certain disclosure requirements. You
get to know who paid for that ad. There is, you know, in
essence, the public file where people can see the information
about that ad.
That is not true for internet-based advertisement. You
know, why is that a problem? Well, one, we know that more and
more political spending is migrating into that arena. Two, we
know from declassified reports by the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence that Russia, China, Iran, and others have
sought to influence public perception of candidates through the
internet.
We have a bipartisan, bicameral bill called the Honest Ads
Act to try to close that gap, and it simply would provide the
same accountability and transparency standards that exist for
TV and radio and apply them to the internet.
What do you think?
Mr. Waldman. Thank you for your leadership in the
introduction of the Honest Ads Act. We think it is very
important. This year, we think that up to 30 percent of
spending on political ads will be online, and the protections
that were in place in an era of broadcast TV and antennas on
the top of your set are not enough for the digital era and
especially the era that we are moving into with all the risks
of disinformation and deepfakes and everything else.
We think that the Honest Ads Act, which is bicameral and
bipartisan, should be an urgent priority. I should note that
important elements of it are also in the Freedom to Vote Act as
part of that significant upgrade of the American electoral
system.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks.
I just commend to any of my colleagues here, I am happy to
share information with you about that bill because I think to
me it is a commonsense how do we keep foreign actors from
trying to mess with our elections.
I want to stick with you. You know, I share some of the
concerns you have raised about the impacts of the SAVE Act on
eligible voters in the U.S. You know, when I think about some
of these issues regarding voter engagement and access to the
ballot box, I think about my grandma.
We called her Oma. She was a remarkable woman. She survived
two World Wars. She was liberated by allied soldiers and came
to this country from the Netherlands in 1948. She built a life
here. She became an American citizen at the age of 87 because
she wanted to vote. She lived until just south of 109 years
old. She was an incredibly proud voter. As a person who was
born 10 years before women's suffrage in this country, she was
an incredibly proud voter.
I think about some of these bits of legislation sort of
through her perspective, right. She became a citizen at 87. At
her age, she did not have a passport because, from her
perspective, she was too old to travel anywhere. She did not
have a driver's license. She had never driven.
You can buy a photo ID in the State of Washington, but it
now costs 54 bucks. That is a poll tax, right. That is a poll
tax, right.
You know, when I think about some of these requirements,
like, I think about, you know, does it pass my Oma test.
You know, I also think about some of the Tribes in my
district. I represent a district with 12 Tribes. Folks from
Tribal Nations have every right to participate in our democracy
and the voting process; however, Tribal enrollment cards, which
are used in Washington State as official identification, do not
necessarily contain information about citizenship.
Folks from Tribal Nations should not also be forced to pay
poll tax to participate in democracy.
I would love to get your thoughts and just have you share
more about impacts of this SAVE Act when it comes to voters'
access to what is their right.
Mr. Waldman. Well, you are exactly right that there are so
many voters who have been voting for decades who are eligible
voters who would be adversely affected by a requirement that
you show a passport or certified birth certificate or
naturalization papers to vote. These are people who have been
living up to their responsibility to vote, like your
grandmother, over so many years who would suddenly find
themselves unable to do so.
In the States where this was briefly in effect, we saw tens
of thousands of eligible voters being unable to vote.
Mr. Kilmer. Eligible voters.
Mr. Waldman. Yes.
You mentioned Tribal voters from Tribal Nations are much
less likely, for example, as I understand it, to have birth
certificates of a kind that would be treated as acceptable
here.
I am not opposed and we are not opposed, for example, to
voter ID. What we are opposed to is requiring ID that lots of
people do not have. If we want to have a system that is secure
and fair, that only eligible voters can vote, it is easy to do.
Unfortunately, these proposals, and this one is one of them,
are crafted in such a way to make it harder for some people to
vote.
In addition, more and more we are seeing rumors spread by
leaders----
Chairman Steil. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Waldman [continuing]. to make people doubt the veracity
of their elections.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you.
Thanks. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Carey is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carey. I want to thank the Chairman.
I want to thank my dear friend, the Ranking Member, for
doing this hearing today.
I want to thank all of you for traveling in to do this
hearing.
Ms. Sutherland, I am going to focus a lot of my questions--
a lot of them are going to be parochial, as I am from the State
of Ohio, the great State of Ohio.
Can you talk a little about your organization's recent
report that the Sixteen Thirty Fund poured almost, if my
numbers are correct or the staff's numbers are correct, roughly
$15 million in 8 months in Ohio on different ballot
initiatives.
Can you kind of just discuss what that was for and where
that money came from?
Ms. Sutherland. That is right. The group in question, the
Sixteen Thirty Fund, is the same group that counts Hansjorg
Wyss as one of their top donors. They have been the beneficiary
of about a quarter of a billion dollars in foreign cash.
Sixteen Thirty Fund turns around and spends it on a lot of
things.
Mr. Carey. Let me ask you real quick, what is the Sixteen
Thirty Fund? What is it?
Ms. Sutherland. The Sixteen Thirty Fund is D.C.-based
501(c)(4).
Mr. Carey. It is not Ohio-based?
Ms. Sutherland. It is not Ohio-based.
Mr. Carey. It is spending all of this money in the State of
Ohio. Why is that?
Ms. Sutherland. Yes. Sixteen Thirty Fund targeted the State
of Ohio to make it easier to amend your State's constitution.
Mr. Carey. Again, not an Ohio organization but an
organization that is based out of D.C. that is targeting Ohio.
Am I correct with that?
Ms. Sutherland. That is correct.
Mr. Carey. Where are the funders?
Ms. Sutherland. Well, their top funders I have outlaid is--
--
Mr. Carey. Are they coming from Ohio?
Ms. Sutherland. They are actually coming from----
Mr. Carey. Are they not coming from Ohio? That is all I
want to know.
Ms. Sutherland. They are coming from, one of them, is
coming from Switzerland, a foreign national.
Mr. Carey. They are from Switzerland?
Ms. Sutherland. Yes.
Mr. Carey. You are targeting at Ohio?
Ms. Sutherland. Yes.
Mr. Carey. With $16 million.
How is that, and why is that right.
Ms. Sutherland. Well, so they are taking advantage of what
we have outlaid as this foreign influence loophole where
foreign nationals can give to ballot issues, both directly and
indirectly. What we have seen is Sixteen Thirty Fund and their
foreign-backed cash targeting Ohio.
Mr. Carey. Is not that wrong?
Ms. Sutherland. Absolutely.
Mr. Carey. Let me ask you this. How has the Ohio
legislature had any success in moving any legislation forward?
I mean, I know these individuals. They are very dear friends of
mine, but are they moving any legislation forward that
prohibits this conduct by foreign nationals?
Ms. Sutherland. I actually had the opportunity just a
couple months ago to testify in support of legislation in Ohio
that would close this foreign influence loophole to prohibit
foreign nationals from contributing to State ballot issues. It
actually passed the State senate, and it was actually recently
taken up again.
Ohio paired this legislation with getting Biden on the
ballot. Unfortunately, every single Democrat in the Ohio State
had voted to keep Joe Biden off the ballot in favor of keeping
the foreign dark money flowing in Ohio.
Mr. Carey. We have got two ballot initiatives. You know,
one is a redistricting ballot initiative, and one is a minimum
wage ballot so they can destroy the restaurants like they did
here in D.C. Tell me, do you think that is going to have a big
influence in terms of the amount of money that is going to go
into the State on these ballot initiatives?
Ms. Sutherland. Absolutely. What we also see on these State
ballot issues is that they are weaponized, and they turn out
the vote to shore up the vote to support these liberal-leaning
ballot issues and help the top of the ticket as well.
Mr. Carey. Let me just--I mean, I only have a minute and 26
seconds left, but so, if Congress or the Ohio legislature does
not act to prohibit this national involvement in our State or
local ballot initiatives between now and November--and you
pretty much said it, but I am going to let you get another
chance at the apple here--this conduct will continue. Am I
correct?
Ms. Sutherland. Absolutely.
Mr. Carey. In finalization, can you talk just a little bit
about what you are seeing in other States? I mean, I know Ohio.
$16 million is a lot of money. What are we seeing in some of
the other States?
Ms. Sutherland. We are seeing right now that the Sixteen
Thirty Fund is actively spending in many States. They are
actively spending in Ohio. They are actively spending in
Missouri, Nevada, and Montana.
Mr. Carey. Is there any reason--I mean, my goodness. Is
there any reason that they would be picking these States to
spend some money in? What do you think it is?
Ms. Sutherland. Yes. If you take a look at the States that
the Sixteen Thirty Fund has targeted for these ballot issues,
you can tell that they are key Presidential States and often
has a competitive U.S. Senate race concurrent with the ballot
issue that they are trying to advance.
Mr. Carey. All right. Well, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Mrs. Torres is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Chairman.
I think it seems like we have forgotten, you know, the fact
that the Russians have so much influence in our Presidential
election and that the former President and current candidate
for President, the Republican nominee, specifically asked the
Russians for help in his last election.
Here we are again witnessing another attempt to undermine a
free and fair and secure American election by continuing to sow
doubt ahead of the 2024 election.
I think that we should be clear about the credibility of
the Republican witnesses that we have in front of us today. I
ask, Mr. Chairman, for unanimous consent to enter into the
record two documents: one, an article from NBC, headline ``Vote
Fraud Crusader J. Christian Adams Sparks Outrage''; and an
article from the Law and Crime, headline ``Former Trump Voting
Commissioner Official Forced to Apologize for Falsely Accusing
People of Voter Fraud.''
[The articles referred to follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mrs. Torres. Mr. Adams has a history of making unfounded
allegations about illegal voting allegations that were so
egregious and so damaging to innocent people and families that
a Federal court had to step in, a Federal court in 2016 and
2017.
Mr. Adams published two reports called ``Alien Invasion in
Virginia'' that states that thousands of people, thousands of
people had illegally registered to vote in Virginia. The report
contained an appendix that contained the voter registration
forms of alleged noncitizens, including their names, home
addresses, and telephone numbers.
This blatant attempt to intimidate voters was so egregious
that a Federal court forced Mr. Adams to provide a written
apology on behalf of himself and his organization, PILF.
The Court also forced PILF to include the following
disclaimer: ``PILF recognizes that individuals in,'' you know,
exhibit whatever, ``were, in fact, in fact, citizens and that
these citizens did not commit felonies but were subject to your
abuse. PILF profoundly regrets any characterization of those
registrants as felons or instances of registration or voting as
felonies.''
It is stunning, stunning that this is the type of behavior
and witness that we have in front of us today and that the
majority has brought to us and that these are the witnesses you
seem to think have any credibility on any of these issues.
Mr. Waldman, it is exhausting to be in this Committee
dealing with these types of issues. To your knowledge, is there
any evidence that noncitizen voting has ever affected the
outcome, the outcome of any election?
Mr. Waldman. I am not aware of any evidence that noncitizen
voting has affected the outcome of any Federal elections.
I will note that the hearing record that Mr. von Spakovsky
keeps waving around is from a quarter century ago. Since then,
Congress passed the Help America Vote Act, and States happily
have vastly improved and greatly upgraded their systems, their
voter registration rolls, and the use of computers. Back then,
it was paper records.
States and officials of both parties have upgraded, and
they should not be subject to felony.
Mrs. Torres. Absolutely.
What would you estimate the chances of noncitizens voting
affecting the outcome of the 2024 upcoming election?
Mr. Waldman. There is no reason to think, based on facts,
not intuition, that noncitizen voting will affect the outcome
of this or any other Federal election of significance.
Mrs. Torres. Like millions of Americans, I was horrified,
Mr. Chairman, and disgusted by the violent, deadly attack on
the Capitol that happened on January 6, 2021. What made the
attack terrifying was that, on top of the threat to our
democracy and on top of the threat to the peaceful transfer of
power, the violent insurrection targeted us, Members of
Congress and staff who were here working that day.
It is our job, as Members of this Committee, to ensure that
nothing like this ever, ever happens again.
Mr. Waldman, is there any connection between the lies that
the former President and these witnesses or some of these
witnesses have stated in an attempt to steal the 2020 election
and the lies about noncitizens voting at this hearing is
spreading today? What would be the impact to this upcoming
election?
Mr. Waldman. False allegations about widespread misconduct
spurred the January 6th insurrection even though court after
court, 63 courts rejected it. It has spurred unwise voting
laws, and I am very worried it is going to be a factor in this
election.
Mrs. Torres. My time is up. Thank you.
I am going to yield back, but I am going to say, should
another insurrection occur, it will be at the hands of this
Committee membership that continues to spread lies about our
honest and free elections.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Lee is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to our
witnesses for your testimony and for being here with us today.
Secretary Byrd, I would like to return to your testimony
and hear more about the specific safeguards that Florida has in
place to prevent noncitizens from voting and what the Federal
Government needs to do to help equip State and local election
officials to conduct lawful, accurate elections.
In 2020, Florida's constitution was amended to specifically
ensure that only U.S. citizens can vote in Florida, correct?
Mr. Byrd. That is correct.
Ms. Lee. That passed with over almost 80 percent of the
vote in Florida. Is not that right?
Mr. Byrd. That is actually right.
Ms. Lee. Now, you testified earlier about something called
the SAVE data base that is in the possession of the Department
of Homeland Security, but you mentioned that it was both overly
expensive and inefficient, in essence, for State and local
election officials to use.
Would you tell us a little bit more about that data base
and some of the things that make it less than optimal for your
use as an election officials?
Mr. Byrd. Thank you. Yes, so the SAVE data base is both
inefficient due to time and in accuracy. It costs States, for
every transaction, and for some voters, it is multiple
transactions, so it is a financial burden on the States to gain
information that only the Federal Government has that we compel
the States to comply with under Federal law.
By the time an election can come and before we have had the
opportunity to gain all of the information, a noncitizen who
made it onto the rolls could gain access to the vote before we
have time to remove them.
Ms. Lee. Would it be helpful if there was not a fee
associated with accessing that data base?
Mr. Byrd. Absolutely.
Ms. Lee. In your opinion, should that data base and could
that data base be more complete and more accurate?
Mr. Byrd. Yes. It should be more accessible to every State
and to local voting administrators.
Ms. Lee. You also touched on information about when a
person is naturalized and then should be accessing, should be
an eligible voter. Is that information that is promptly and
reliably provided to you as an election official from the
Federal Government?
Mr. Byrd. It is not. That is one of the things that we are
requesting that Congress consider is making that information
available on a regular basis to States, everyone who is
naturalized, so we can run that data base of new citizens
against our existing voter registration roll.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Adams testified earlier about information that
exists in the Federal courts when individuals report for jury
duty. Is there information there as well that would be useful
to you if it were, in fact, provided to State and local
election officials?
Mr. Byrd. Yes. Any information that is in the possession of
any branch of the Federal Government regarding citizenship
status would be helpful to the States.
Ms. Lee. Are there other provisions of the NVRA that in
your view would be helpful if amended?
Mr. Byrd. Most significantly it is the issue of who has
become a naturalized citizen. Also, as you know as my
predecessor as secretary of the State of Florida, in a
Presidential election year, which we are in, there are three
periods: the Presidential preference primary, the primary in
August, and then the election in November.
There is a provision in the NVRA that prohibits States from
doing certain list maintenance 90 days before each of those
elections. That is 270 days out of this Presidential election
year in which States are prohibited from engaging in certain
voter list maintenance activity, and we think that should be
stopped.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Secretary Byrd.
Mr. Adams, I want to return to you. You featured very
prominently in some comments just a moment ago. I wanted to
give you an opportunity to share your perspective and respond.
Mr. Adams. Thank you, Representative Lee.
First of all, I see Representative Torres has hit and run.
This is endemic of cancel culture where anyone who talks about
these issues is attacked.
Her recitation of the record was grotesquely inadequate,
and, in fact, what we published were public records from the
Commonwealth of Virginia about noncitizens who were removed
from the rolls, or purported noncitizens.
I have here from Virginia's Department of Elections
commentary about our work. It said, ``It is worth noting there
were some issues that we had with delivery of the DMV
noncitizen file.'' They have since corrected these issues. In
other words, we found the problem in Virginia list maintenance
involving the improper cancellation of Americans.
Representative Torres, were she still here, should be glad
that public records have been corrected as a result of these
cases that we discovered.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
In consultation with the Ranking Member, we will each make
brief closing remarks before we conclude the hearing. I will
yield to the Ranking Member.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate you
giving me a couple minutes here just to gather some of my
thoughts.
I think one of the reasons I think we are so concerned
about this is there are already doubts being cast on the 2024
election by leading Republicans. Senator Lindsey Graham said he
would accept the results of the election only if there was no
massive cheating, which has never been proven, despite claims
in 2020.
Earlier this month, two of former President Trump's
potential running mates, Senator Tim Scott and Governor Doug
Burgum of North Dakota, declined to commit to accepting the
results.
Senator J.D. Vance of Ohio, I saw him on television the
other day at CNN, said he would only honor the outcome if the
election was free and fair, but Republicans should be ready to
pursue any problems.
The list goes on. Even my colleague from New York,
Representative Stefanik, refused to commit to certify voting
results in 2024.
Byron Donalds said he would not necessarily certify the
2028 election results if he were Vice President.
It goes on and on. We are panicked because, in the 250
years of this country's existence, in this Republic, people
have routinely, on both sides of the aisle, both sides of any
partisan debate, have always accepted election results, until
2020. The former President continues to this day to cast doubt.
In fact, one of the things I also wanted to point out is we
suggested authorizing up to $5 billion over the next 10 years
to put money into State and local elections to help local
election officials and State officials do the job to the best
of their ability and have not had support for that.
Frankly, even the ERIC tool, which is a nonpartisan
organization that helps States ensure security and integrity of
voter rolls by collecting data from various State sources,
including DMVs and election offices, you know, the former
President went on a rave about--sort of conspiracy-fueled about
ERIC and its partisanship with no evidence at all.
Because people feel compelled to follow every single thing
he says, they have to run like rats out of an aqueduct to try
to keep up with the insanity.
I have great respect for my colleague Laura Lee. She said
of ERIC in 2019 when she was Florida's secretary of State,
``Joining ERIC keeps Florida at the forefront of election
security and will help us ensure a fair and accurate election
in 2020 and beyond.''
I note then the former President said, ``We are not for
ERIC anymore.'' Your successor who is here, the secretary of
State, caused Florida to leave ERIC--the bipartisan,
nonpartisan effort to do this.
In fact, even you, Mr. Adams, a witness today, said there
was no adequate alternative to ERIC, declaring, this is a
quote, ``There is no replacement right now. People are trying
and hoping. I am hoping for a Lamborghini.'' Hopefully you got
one, I hope, Mr. Adams, for your sake. You even called out
snake oil salesmen pushing the nonexistent replacement to ERIC.
We are desperately concerned about notions that, even here
we are, 3 and a half years later, the former President
continuing to insist that there is fraud in a 2020 election
despite the countless lawsuits, all the evidence to the
contrary. We are still doing this, which is why we are panicked
about 2024.
To say this hearing, again, we believe is a pretext for
starting a reverse engineer of Y-2024: ``We are going to call
into question. We do not have any data about it.''
Frankly, there is so much we can be doing to ensure all
Americans vote. I apologize. I am taking a few extra seconds
here, and I appreciate that. We are just very, very concerned.
We know, for instance, that the research methodology of the
studies referenced by Mr. von Spakovsky's testimony were
immediately and convincingly rebutted upon publication by
experts of the survey data used in the study. It has been a
decade now, and in a decade since, the authors of that data
have not published a defense of their research that is
compelling enough to make it through review, peer review, or
surveys of any serious scrutiny.
I think we all know this. I hope my majority colleagues
know this. Some people might say that they just do not care. I
hope--no, honestly, I pray that this is not true.
As far as I can tell, none of the majority Members of this
Committee, the main Committee of jurisdiction for the bill that
we are talking about today attended the Speaker's now infamous
press conference to introduce the so-called SAVE Act, an
Orwellian name if I have ever heard one. That was last week.
As of 10 a.m. this morning, at least according to
Congress.gov, only one of the Members of this Committee has
signed on to the bill. I take that as a good sign. I hope this
means, at the very least, most of my colleagues on this
Committee are unwilling to entwine their names for posterity to
these obvious lies to this disgraceful effort to subvert and
downgrade our Republic. I think they know deep down, as I do,
what is happening here, and I think the rest of us know it too.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
I thank our witnesses for being here today. I think what we
have fleshed out is the real significant issue that noncitizen
voting is playing in instilling confidence in our elections. As
we have done over the course of the past 18 months in this
Committee, we have explored areas where we can improve our
confidence in our elections.
We did a hearing in Atlanta, Georgia, to show exactly what
took place when Georgia passed a voter integrity bill that
enhanced integrity in their elections. Contrary to what
President Biden claimed and many on the left claimed, what we
actually saw was great participation in Georgia, by many
analyses, participation actually increasing in the State.
The University of Georgia did a comprehensive study of that
election, and what we got back was great data, that people were
actually very pleased with how the elections were conducted and
operated, which tells me that, as we increase confidence in our
election, we actually increase participation.
What we have done is fleshed out, as Hans von Spakovsky has
shown us, this has been an issue that has plagued elections for
some time. In an election over 20 years ago, this House
Committee showed numerous noncitizens voting.
Then, in a more recent era, we have Washington, D.C.,
aggressively not only allowing noncitizens to vote, in
particular, for mayor and other key elections in the city but
so much as actively encouraging noncitizens to vote, so much so
sending out a postcard at taxpayer expense encouraging
noncitizens to vote in our Nation's Capital. To do so, one
would only need to reside in Washington, D.C., for 30 days.
As we look at ways to increase Americans' confidence in our
elections between now and the November election, I think this
should be an area where folks on the left should actually be
willing to work with us to make sure that we are addressing
these concerns, to maintain that U.S. elections are for U.S.
citizens, to remove noncitizens from the voter rolls, to secure
our election and increase Americans' confidence in their
election because I believe, as we increase confidence in our
elections, more individuals are willing to participate, and
more participation in our elections is a good thing.
Before we leave, I also have a real concern with what the
Biden administration has done, in particular, as it relates to
Executive Order 14.019. What they have done is worked to
weaponize all Federal agencies on behalf of President Biden's
reelection campaign.
I am sending a letter to every Cabinet official in the
Biden administration, in particular, as it relates to this
executive order. Our Federal agency should be focused on
serving the American people, not focused on reelecting
President Biden.
As we see the actions taken by this administration to
leverage taxpayer dollars for political purposes, that should
be concerning to all citizens.
I look forward to the reply from these letters from every
Cabinet Secretary in the Biden administration.
I appreciate all of our witnesses for being here. I
appreciate the Ranking Member and all Members of the Committee
for their participation.
Members of the Committee may have some additional questions
for our witnesses. We ask you to respond to those questions in
writing.
Without objection, each Member will have 5 legislative days
to insert additional material into the record or to revise and
extend their remarks.
If there is no further business, I want to thank the
Members for their participation.
Without objection, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:58 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
