- MARKUP OF H.R. 9488, H.R. 7764, H.R. 6394, H.R. 6969, H.R. 9489, H.R. 9487, and H.R. 6242

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MARKUP OF H.R. 9488, H.R. 7764, H.R. 6394,
H.R. 6969, H.R. 9489, H.R. 9487, and H.R. 6242

=======================================================================

MARKUP

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 11, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov
www.cha.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-756                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin, Chairman

BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOSEPH MORELLE, New York,
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia              Ranking Member
GREG MURPHY, North Carolina          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             NORMA TORRES, California
MIKE CAREY, Ohio                     DEREK KILMER, Washington
ANTHONY D'ESPOSITO, New York
LAUREL LEE, Florida

Mike Platt,  Staff Director
Jamie Fleet,  Minority Staff Director

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Opening Statements

Chairman Bryan Steil, Representative from the State of Wisconsin.     1
Prepared statement of Chairman Bryan Steil...................     2
Ranking Member Joseph Morelle, Representative from the State of
New York.......................................................     3
Prepared statement of Ranking Member Joseph Morelle..........     3

Submissions for the Record

House bill H.R. 9488.............................................     6
Chairman Steil's Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
9488...........................................................    12
House bill H.R. 7764.............................................    20
Chairman Steil's Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
7764...........................................................    31
House bill H.R. 6394.............................................    42
House bill H.R. 6969.............................................    47
House bill H.R. 9489.............................................    50
House bill H.R. 9487.............................................    53
House bill H.R. 6242.............................................    56

MARKUP OF H.R. 9488, H.R. 7764, H.R. 6394, H.R. 6969, H.R. 9489, H.R.
9487, and H.R. 6242

----------

September 11, 2024

Committee on House Administration,
House of Representatives,
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:19 a.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Bryan Steil
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Steil, Loudermilk, Bice, Carey,
D'Esposito, Lee, Morelle, Torres, and Kilmer.
Staff present: March Bell, General Counsel; Annemarie Cake,
Professional Staff and Deputy Clerk; Rachel Collins, Deputy
General Counsel; Alexander Deise, Parliamentarian; Thomas Lane,
Elections Counsel and Director of Elections Coalitions; Kristen
Monterroso, Legislative Clerk; Marissa Mullen, Deputy Director
of Member Services; Phillip Pinegar, Oversight Professional
Staff; Michael Platt, Staff Director; Elliot Smith, Director of
Oversight; Jordan Wilson, Director of Member Services; Khalil
Abboud, Minority Deputy Staff Director; Jamie Fleet, Minority
Staff Director; Sarah Nasta, Minority Senior Advisor and
Director; Matt Schlesinger, Minority Senior Counsel; and Sean
Wright, Minority Chief Counsel.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRYAN STEIL, CHAIRMAN OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WISCONSIN

Chairman Steil. The Committee on House Administration will
come to order.
I note that a quorum is present.
Without objection, the chair may declare a recess at any
time.
Today we will consider multiple pieces of legislation that
showcase the work of this Committee over the Congress. We will
consider legislation that will enhance election integrity,
something this Committee has been working on since the
beginning of the Congress.
As Chairman of this Committee, my focus has been on
increasing participation and restoring Americans' confidence in
our elections.
My bill, the Secure Handling of Internet Electronic
Donations, or the SHIELD Act, will do just that. The SHIELD Act
strengthens donor verification standards for political
committees.
Increasing election integrity should be a nonpartisan
issue, and I hope today's discussion will help prove that.
Other pieces of legislation we will be considering today
are also nonpartisan in nature.
Our first bill will sunset the Advisory Committee on the
Records of Congress. This Advisory Committee was established in
1990, a time when records management was not clearly
established for the legislative branch. The Advisory Committee
met its objective to set good management standards, which makes
it redundant to ongoing efforts in the House, the Senate, and
the Center for Legislative Archives. This legislation will save
taxpayer dollars while ensuring good legislative record
keeping.
The second bill will make small changes to the House Office
of Legislative Counsel. This office provides a critical
function--to take our ideas and craft them into legislation.
Specifically, this measure will designate one deputy to manage
this office should there be any vacancy with the Legislative
Counsel.
We will also be considering a bill to establish a
commission to study the potential transfer of the Weitzman
National Museum of American Jewish History to the Smithsonian
Institution.
Since 1976, the Weitzman National Museum of American Jewish
History, based in Philadelphia, served as the only museum in
our Nation dedicated to telling the full story of the American
Jewish experience.
This legislation would commission a study to determine the
feasibility of the Smithsonian Institution to incorporate the
Weitzman Museum into its collection.
Additional pieces of legislation that will be considered
will honor American values and our history. From honoring one
of our Founding Fathers with a publicly accessible statue in
the Capitol to the creation of a congressional time capsule,
each piece of legislation would preserve and honor this great
country's history.
I look forward to a thoughtful discussion on the
legislation before us today, and I yield.

PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION BRYAN STEIL

Today we will consider multiple pieces of legislation that
showcase the work of this Committee over the Congress. We will
consider legislation that will enhance election integrity,
something this Committee has been working on since the
beginning of the Congress.
As Chairman of this Committee, my focus has been on
increasing participation and restoring Americans' confidence in
our elections.
My bill, the Secure Handling of Internet Electronic
Donations, or the SHIELD Act, will do just that. The SHIELD Act
strengthens donor verification standards for political
committees.
Increasing election integrity should be a nonpartisan
issue, and I hope today's discussion will help prove that.
Other pieces of legislation we will be considering today
are also nonpartisan in nature.
Our first bill will sunset the Advisory Committee on the
Records of Congress. This Advisory Committee was established in
1990, a time when records management was not clearly
established for the legislative branch. The Advisory Committee
met its objective to set good management standards, which makes
it redundant to ongoing efforts in the House, the Senate, and
the Center for Legislative Archives. This legislation will save
taxpayer dollars while ensuring good legislative record
keeping.
The second bill will make small changes to the House Office
of Legislative Counsel. This office provides a critical
function--to take our ideas and craft them into legislation.
Specifically, this measure will designate one deputy to manage
this office should there be any vacancy with the Legislative
Counsel.
We will also be considering a bill to establish a
commission to study the potential transfer of the Weitzman
National Museum of American Jewish History to the Smithsonian
Institution.
Since 1976, the Weitzman National Museum of American Jewish
History, based in Philadelphia, served as the only museum in
our Nation dedicated to telling the full story of the American
Jewish experience.
This legislation would commission a study to determine the
feasibility of the Smithsonian Institution to incorporate the
Weitzman Museum into its collection.
Additional pieces of legislation that will be considered
will honor American values and our history. From honoring one
of our Founding Fathers with a publicly accessible statue in
the Capitol to the creation of a congressional time capsule,
each piece of legislation would preserve and honor this great
country's history.
I look forward to a thoughtful discussion on the
legislation before us today, and I yield.

I will now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle, for 5
minutes for the purpose of offering an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH MORELLE, RANKING MEMBER OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
NEW YORK

Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
convening today's markup.
I am pleased to see several important bills aimed at
improving legislative branch operations and supporting our
cultural institutions on the agenda, and as each bill is called
up I will offer some very, very brief remarks.
I do want to express my appreciation for your efforts and
the work of the staff to reach bipartisan consensus on these
measures.
I am also looking forward to our discussion on the
elections-related measures on the agenda and expect to support
a bill on the integrity of our campaign finances. I want to do
some comments with regard to that, however.
I appreciate this. We look to have, I hope, a consensus
and support from our Members on the bill. Again, I want to
thank you and your staff and all the Members for the
cooperation with that.

PREPARED STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION JOSEPH MORELLE

I am pleased to see several important bills aimed at
improving legislative branch operations and supporting our
cultural institutions on the agenda, and as each bill is called
up I will offer some very, very brief remarks.
I do want to express my appreciation for your efforts and
the work of the staff to reach bipartisan consensus on these
measures.
I am also looking forward to our discussion on the
elections-related measures on the agenda and expect to support
a bill on the integrity of our campaign finances. I want to do
some comments with regard to that, however.
I appreciate this. We look to have, I hope, a consensus
and support from our Members on the bill. Again, I want to
thank you and your staff and all the Members for the
cooperation with that.

I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
I will now call up H.R. 9488, the Secure Handling of
Internet Electronic Donations Act, the SHIELD Act.
As noted, the SHIELD Act would prohibit political
committees from accepting contributions from debit or credit
cards without the disclosure of the Card Verification Value, or
the CVV, and the billing address associated with the card.
Additionally, the legislation would prohibit the acceptance
of contributions from prepaid debit or gift cards.
Finally, the SHIELD Act will strengthen laws that prohibit
aiding and abetting making a contribution in another person's
name.
This has been a top legislative recommendation from the
Federal Election Commission for years. This bill will
strengthen campaign finance laws and enhance election
integrity.
As we approach election day, it is more important than ever
that we continue our work to protect American election
integrity.
I want to thank my colleagues for their work and co-
sponsorship of this important legislation.
I also want to thank our staff and my Democratic colleagues
and their staff for their collaboration on getting this bill
into final form.
I will now recognize Ranking Member Morelle if you would
like to give a statement on the bill.
Mr. Morelle. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am, as others are, deeply committed to protecting the
integrity of our campaign finance system. Preventing fraudulent
fundraising practices is an important endeavor, and for that
reason, I anticipate supporting the Amendment in the Nature of
a Substitute before us today.
Indeed, the question on whether to include CVV numbers with
contributions or ban gift cards and prepaid card contributions
is not a new one. Prohibiting aiding and abetting the making of
a contribution in the name of another has been a longstanding
bipartisan FEC legislative recommendation.
I do want to, however, make a broader point, which is, in
my opinion, the majority could and should have brought forward
these reforms at any point over the last 20 months. In fact,
the Committee has instead focused its efforts on other
elections-related endeavors.
We had, for instance, a multi-panel hearing on a paper
ballot shortage in Luzerne County, Pennsylvania; a hearing
assessing the law enforcement response to the multiple pipe
bombs on January 6--3 years after the attack on the Capitol; a
long markup last July on the ACE Act, a bill full of measures
hostile to voting rights that perpetuated the former
President's big lie and would flood even more dark money into
our political system; and the Committee's stewardship of the
SAVE Act, former President Trump and Speaker Johnson's extreme
MAGA bill that would harm every American, but particularly
military voters and married women.
This bill, the SHIELD Act, was introduced 2 days ago. The
majority did not seek our input on drafting the bill. If they
had, I would have suggested to my majority colleagues there are
some critical issues that I think the bill should address.
For starters, the bill misunderstands how online payments
processing works and would severely restrict donors from being
able to contribute through online platforms.
The bill would require platforms to collect CVV information
for all online contributions made with a credit card or debit
card at the time the contribution is made.
Payment card industry data security standards requirements,
however, prohibit payment processors from storing CVV
information.
In turn, this requirement will prohibit processing
transactions, contributions to political candidates, involving
saved payment information.
Saved payment information is a key to donors making
recurring contributions, something candidates on both sides of
the aisle receive. Donors would likewise be unable to use
common third-party payment processors like Apple Pay, PayPal,
and Google Pay, which frequently do not provide CVV
information.
The legislation confusingly includes requirements for
lawful permanent residents living outside the United States. I
am not sure how familiar the majority is with the requirements
of obtaining a green card, but green card holders do not
typically seek to live outside the United States.
The language is confusing at best. It certainly needs to be
looked at and revised. The bill gives the FEC 10 days to issue
regulations, something that will force the Commission to
regulate without the benefit of public comment.
Finally, campaign treasurers are required to retain all
contributor information, but the bill fails to specify for how
long they have to retain that information, which could mean
forever. In fact, if I were a treasurer, I would assume it
means forever. That is a big change when you consider the
standard 3-year retention policy applicable at FEC regulations.
Those are just a few of the examples of problems of the
bill. I do not think they argue against doing it. We would have
liked the opportunity and our staff to work to create solutions
to these problems, which can be overcome, but there was just
not enough time to do it from the bill's introduction to markup
to fix what I consider are some serious problems.
Here is the rub. We know what this is about. The majority
introduced the bill this week without input from the minority.
We are marking up the bill 55 days before the election. This is
not promoting election integrity.
Committee Democrats, we are not going to fall for it. We
care deeply about it. That will be our North Star, making sure
that elections are protected.
I recommend colleagues support the measure, but we should
be clear-eyed about the flaws with the bill, and we should in
the future take some time to make sure that we get this right.
With those reservations, I will support the bill.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
The clerk will please report the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 9488----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the first reading of the
bill is dispensed with. Also, without objection, the bill shall
be considered as read and open to amendment at any point.
[House bill H.R. 9488 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. I have an Amendment in the Nature of a
Substitute at the desk. The clerk will please report the
amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the Amendment in the
Nature of a Substitute is considered as read and will be
considered as original text for the purpose to of further
amendment.
[Chairman Steil's Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute
to H.R. 9488 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Does any Member seek recognition for
amendment or debate?
Congresswoman Bice?
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am proud to cosponsor the SHIELD Act, common-sense
legislation that will close loopholes currently allowing
illegal donations to fund campaigns.
This is necessary because some online portals are not
taking steps to protect against fraudulent donations. When
enacted, the bill will require the same information you submit
when making an online purchase, a CVV and an address.
I urge my colleagues to support it.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
I will recognize myself for 5 minutes--or for purpose of
striking the last word.
Per the Ranking Member's remarks in our sidebar just now,
we would love to engage in working on any potential adjustments
prior to this bill coming to the House floor. We could work on
a manager's amendment at that time.
The speed at which this is coming I think is important,
because I think we have seen some anecdotal evidence of illegal
contributions.
We have identified this loophole through a robust review of
our campaign finance laws, and as this loophole was exposed, we
think this is the opportunity to make sure that it is closed.
I am proud of the work that this Committee has done over
the course of 2 years to further election integrity. As this
loophole is identified, I think it is imperative for all of us
to come together to close the loophole.
I thank the Ranking Member's support of the legislation and
will be open to any further adjustments that may be necessary
between now and this legislation seeing floor action.
Does any other Member seek recognition?
Representative Kilmer?
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Chairman. Just briefly.
If we are looking at ways in which the Federal Election
Commission can be more effective, Representative Fitzpatrick
and I have a bipartisan bill called the Restoring Integrity to
America's Elections Act that looks at some changes to the
Federal Election Commission that are bipartisan, with an eye
toward professionalizing it and getting it out of persistent
stalemate.
If between here and the floor there is an attempt to look
at potential changes, I would just request that that be a bill
that is incorporated.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back. I will take that
under consideration for sure.
Does any other Member seek recognition for amendment or
debate?
There being no further amendment or debate, the question
now occurs on the Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute is adopted.
The question now occurs on ordering H.R. 9488, as amended,
reported favorably to the House.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
Those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
motion to report is agreed to.
A majority having voted in favor of H.R. 9488, as amended,
the bill is ordered favorably reported to the House.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid on the
table.
I now call up H.R. 7764, the Commission to Study the
Potential Transfer of the Weitzman National Museum of American
Jewish History to the Smithsonian Institution Act.
The nonpartisan legislation would create a commission to
study the absorption of the Weitzman National Museum of
American Jewish History into the Smithsonian Institution.
We are in a critical time where our ally Israel needs our
support. With the rise of antisemitism in this country and
around the world, it is crucial that we are protecting Jewish
American history and expanding education efforts. By studying
this potential absorption, we can ensure that the museum is
maintained for years to come.
I will now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle, if he
would like to give a statement on the bill.
Mr. Morelle. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am very grateful to you for working to advance H.R. 7764,
as you indicated, a bipartisan bill creating a commission to
study the potential transfer of the Weitzman Museum of American
Jewish History to the Smithsonian.
Since the first Jews fled the Portuguese inquisition in
1654 and arrived in New Amsterdam, what is now called New York
City, Jewish Americans have contributed to the country in
innumerable ways, which includes my hometown of Rochester, New
York, where Jewish Americans have been an integral part of our
community, establishing our first synagogue in the 1840's and
building a thriving business community around Joseph Avenue in
the early 20th century, and contributing to the cultural
diversity that makes my community such a wonderful place to
live.
Across this Nation, Jewish Americans have served at some of
the highest levels of Government, won Nobel Prizes, created
enduring pieces of art and literature, and been at the
forefront of virtually all fights for social justice, freedom,
and equality.
It pains me, as I am sure it does you, Mr. Chair, and all
the Members, that antisemitism in the United States has
increased significantly, fueled by attacks on Jewish Americans
after the October 7 terrorist attacks in Israel, as well as the
seemingly unbridled growth of racism, extremism around the
country.
I just want to, again, thank you. The historic levels of
antisemitism have to be addressed. This is one way to do that
in a thoughtful way and move this commission forward.
I, again, want to thank you, want to thank my colleagues
and the staff for advancing this, and we will certainly be in
the affirmative.
Thank you, sir.
Chairman Steil. I thank the Ranking Member for his support
and his remarks.
The clerk will please report the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 7764----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the first reading of the
bill is dispensed with. Also, without objection, the bill shall
be considered as read and open to amendment at any point.
[House bill H.R. 7764 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. I have an Amendment in the Nature of a
Substitute at the desk. The clerk will please report the
amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the Amendment in the
Nature of a Substitute is considered as read and will be
considered as original text for the purpose of further
amendment.
[Chairman Steil's Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute
to H.R. 7764 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Does any other Member seek recognition for
amendment or debate?
Seeing none, the question now occurs on the Amendment in
the Nature of a Substitute.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute is adopted.
The question now occurs on ordering H.R. 7764, as amended,
reported favorably to the House.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
motion to report is agreed to.
A majority having voted in favor of H.R. 7764, as amended,
the bill is ordered favorably reported to the House.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid on the
table.
I now call up H.R. 6394, the Semiquincentennial
Congressional Time Capsule Act.
This nonpartisan legislation would authorize a time capsule
to be buried on the Capitol Grounds to mark the 250th
anniversary of America's founding.
The bill has the support of House Members on the America
250 Commission, established to celebrate the 250th anniversary
of the signing of the Declaration of Independence in 2026.
Additionally, the bill already has the support of the Architect
of the Capitol.
I would encourage my colleagues to support the legislation.
I will recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle, if he
would like to give a statement on the bill.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
As you indicated, July 4, 2026, we will celebrate our
semiquincentennial, and I want to thank my staff for
phonetically placing that before me so I would not stumble over
it.
I think this really is significant. The time capsule, as I
understand, will be determined by bipartisan, bicameral
congressional leaders, include written materials,
representations of important legislative milestones, and a
message to our future colleagues in the 244th Congress, if we
have counted properly.
I am looking to see what goes into the time capsule. I am,
frankly, looking forward to when we open it, because I will be
here one way or another. I----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Morelle. I appreciate everyone bringing it forward. I
think this is a great idea.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. I have no doubt there are current Members
that may be here in the 244th, but it will not be me.
The clerk will please report the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 6394, to provide----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the first reading of the
bill is dispensed with. Also, without objection, the bill shall
be considered as read and open to amendment at any point.
[House bill H.R. 6394 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Does any Member seek recognition for
amendment or debate?
There being no further amendments, without objection, we
will consider the question to report the measure at the end of
the markup.
I now call up H.R. 6969, to Direct the Joint Committee on
the Library to procure a statue of Benjamin Franklin for
placement in the United States Capitol.
This bill would authorize the placement of a statue of
Benjamin Franklin in the U.S. Capitol accessible to the public
during guided tours.
I will recognize Mr. Morelle, if he would like to give an
opening statement on the bill.
Mr. Morelle. Just to be very brief.
I spoke with Representative Chrissy Houlahan, who is a
sponsor of the bill along with Representative Fitzpatrick, and
while there are certainly some references--and this may be
interesting to people who have both been here and to Americans
who have not--certainly references to Benjamin Franklin across
the Capitol in paintings. I believe there is a statue tucked
away in the back hallway on the Senate side. There is no statue
prominently displayed in the Capitol of one of the most
important Founders of our Nation. Millions of visitors who come
by here should see that, and I think this legislation would
change that.
He was a statesman, a diplomat, scientist, inventor,
political philosopher, businessperson, and really mentored so
many people during the most difficult times of this Nation's
founding, negotiated the Treaty of Paris, which ended the
Revolutionary War, helped draft the Declaration.
On and on we could go. I think we all appreciate it. I
think it is appropriate that we honor him and have him
displayed prominently in the Capitol.
I thank you for taking up the bill and for your leadership,
and, again, thank the staffs on both sides for working this
out.
Looking forward to support it enthusiastically.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The clerk will please report the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 69----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the first reading of the
bill is dispensed with. Also, without objection, the bill shall
be considered as read and open to amendment at any point.
[House bill H.R. 6969 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Does any Member seek recognition for
amendment or debate?
Mrs. Bice?
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am a proud cosponsor of H.R. 6969, which adds to the U.S.
Capitol's National Statutory Collection a new piece to honor
one of our Nation's foremost Founding Fathers, Benjamin
Franklin.
As was mentioned by Ranking Member Morelle, he was the
first American diplomat, fostering our Nation's relationship
with the French Government, which helped us win the
Revolutionary War, and that continues, endures to this day.
I am excited to see this statue placed ahead of America's
250th birthday. As Benjamin Franklin would say, a penny saved
is a penny earned, and this statue comes at no cost.
I urge all of my colleagues to vote in support of the
legislation.
Chairman Steil. Does any other Member seek recognition?
There being no further amendments, without objection, we
will consider the question to report the measure at the end of
the markup.
I now call up H.R. 9489, to sunset the Advisory Committee
on the Records of Congress and for other purposes.
This bill sunsets the Advisory Committee on the Records of
Congress, which is no longer needed, and be replaced with a
reporting requirement for the Clerk, Secretary of the Senate,
and National Archives.
The ACRC convenes twice per year to discuss records
management for the House and Senate. However, the Clerk and
Secretary of the Senate agree that this Committee can be
replaced with a reporting requirement.
I support this legislation due to the feedback from these
agencies that are directly involved with records management.
I will recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle, if he
would like to give a statement on the bill.
Mr. Morelle. Simply that I appreciate you bringing it
forward, and look forward to supporting it.
I will yield back.
Chairman Steil. The clerk will please report the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 94----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the first reading of the
bill is dispensed with. Also, without objection, the bill
should be considered as read and open to amendment at any
point.
[House bill H.R. 9489 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Does any Member seek recognition?
There being no further amendments, without objection, we
will consider the question and report the measure at the end of
the markup.
I will now call up H.R. 9487, to amend the Legislative
Reorganization Act of 1970 to authorize the Legislative Counsel
of the House of Representatives to designate more than one of
the attorneys of the Office of the Legislative Counsel as a
Deputy Legislative Counsel, and for other purposes.
In the event the Legislative Counsel position is vacant,
the Deputy Legislative Counsel would be given formal authority
to perform all the functions of the Legislative Counsel under
this legislation.
I strongly support this legislation for continuity of
operations and succession purposes.
I will recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle, if you
would like to give a statement on the bill.
Mr. Morelle. Yes. Just very briefly. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
It has been more than 100 years since the inception of the
House Office of Legislative Counsel, which I believe began as
an experiment with the House Ways and Means Committee and has
become truly a critical House support entity. The expert
attorneys in the Office of Legislative Counsel now draft tens
of thousands of bills and resolutions each Congress, and the
number is growing exponentially when you account for the many
drafts of a measure as it is being refined.
It is an increasing number of amendments as well being
submitted by Members as we have seen on both legislation large
and small.
As the demands of the office continue to increase, it is
vital we provide the attorneys with the support they need to do
their jobs effectively. That certainly includes both increasing
the resources, but also it requires ensuring the office engages
in succession planning, as you said, to ensure continuity of
Government.
While this may seem like a sort of a pedestrian matter, it
is actually a big deal in my view in terms of ensuring that
Congress does the job it needs to for the American people.
I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge the current
Deputy Legislative Counsel, Noah Wofsy. He and his team do a
masterful job working closely with Members and staff on the
Committee, and on this Committee in particular, and we would
quite literally not be able to have this or any other markup
without both his talents, dedication, and patience, and also
Legislative Counsel Wade Ballou and the entire team in the
Office of Legislative Counsel for the work they do.
We are very, very grateful for their service. The American
people do not know their names but benefit from them every day.
I am anxious to be able to be in support of this measure.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The clerk will please report the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 9----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the first reading of the
bill is dispensed with. Also, without objection, the bill
should be considered read and open to amendment at any point.
[House bill H.R. 9487 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Does any Member seek recognition for
amendments or debate?
Seeing none, there being no further amendments, without
objection, we will consider the question to report the measure
at the end of the markup.
I now call up H.R. 6242, the VOTES Act of 2023. I will
recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle, if he would like to
give a statement on the bill.
Mr. Morelle. Just briefly.
Again, I am really grateful for the opportunity to have
this in front of us and to speak in support of the VOTES Act
bill. It is an important bill, championed by my friend and
colleague Maxwell Frost of Florida as well as a number of
Members on this Committee. I cosponsored it, but I know Ms. Lee
is a lead sponsor of the bill, and I want to thank her for her
leadership and her efforts on that as well. I believe Mr.
Kilmer is a cosponsor as well.
It is a common-sense update to the UOCAVA to ensure that
our overseas servicemembers can participate in our democracy.
It is essential that we guarantee every American, we have
talked about that at length today, no matter our opinion, we
believe every member of our Armed Forces should be able to cast
a ballot.
Those ballots--we are 10 days from the deadline for States
to send out those ballots to our men and women in uniform, and
this deadline is a meaningful reminder of our duty as Members
to protect the right of all servicemembers.
I am grateful for the bill being before the House. Thank
you. Thank your staff. Thank Ms. Lee. Thank Mr. Kilmer and Mr.
Frost for their leadership on this.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
The clerk will please report the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 6242----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the first reading of the
bill is dispensed with. Also, without objection, the bill
should be considered as read and open to amendment at any
point.
[House bill H.R. 6242 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Does any Member seek recognition?
Ms. Lee is recognized.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to thank my Florida colleague, Congressman
Maxwell Frost, for introducing this important bill, which I am
proud to cosponsor.
This bill amends the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens
Absentee Voting Act, otherwise known as UOCAVA, which is how
that we ensure that our servicemembers overseas have their
right to vote protected and facilitated.
This bill expands UOCAVA provisions to ensure that we
include men and women who are serving in our National Guard or
in an inactive service status so that they, too, are covered by
UOCAVA.
With that, I encourage the Members of the Committee to
support this bill.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
Does any other Member seek recognition?
There being no further amendments, without objection, we
will consider the question and report the measure at the end of
the markup.
There being no further amendments or debate, the question
now occurs on ordering 6394, 6969, 9489, 9487, and 6242
reported favorably to the House.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it and the
motion report is agreed to.
A majority having voted in favor of H.R. 6394, H.R. 6969,
H.R. 9489, H.R. 9487, and H.R. 6242, the bills are ordered
favorably reported to the House. Without objection, the motion
to reconsider is laid on the table.
This concludes the order of business for today's markup.
Pursuant to House Rule XI, clause 2(l), I ask that the
Committee Members have the right to file with the clerk of the
Committee supplemental additional minority and dissenting views
on each of the items marked up today.
Without objection.
Also, without objection, the staff is authorized to make
necessary technical and conforming changes.
If there is no further business, I thank the Members for
their participation.
Without objection, the Committee on House Administration
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:46 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
