- THE U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE: CUSTOMERS, COMMUNITIES, AND MODERNIZATION EF- FORTS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE: CUSTOMERS,
COMMUNITIES, AND MODERNIZATION EFFORTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

JUNE 26, 2024
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov
www.cha.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-573                     WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin, Chairman

BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOSEPH MORELLE, New York,
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia            Ranking Member
GREG MURPHY, North Carolina          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             NORMA TORRES, California
MIKE CAREY, Ohio                     DEREK KILMER, Washington
ANTHONY D'ESPOSITO, New York
LAUREL LEE, Florida

Mike Platt,  Staff Director
Jamie Fleet,  Minority Staff Director

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Opening Statements

Chairman Bryan Steil, Representative from the State of Wisconsin.     1
Prepared statement of Chairman Bryan Steil...................     3
Ranking Member Joseph Morelle, Representative from the State of
New York.......................................................     4
Prepared statement of Ranking Member Joseph Morelle..........     5

Witness

Shira Perlmutter, Register of Copyrights and Director, U.S.
Copyright Office, Library of Congress..........................     7
Prepared statement of Shira Perlmutter.......................     9

Submissions for the Record

Coalition of Visual Artists letter...............................    38
Copyright Clearance Center letter................................    43
News/Media Alliance letter.......................................    46
Copyright Alliance letter........................................    49
National Music Publishers' Association letter....................    56

Questions for the Record

Shira Perlmutter answers to submitted questions..................    60

THE U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE: CUSTOMERS,
COMMUNITIES,  AND MODERNIZATION EF-
FORTS

----------

June 26, 2024

Committee on House Administration,
House of Representatives,
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:17 a.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Bryan Steil
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Steil, Loudermilk, Griffith, Bice,
Carey, Lee, Morelle, Sewell, Kilmer, and Torres.
Staff present: March Bell, General Counsel; Kelvin
Bencosme, Staff Assistant; Kristen Monterroso, Director of
Operations and Legislative Clerk; Michael Platt, Staff
Director; Elliot Smith, Director of Oversight; Jessica Smith,
GAO Detailee; Jordan Wilson, Director of Member Services;
Khalil Abboud, Minority Deputy Staff Director; Jamie Fleet,
Minority Staff Director; Kwame Newton, Minority Oversight
Counsel; Heather Painter, Minority Legislative Director; Matt
Schlesinger, Minority Senior Counsel; and Sean Wright, Minority
Chief Counsel.

OPENING  STATEMENT OF HON. BRYAN STEIL,  CHAIRMAN OF
THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REP-
RESENTATIVE FROM WISCONSIN

Chairman Steil. The Committee on House Administration will
come to order. I note that a quorum is present.
Without objection, the chair may declare a recess at any
time.
Also, without objection, the hearing record will remain
open for 5 legislative days so Members may submit any materials
they wish to be included therein.
Thank you, Ranking Member Morelle, Members of the
Committee, and our witness, for participating in today's panel.
As part of the Committee on House Administration's
oversight over the legislative branch, today we are focusing on
the U.S. Copyright Office operations. We will explore how the
U.S. Copyright Office is modernizing, assisting customers, and
engaging with stakeholders.
As a legislative-branch entity, this Committee has
oversight over the U.S. Copyright Office.
Since becoming part of the Library of Congress in 1870, the
Copyright Office has grown to become a critical linchpin in the
U.S. economy. The copyright industry impacts roughly 16 million
American jobs.
Who requires a copyright? A variety of industries engage
with the Copyright Office on a daily basis. I will just name a
few. You engage with singers, with songwriters, authors,
filmmakers, the media, software engineers, and more.
Where does the Committee on House Administration come into
copyright issues, one may ask. The Committee has oversight over
the Office's operations.
Each year, the Copyright Office works with thousands of
individuals and examines their copyright claims. These records
are supplemented with thousands of documents, representing
hundreds of thousands of titles of work. In recent years, we
have seen an uptick in the volume of work submitted to your
office.
Today, we will explore how the Office operations have been
challenged and how they have worked to improve customer
experience and make it simpler, easier, and more efficient for
everyday copyright holders to register their works.
By registering copyrights in a timely manner, individual
creativity and individual businesses can thrive. As the
Copyright Office knows, many high-volume artists, like
photographers for example, are having difficulty registering
their work due to an expensive and time-consuming registration
process.
Let us use wedding photographers as an example. They may
take hundreds, possibly thousands, of wedding photos at an
average wedding. The current online system prevents
photographers from uploading in large batches, making it
difficult for them sometimes to reach critical client
deadlines.
Assuming timely registration of copyright is of the utmost
importance--ensuring timely registration of copyright is of the
utmost importance, particularly to ensure these works are
protected.
As technology is rapidly evolving, widespread copyright
infringement for many content owners is becoming the status
quo, unfortunately. Copyright infringement corrodes value and
diminishes their ability to make ends meet. We want to learn
more about the process and some of the burden content creators
are experiencing today.
In recent years, the Office has undertaken significant
modernization efforts. This includes IT modernization and AI
policy plans. The Committee on House Administration has been
working with each of our support agencies, including the
Copyright Office, to develop AI governance plans.
In 2016, the Copyright Office established the Copyright
Modernization Office to ensure the Office is achieving its
mission and strategic goals on behalf of copyright owners. In
their 2023 annual report, the Office made steady progress in
creating a web-based, cloud-hosted, user-friendly platform.
While the new system has improved efficiency, there is
still more to be done to make sure the new system is meeting
the needs of users. Over the last year, the Committee has met
with a variety of individuals and stakeholders who engage with
the Copyright Office and have heard their concerns.
I look forward to a robust discussion today to ensure we
are promoting innovation while protecting content owners' work.
Before I yield to the Ranking Member for 5 minutes, I will
note that we are expecting votes to be called at the bottom of
the hour. There is potentially a new 20-minute rule on the
first vote, and so, at risk of that, we will probably gavel out
a little early. Then we will come back and pick back up where
we leave off, whether or not that is opening statements or into
Members' questions.
With that, I will now recognize the Ranking Member for 5
minutes for the purpose of offering opening remarks.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Steil follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE
ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION BRYAN STEIL

As part of the Committee on House Administration's
oversight over the legislative branch, today we are focusing on
the U.S. Copyright Office operations. We will explore how the
U.S. Copyright Office is modernizing, assisting customers, and
engaging with stakeholders.
As a legislative-branch entity, this Committee has
oversight over the U.S. Copyright Office.
Since becoming part of the Library of Congress in 1870, the
Copyright Office has grown to become a critical linchpin in the
U.S. economy. The copyright industry impacts roughly 16 million
American jobs.
Who requires a copyright? A variety of industries engage
with the Copyright Office on a daily basis. I will just name a
few. You engage with singers, with songwriters, authors,
filmmakers, the media, software engineers, and more.
Where does the Committee on House Administration come into
copyright issues, one may ask. The Committee has oversight over
the Office's operations.
Each year, the Copyright Office works with thousands of
individuals and examines their copyright claims. These records
are supplemented with thousands of documents, representing
hundreds of thousands of titles of work. In recent years, we
have seen an uptick in the volume of work submitted to your
office.
Today, we will explore how the Office operations have been
challenged and how they have worked to improve customer
experience and make it simpler, easier, and more efficient for
everyday copyright holders to register their works.
By registering copyrights in a timely manner, individual
creativity and individual businesses can thrive. As the
Copyright Office knows, many high-volume artists, like
photographers for example, are having difficulty registering
their work due to an expensive and time-consuming registration
process.
Let us use wedding photographers as an example. They may
take hundreds, possibly thousands, of wedding photos at an
average wedding. The current online system prevents
photographers from uploading in large batches, making it
difficult for them sometimes to reach critical client
deadlines.
Assuming timely registration of copyright is of the utmost
importance--ensuring timely registration of copyright is of the
utmost importance, particularly to ensure these works are
protected.
As technology is rapidly evolving, widespread copyright
infringement for many content owners is becoming the status
quo, unfortunately. Copyright infringement corrodes value and
diminishes their ability to make ends meet. We want to learn
more about the process and some of the burden content creators
are experiencing today.
In recent years, the Office has undertaken significant
modernization efforts. This includes IT modernization and AI
policy plans. The Committee on House Administration has been
working with each of our support agencies, including the
Copyright Office, to develop AI governance plans.
In 2016, the Copyright Office established the Copyright
Modernization Office to ensure the Office is achieving its
mission and strategic goals on behalf of copyright owners. In
their 2023 annual report, the Office made steady progress in
creating a web-based, cloud-hosted, user-friendly platform.
While the new system has improved efficiency, there is
still more to be done to make sure the new system is meeting
the needs of users. Over the last year, the Committee has met
with a variety of individuals and stakeholders who engage with
the Copyright Office and have heard their concerns.
I look forward to a robust discussion today to ensure we
are promoting innovation while protecting content owners' work.
Before I yield to the Ranking Member for 5 minutes, I will
note that we are expecting votes to be called at the bottom of
the hour. There is potentially a new 20-minute rule on the
first vote, and so, at risk of that, we will probably gavel out
a little early. Then we will come back and pick back up where
we leave off, whether or not that is opening statements or into
Members' questions.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH MORELLE,  RANKING
MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION,
A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM NEW YORK

Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your leadership,
for calling this on this really, really important topic. It has
been great to work with you and your team on these important
issues.
I want to thank Register Perlmutter for being here today
and for your efforts to ensure the Copyright Office keeps pace
with what is breakneck change in the speed of changing
technology. It is great to have you here to talk about this and
the critical role that the Copyright Office plays in promoting
creativity, innovation, and economic growth in our Nation.
The Founders recognized the importance, enshrining the
right in the Constitution as promoting the progress of science
and useful arts. I think sometimes people are surprised when
you mention that copyright is actually listed in the United
States Constitution, but here we are and conducting this
oversight of the Office to discuss the progress that has been
made, the challenges that the Office and we all still face to
improve the services that you provide to copyright owners and
to the American public. Our responsibility is to ensure you
have the necessary resources and congressional support to carry
on the mission effectively in this ever-changing digital age.
I do want to recognize the substantial progress the Office
has made in recent years, thanks to your leadership and that of
your team. Thank you to you for your hard work and the hard
work of your staff.
The development of the Enterprise Copyright System, the
ECS; the launch of the Copyright Claims Board; and the
establishment of the Copyright Public Modernization Committee
are just a few of the highlights that I think demonstrate the
Office's commitment to a future-facing intellectual property
system.
As we move forward, it seems to me it is crucial we build
on these successes and continue to enhance the accessibility,
efficiency, and resilience of the copyright system.
The ongoing development of the ECS is particularly
promising. When fully implemented, the system will provide a
unified, user-friendly platform for registration, recordation,
public recordkeeping, and licensure.
As the chair has described and I understand, the dedicated
copyright modernization funding is set to expire in the coming
years, however, and additional fiscal support will be needed to
avoid losing momentum on the progress you have made, so that is
something we will all keep very much in mind.
I do want to highlight the Office's ongoing work on
artificial intelligence. Again, the chair touched on it. It has
broad implications for copyright. I do not think anyone needs
to be reminded of that.
With the rapid advancement of generative AI, it is critical
that the Office provides timely guidance and leadership not
only on the scope of copyright protections in AI-generated
works but also on the use of copyrighted materials in AI
training on the so-called back end, when you are starting to
train models.
I worked on these issues back when I was a member of the
New York State Assembly. We did not call it AI, but we talked
about computer-generated images and computer-generated work and
the use of someone's voice, their likeness, without consent, a
problem that becomes even more pernicious with the explosion of
AI technology--the ease, the ability to generate AI content.
AI-generated deepfakes can be created using this technology in
ways that it could not have been even a decade ago.
The use of that technology will have a major implication
for the worlds of copyright as well; I do not need to tell you.
Is AI-generated content copyrightable? Who holds the copyright?
Does the AI training process infringe on the rights of
copyright holders when the data relied upon inevitably includes
copyrighted work?
In fact, just 2 days ago, three of the largest record
labels in the world sued two AI startups, arguing the use of
their AI technology to generate content infringes upon the
rights of the artists whose material was used for training sets
for those models.
These are difficult, complex questions. I am looking
forward eagerly to your multi-part report on how these issues
affect the copyright domain. I understand that report is coming
out later this year, and I am sure you will probably want to
touch on that.
Finally, I want to just touch on the importance of the
right to repair, something that I have been involved in, again,
since my time as a State legislator, and the role of copyright
law, section 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act,
which prohibits the circumvention of technological protection
measures that control access to copyrighted works even for non-
infringing purposes like repair.
Recognizing the unintended consequences of the prohibition,
your office has encouraged the Librarian to exempt consumer
devices from this restriction in the past. I am grateful to you
for that. Obviously, an issue that will continue.
Today, the Office considers whether or not to preserve
these protections for consumer choice but to expand them to the
commercial and industrial equipment that has just as great, in
fact, if not even greater, impact on our everyday lives.
I will continue on the questioning. I do not want to go far
beyond my time, and I appreciate the indulgence of the chair.
Again, look forward to hearing your testimony.
Mr. Chair, thanks again for holding this important hearing.
With that, I will yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Morelle follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION JOSEPH MORELLE

The Founders recognized the importance, enshrining the
right in the Constitution as promoting the progress of science
and useful arts. I think sometimes people are surprised when
you mention that copyright is actually listed in the United
States Constitution, but here we are and conducting this
oversight of the Office to discuss the progress that has been
made, the challenges that the Office and we all still face to
improve the services that you provide to copyright owners and
to the American public. Our responsibility is to ensure you
have the necessary resources and congressional support to carry
on the mission effectively in this ever-changing digital age.
I do want to recognize the substantial progress the Office
has made in recent years, thanks to your leadership and that of
your team. Thank you to you for your hard work and the hard
work of your staff.
The development of the Enterprise Copyright System, the
ECS; the launch of the Copyright Claims Board; and the
establishment of the Copyright Public Modernization Committee
are just a few of the highlights that I think demonstrate the
Office's commitment to a future-facing intellectual property
system.
As we move forward, it seems to me it is crucial we build
on these successes and continue to enhance the accessibility,
efficiency, and resilience of the copyright system.
The ongoing development of the ECS is particularly
promising. When fully implemented, the system will provide a
unified, user-friendly platform for registration, recordation,
public recordkeeping, and licensure.
As the chair has described and I understand, the dedicated
copyright modernization funding is set to expire in the coming
years, however, and additional fiscal support will be needed to
avoid losing momentum on the progress you have made, so that is
something we will all keep very much in mind.
I do want to highlight the Office's ongoing work on
artificial intelligence. Again, the chair touched on it. It has
broad implications for copyright. I do not think anyone needs
to be reminded of that.
With the rapid advancement of generative AI, it is critical
that the Office provides timely guidance and leadership not
only on the scope of copyright protections in AI-generated
works but also on the use of copyrighted materials in AI
training on the so-called back end, when you are starting to
train models.
I worked on these issues back when I was a member of the
New York State Assembly. We did not call it AI, but we talked
about computer-generated images and computer-generated work and
the use of someone's voice, their likeness, without consent, a
problem that becomes even more pernicious with the explosion of
AI technology--the ease, the ability to generate AI content.
AI-generated deepfakes can be created using this technology in
ways that it could not have been even a decade ago.
The use of that technology will have a major implication
for the worlds of copyright as well; I do not need to tell you.
Is AI-generated content copyrightable? Who holds the copyright?
Does the AI training process infringe on the rights of
copyright holders when the data relied upon inevitably includes
copyrighted work?
In fact, just 2 days ago, three of the largest record
labels in the world sued two AI startups, arguing the use of
their AI technology to generate content infringes upon the
rights of the artists whose material was used for training sets
for those models.
These are difficult, complex questions. I am looking
forward eagerly to your multi-part report on how these issues
affect the copyright domain. I understand that report is coming
out later this year, and I am sure you will probably want to
touch on that.
Finally, I want to just touch on the importance of the
right to repair, something that I have been involved in, again,
since my time as a State legislator, and the role of copyright
law, section 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act,
which prohibits the circumvention of technological protection
measures that control access to copyrighted works even for non-
infringing purposes like repair.
Recognizing the unintended consequences of the prohibition,
your office has encouraged the Librarian to exempt consumer
devices from this restriction in the past. I am grateful to you
for that. Obviously, an issue that will continue.
Today, the Office considers whether or not to preserve
these protections for consumer choice but to expand them to the
commercial and industrial equipment that has just as great, in
fact, if not even greater, impact on our everyday lives.

Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back. Appreciate your
work in this nonpartisan way on the oversight of the Copyright
Office, you and your whole team.
Without objection, all other Members' opening statements,
as well as letters for the record submitted from outside
parties, will be made part of the hearing record if they are
submitted to the Committee clerk by 5 p.m.
Today, we have one witness. We welcome Register Shira
Perlmutter, Register of Copyrights and Director of the U.S.
Copyright Office.
Appointed in October 2020, Register Perlmutter advises
Congress and executive branch agencies on copyright policy and
directs the administration on important provisions of the U.S.
Copyright Act, leading a workforce of roughly 500 employees.
We appreciate you being with us today and look forward to
your testimony.
Pursuant to paragraph (b) of Committee rule 6, the witness
will please stand and raise your right hand.
[Witness sworn.]
Chairman Steil. Let the record show the witness answered in
the affirmative.
Now, we appreciate you being here today and look forward to
your testimony. I will remind you that we have read your
written statement and it will appear in full in the Committee
record. I will now recognize you for 5 minutes for the purpose
of offering an opening statement.

STATEMENT  OF  SHIRA  PERLMUTTER,  REGISTER  OF COPY-
RIGHTS AND DIRECTOR, U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE, LIBRARY
OF CONGRESS

Ms. Perlmutter. Chairman Steil, Ranking Member Morelle, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
report on the accomplishments of the U.S. Copyright Office in
updating our information technology systems and serving the
public.
IT modernization continues to be a top priority for the
Office as well as one of our main strategic goals. Development
work began to build the new Enterprise Copyright System, or
ECS, in 2020, after we received its initial funding from
Congress.
Since I joined the Office in October of that year, we have
made significant progress, thanks to the close and productive
collaboration we have established with the Library's Office of
the Chief Information Officer, or OCIO. As we work together,
the Copyright Office determines the evolving business
priorities for ECS, and OCIO manages the software development
and implementation.
Two major components of ECS are already being successfully
used by the public. We are now mapping out next steps and
timing, with a focus on registration.
The first ECS component to be developed was recordation,
given the need to take an antiquated paper-based process into
the 21st century. We now have an efficient online recordation
system, which is used for more than 80 percent of submissions.
Average processing times have fallen from months to weeks.
We have also made available to the public a pilot of our
new Copyright Public Records System, or CPRS. This will replace
the existing Public Catalog with a more user-friendly system as
the authoritative source for registration and recordation
information.
We are currently accelerating the pace of work on
registration, which is the largest and most complex and most
visible component of ECS. The Office has had an electronic
registration system, known as eCO, for more than 15 years now.
This system continues to function effectively, with processing
times at an all-time low. It does have some limitations, and
the new ECS version will be a major improvement.
Over the past year, the Copyright Office and OCIO have,
together, completed a great deal of work in developing the
registration system. We have tripled the number of IT teams
working on it, and we are further reallocating resources to
enable rapid progress.
Consistent with testimony I have given to Congress before,
we expect to initiate a limited pilot of the standard
application, as well as the eDeposit upload functionality, by
the end of this calendar year. This will allow us to gather
user feedback to guide further development.
Let me mention two other areas of collaboration with OCIO.
First, as part of our commitment to preservation and access, we
are digitizing our historical records and making them available
online. This summer, we have completed fully half of our over
26,000 record books. Second, we have launched a customer
contact center, resulting in improved user experience and
better analysis.
The Office has, at the same time, taken on increasing
responsibilities in the areas of law and policy. These include
oversight of new statutory structures, multiple rulemakings,
and studies on important policy issues, like the one currently
on the topic of artificial intelligence.
Another of the Office's priorities is outreach and
communication. We are committed to maximum transparency, and we
consult regularly with the public in both formal and informal
ways.
During my tenure, we have ramped up outreach, including to
raise awareness about new opportunities for stakeholders, with
the establishment of the Small Claims Tribunal and
implementation of the Music Modernization Act. We also obtain
public input through the notice-and-comment process as well as
holding or joining meetings as requested by stakeholders.
On IT modernization in particular, the Office has hosted
numerous public events. We conduct training webinars for
systems in production, gather feedback via email, and ask users
to complete online surveys. Responses have been very positive,
with strong interest in additional features.
We have also established a more sustained formal mechanism
for receiving input. In 2021, the Librarian appointed a
Copyright Public Modernization Committee, or CPMC, to discuss
the technology-related aspects of the Office's services. In its
initial 3-year term, the CPMC held six public online meetings
as well as several informal briefings, and the Librarian has
reauthorized it for an additional term. Once the new Members
are selected, we plan to hold a meeting before the end of the
year.
I will close by thanking the Committee for its support of
the work of the Copyright Office and the Library to enable
continued development of copyright IT systems. I am pleased to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Perlmutter follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF SHIRA PERLMUTTER

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you, Register Perlmutter. Appreciate
you being here today.
I will begin our questions, and then we will continue with
the Ranking Member and alternate sides. Again, votes have been
called. I will monitor where that process is; then we will take
a brief recess.
Register Perlmutter, I would like to begin my conversation
with you about the AI initiative that you mentioned in your
testimony. It is critical the Office addresses the copyright
challenges that result from AI-generated content head-on. It is
impacting every corner of the creative community in the United
States.
As we saw just last month, Scarlett Johansson was in the
news after an AI company used a sound-alike voice despite her
not giving permission for her voice to be used in that manner.
Now, we have heard concerns from songwriters, from artists,
photographers that are struggling with similar issues, and the
stakeholders are eagerly awaiting guidance from your office.
It is correct that the AI initiative has been in the works
for now over a full calendar year, correct?
Ms. Perlmutter. The issue has been around for about a year
and a half. We launched our study--our AI initiative studying
the issues in March and followed up with a notice requesting
public comment at the end of August.
Chairman Steil. In March of last year, right?
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes.
Chairman Steil. A little over a year ago. You got comments
in August, and you got about 10,000 comments. Is that about
accurate?
Ms. Perlmutter. We did. We have read every single one of
them.
Chairman Steil. You have bucketed them into key categories:
literary works, visual works, et cetera.
I want to dive in, kind of, then, on where you are at in
this process, because a lot of people are waiting on this. Do
you have an expected date for your review?
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes. We are issuing the report in sections,
frankly, because there are so many issues it would take too
long to try to do one entire volume covering everything at
once.
The first section will deal with the issue of digital
replicas, the issue that Mr. Morelle has raised in his opening
statement. That section is close to being finalized, and we
expect to issue it in the coming weeks.
The second section of the report will talk about the issue
of copyrightability of the output created using generative AI.
That study we expect to issue by the end of this summer.
Then we will turn to the infringement-related questions,
including whether the ingestion of copyrighted works for
purposes of training the AI constitutes fair use, in what
circumstances it might constitute fair use, and also
considerations related to licensing and the allocation of
potential liability.
That--those last sections of the report we expect to be out
in the fall.
Chairman Steil. Obviously, this is a big topic area, a lot
of comments. Is there something in particular that is driving
the delay for these reports to come forward, or is it just the
volume of work? Can you help scale that--or scope that for me?
Ms. Perlmutter. This is really the timeframe we expected to
always follow. We--it takes some time, as you can imagine, to
review 10,000 comments, so we spent the period between
September and December doing that. Since that time, we have
been preparing outlines and drafting.
The only thing that has been delayed a bit is, the initial
section of the report on digital replicas we had predicted to
be able to publish by the end of the spring, and, as I said, it
will now be out within the next few weeks.
Chairman Steil. Thank you.
One of the concerns I have heard, in particular, is whether
or not we are going to see a patchwork of State laws. As we
look at Tennessee--Tennessee, not waiting for the Federal
Copyright Office, has taken it upon themselves to pass the
ELVIS Act--the Ensuring Likeness, Voice, and Image Security
Act--a first-of-its-kind legislation prohibiting using AI to
mimic an artist's voice without permission. It goes into effect
July 1, just next week.
I know you are monitoring this Act. Do you have a concern
that there would be a series of State laws that will arrive and
come on line prior to your report's coming out? Does that give
you concern or does not cause you concern?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, there is a concern in general about
having a patchwork of inconsistent State laws. That is already
the case with State rights-of-publicity laws, which cover a lot
of this type of conduct and they differ in many respects, one
from the other. That is one of the things that commenters
raised with us as one of the strong arguments they have made
for a Federal right.
We know, however, that Congress is not just waiting for us
to issue the report, because one bill has already been
introduced; another discussion draft has been circulated. There
is legislative activity continuing even while we are preparing
the report, and we are trying to stay abreast of all of that
activity.
Chairman Steil. As we think about the operations of the
Copyright Office, obviously, a need for human capital, in
particular, understanding AI in a way that probably was not
prevalent, obviously, a decade ago.
Do you feel you have the human capital and the knowledge of
employees inside the Copyright Office to be able to navigate
through the new questions that are arising as it relates to AI?
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes, I do. The Copyright Office has always
had to grapple with, how do we apply new, emerging technologies
to copyright principles and laws? We have always had to make
sure that we educated ourselves sufficiently to be able to be
thoughtful and appropriate in what our recommendations were,
and this is no different.
We actually spent months at the beginning of last year,
after we launched the initiative--so throughout the spring and
summer--educating ourselves, including having multiple meetings
with technology companies as well as doing our own research and
reading. I think we have a good grasp of how the technology
works; certainly adequate to analyze the copyright-related
issues.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much. Thank you for being
with us today.
I will now recognize the Ranking Member for the purpose of
asking questions.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for that
exchange, which was really helpful.
I did want--I had some questions, as well, on the question
of AI. Without asking you to sort of preview what the
recommendations are--because that, as you said, is going to
come out in a series of reports--can you at least give me a
sense of, sort of, the analysis you did and the process that
you used to take new technology and things that would not have
been even possible a decade ago and sort of just give me your
thought process on how you place that against, you know, the
standards that we have used in the past? How do you--what has
been your charge to staff as you sort of work through this and,
sort of, the principles that you have used?
Ms. Perlmutter. We have basically been proceeding on two
tracks at the same time. Because one of the Office's functions
is to do policy analyses and assist Congress in analyzing
copyright issues, and the other piece of our role is to
administer the Copyright Act, which includes, of course,
registering claims to copyright.
We have, throughout the last few years, been looking at
claims in works that incorporate in some way AI-generated
material. That has been an ongoing process of having to draw
lines and decide when there is sufficient human authorship in a
particular work to support a claim to copyright. Because, in
our view--and we have been upheld by the courts on this--human
authorship is required for copyright protection.
Mr. Morelle. You have sort of, I think--is it fair to say
that, from your perspective, the notion of generative AI, where
you cannot trace an author, a human author--that is not
copyrightable? You have sort of--you have kind of already
arrived at that conclusion, no?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, we have certainly arrived at the
conclusion that if it is purely generated by AI and there is no
human involvement, there cannot be copyright protection.
The District Court for the D.C.--for the District of
Columbia has upheld that decision. It is now on appeal to the
D.C. Circuit.
Mr. Morelle. Because it is interesting, AI does not--I
mean, there has to be some human involvement, right? I mean,
you have to train the models, you have to write the algorithms.
It does not produce it out of thin air.
So--but it is interesting, where you--and this may be, you
know, one of those deeply philosophical questions, ultimately,
to arrive at it--where does human engagement stop and where is
the tool doing the creative--or the creation of the work?
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes. Exactly. What we have been doing is
trying to apply existing principles of how you distinguish idea
from expression and how you determine whether there is
sufficient expression to uphold a copyright.
What we are looking at in each case--of course, you are
right, there will be some human involvement. Humans have to
program the machines. The question is, did a human determine
the expressive elements of the output sufficiently so that we
can recognize human authorship in it?
Mr. Morelle. Yes.
Ms. Perlmutter. We are drawing those lines every day in the
applications we receive. We issued guidance to applicants last
year that explained what they should do when they are trying to
register such a work, essentially to disclaim those elements
that were produced purely by AI and identify what the human
authorship is of the work.
Mr. Morelle. Yes. It is fascinating, and we are looking
forward to this continued conversation.
I want to jump, if I can, quickly, with the last minute and
a half that I have, around the question of right to repair and
exemptions that I mentioned in my opening comments.
Can you just share what factors the Office is weighing as
it evaluates the proposed expansion of the repair exemptions to
cover a broader range of devices beyond consumer products?
There is agricultural equipment; there is a whole host of folks
that are deeply interested in this. I am just sort of curious
if you could give me an update on your thinking.
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes. As you recognize, we have already
issued--or, the Librarian of Congress has issued one exemption
for repair for consumer products, and the question is whether
to expand it.
Mr. Morelle. Right.
Ms. Perlmutter. We are in the middle of the rulemaking now,
so I cannot articulate exactly what we are going to say in
October. I will say, we are looking at whether there has been
sufficient evidence produced to meet the standards under the
1201 rulemaking process.
We have suggested in the past that Congress look at a
permanent exemption covering right to repair that could
possibly be broader than the evidence we see in any particular
proposal under 1201.
Mr. Morelle. Yes. An issue I have long been involved with.
You know, from my perspective, understanding there are rights
here that have to be measured and balanced, but for a consumer,
in terms of price, you know--and it is not just affordability.
It is, if you are a farmer and you have to have a point where
your whole year is relying on being able to harvest and your
harvester goes down and you cannot get access to repair, it is
really having a deleterious effect on their work and on their
business.
I appreciate your efforts in this and look forward to
continuing to engage on these issues.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Recognizing where we are at in the vote schedule and the
theory that we are going to have a first vote that is 20
minutes long, we are going to recess now. I encourage Members
to come back quickly. We will pick up where we left off with
questions.
This Committee stands in recess, subject to the call of the
chair.
[Recess.]
Chairman Steil. I reconvene the Committee and call it to
order.
We will continue with our order of questions. I now
recognize Mr. Loudermilk for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Ms. Perlmul--Ms. Perl--Perlmutter. That is hard
to say, since I served with a Perlmutter for many years. I do
not know if there is any relation there. Thank you for being
here.
You mentioned in your testimony that the modernization of
the Copyright Office's information technology continues to be a
top priority as well as a strategic goal.
Can you elaborate on the Office's partnership with the
Library of Congress and the Office of Chief Information Officer
in this effort?
Ms. Perlmutter. I would be happy to.
Before I arrived at the Library, the Library had
centralized IT work within the Library for all of the service
units, including the Copyright Office. The way the relationship
works is that the Copyright Office experts develop the business
goals and priorities and needs, and then work very closely with
OCIO to help them understand what we need and when and how, and
then they essentially enable us to do it by developing the
technology.
We work extremely closely together, so I would say, at all
levels, in both offices, we are in contact every day. I meet
regularly with the Chief Information Officer, Judith Conklin,
and our teams meet regularly and work together, both formally
and informally, constantly.
Mr. Loudermilk. OK. Do you feel like you are getting the
support you need from the Library and the CIO in order to
advance these technology programs?
Ms. Perlmutter. Absolutely. We are working as a team, and
we have a completely shared vision of where this is going and
how to work out the timing and make it happen.
Mr. Loudermilk. Great.
Can you speak to the IT modernization efforts that will
harden the Office's systems against security concerns and
cybersecurity weaknesses, especially in the context of
electronic deposits of published works submitted to the USCO?
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes. I am far from a cybersecurity expert,
but I know that the Library has in place excellent and state-
of-the-art security processes and that, in particular, any
electronic deposits that we get are protected in transit and
when we receive them.
I am sure we can get you a better answer for the record
with more detail on exactly what is done for security
purposes----
Mr. Loudermilk. Right.
Ms. Perlmutter [continuing]. from a technical perspective.
I am assured that it is a very robust system that complies with
all of the relevant Federal standards and, in fact, is as
protective as the way that we protect sensitive congressional
information as well.
Mr. Loudermilk. OK. Yes, the cybersecurity is an issue; it
is a growing issue. It will always be an issue. Unfortunately,
it seems like the Federal Government is often the weak link in
the chain. That is something that concerns a lot of people,
especially if you are going to be housing protected works or
personal identifiable information. That is of high concern.
Can you tell me about the elements of the new IT system
that will directly benefit an individual copyright holder who
is trying to register a new work?
Ms. Perlmutter. There will be a number of ways in which it
will be beneficial to copyright holders. Of course, it is still
in development, and we will be able to show a limited pilot by
the end of the year of the standard application. People will
have a chance to see it and give us feedback, and that will--
that feedback will, in turn, go into further development.
One of the things that I have been most excited about with
the new ECS registration system is that it will be much easier
for the average person to use without having any expertise.
Mr. Loudermilk. OK.
Ms. Perlmutter. There will be a lot of help given in terms
of understanding terms, knowing what categories to use, knowing
what forms to use. I think that will be a tremendous benefit.
There will also be ways in which it will be much easier to
upload deposits. It will be faster, it will be easier to upload
large deposits or multiple works at a time. I think people will
find that to be a great benefit.
Mr. Loudermilk. Do you plan on doing some sort of
controlled testing with real-time users, and will you be asking
for feedback in that?
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes, that is----
Mr. Loudermilk. OK.
Ms. Perlmutter [continuing]. exactly what we have in mind.
The idea is to have this limited pilot by the end of the
calendar year. We are already getting information about people
who are interested in participating. What we want to do is to
prioritize those who have been using the existing online
registration system so that they can helpfully compare what is
in use now with what we plan to do going forward and give us
the feedback that we can use to further shape and direct
development.
Mr. Loudermilk. The last question, real quickly: Do you
have plans to keep it within budget and within the timeframe?
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes. We are currently operating within the
budget that Congress has given us so far. We have a budget for
fiscal 1925 where we did get what we had asked for for
modernization. We have enough right now to proceed as planned
with the limited pilot by the end of the year.
We will be making a request in the 1926 budget for
additional funding to ensure that we can continue in this pace
of development.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Sewell is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Sewell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Register, for sharing your testimony today.
For more than 150 years, the United States Copyright Office
has been at the forefront of protecting creators and preserving
our Nation's stories by maintaining intellectual property for
musicians, artists, literary authors, and other forms of
creative content.
Copyright is the engine of free expression, and it plays a
central role in our access to information. Being able to create
new materials and share that information with the public is a
fundamental right recognized by Article 27 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Copyright helps protect the value
of the creator's work so that the creator can control how that
information is shared.
Extremists are making efforts across the Nation to decide
what information is worthy of consumption by removing books
that tell the full story about diversity, equity, and inclusion
in the classroom. Preserving all of our history is important,
because it reflects the cultural diversity, ingenuity, and
challenges that the fabric of our Nation was founded on.
Each year, I look forward to attending the Congressional
Dialogue Dinners at the Library of Congress, because it gives
me a chance to access the information that expands our world
view but also to see all of the amazing archives we have, the
history that we have in archives.
This is why I was particularly excited when I read about
the Copyright Office's efforts to digitize information in your
testimony, because it makes it more accessible to people. The
Copyright Office is undertaking a major effort to digitize and
make available online its vast collection of historical
records, dating back to 1870, I understand.
Beyond digitization, what steps is the Office taking to
enhance searchability and usability of these historic records
for researchers and the public?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, thank you for that question. I am
very excited about this project. We, in addition to making
those historical public records available online--and we have
done about half of them so far--we are working on--the next
step will be to develop a way to extract metadata from the
records.
Ms. Sewell. Yes.
Ms. Perlmutter. Right now, the great improvement is that
people do not have to come physically to the Copyright Office
to look at those records; they can see them online in digital
form.
The next step is to enable them to do the research----
Ms. Sewell. Yes.
Ms. Perlmutter [continuing]. without having to go through,
laboriously looking at each page. We are working right now with
LC Labs to test an experiment with some AI programs to see how
we can engage in exactly that project of extraction of
metadata.
Ms. Sewell. Gotcha.
Ms. Perlmutter. I think there is a lot of exciting
potential there, and we are----
Ms. Sewell. It is very critical that we figure out how to
make it really searchable and usable, so I am glad to know that
you have undertaken that.
With over 12,000 record books available currently today,
what is the timeline for completing the digitization of the
remaining books?
Ms. Perlmutter. I expect we will be able to do it in the
next few years. We have to figure out exactly how we allocate
all of our various resources and fundings between the other
parts of----
Ms. Sewell. Yes.
Ms. Perlmutter [continuing]. ECS development and this
digitization project. It is something we plan to do in the next
few years--to complete in the next few years.
Ms. Sewell. How is the Office leveraging the partnerships
and collaborations, both within the Library of Congress and
within--and with exterial--external--excuse me--organizations,
to advance its historical record preservation efforts? How are
you working with public-private partnerships to do that?
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes, that is a good question. We are
looking at the possibility of additional public-private
partnerships.
Ms. Sewell. Uh-huh.
Ms. Perlmutter. Right now, we are doing this work on our
own----
Ms. Sewell. Yes.
Ms. Perlmutter [continuing]. and making it available
online, as I have said, through the Library's websites. I think
the idea of public-private partnerships to do further work is a
good one, and it is one that----
Ms. Sewell. We should explore, actually.
Ms. Perlmutter [continuing]. I have suggested exploring
further, yes.
Ms. Sewell. Exactly.
Well, thank you for all that you are doing, and look
forward to the digitization of all the wonderful books and
historical records that we have. Thank you.
Ms. Perlmutter. Thank you.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
Mr. Griffith is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. I need some help understanding all this. I
understand the historical records, but when Ms. Sewell starts
talking about books, some of those books are currently under
copyright, and if you digitize them and you do not have a
license, what is the legal--underlying legal authority for
that?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, we are not digitizing books under
copyright. We are digitizing our records----
Mr. Griffith. Just your records.
[Crosstalk.]
Ms. Perlmutter [continuing]. records.
Mr. Griffith. If you are doing submissions or if you are
putting your work in, that is not going to be digitized.
Ms. Perlmutter. We do not take material that is not
digitized and digitize it.
Mr. Griffith. You are not making copies digitally of
material that could be copyrighted--or is copyrighted.
Ms. Perlmutter. People can submit digital copies of their
work----
Mr. Griffith. Yes.
Ms. Perlmutter [continuing]. as deposits, but we do not
take the analog copies and digitize them.
Mr. Griffith. OK. That is not a part of your plan that is
coming out?
Ms. Perlmutter. No.
Mr. Griffith. OK. All right. That is good to know.
What documents do you have that you are going to be
digitizing for the historical records?
Ms. Perlmutter. We have, they are called historical record
books, which are records of copyright registrations and
recordations over the years. The historical public record books
go back to the 19th century, up until 1978, when the current
Copyright Act went into force.
We have those. We also have card catalogs. We have a number
of different forms of historical records. We have some
microfilm records that we are also----
Mr. Griffith. All right.
Ms. Perlmutter [continuing]. in the process of digitizing.
Mr. Griffith. So--and I apologize that I am confused, but
if I submit a book--and I have not written any yet--but if I
submit a book to you for registration under the Copyright Act
and you are digitizing those--let us say I give you an analog
copy and I want it copyrighted. You are saying you are not
digitizing those, but then you are saying anything that has
been filed for registration.
Tell me--explain it to me.
Ms. Perlmutter. We are digitizing our records, which are,
like, applications for registration or lists of----
Mr. Griffith. Would not that include a copy of the
underlying book, or----
Ms. Perlmutter. No.
Mr. Griffith. That does not?
Ms. Perlmutter. That is the deposit copy, and that we are
not digitizing.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I am just trying to make sure I
get it straight.
Ms. Perlmutter. It can be confusing.
Mr. Griffith. It can be confusing, yes, ma'am, and I
appreciate that.
The purpose is just so that the historical records can be
more easily accessed. I am fine with the historical records----
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes. Really, for two purposes. One is for
people who want to use copyrighted work so they can find out
what is there and who owns it and get in touch with them. The
other is for researchers.
Mr. Griffith. All right. I appreciate that.
What else is exciting going on over there that you have not
had a chance to tell us about yet?
Ms. Perlmutter. Oh, wow. There is so much going on. It has
been quite something.
One thing that we are very proud of: We have set up a new
Copyright Small Claims Court 2 years ago, pursuant to the CASE
Act----
Mr. Griffith. Yes.
Ms. Perlmutter [continuing]. that Congress passed in 2018.
Mr. Griffith. I think you mentioned that earlier, yes.
Ms. Perlmutter. It is functioning incredibly well and
getting close to 1,000 claims having been filed. It is
operating very smoothly and very effectively.
Mr. Griffith. Again, just so that I am clear, you are not
taking any documents that are filed as a part of the
registration process and digitizing the document--the book or
the work for copyright purposes, just the registration forms?
Ms. Perlmutter. Just the--just the forms, the information
that people have given us in connection with registration, but
not the works themselves.
Mr. Griffith. All right.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Kilmer is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Chairman.
Thanks for being with us.
I want to talk about the local news industry. There has
been a significant decline in the number of local newspapers
and outlets across the country. I think that is concerning, in
part because it keeps our constituents informed and engaged,
and I think it plays a very important role in maintaining a
strong democracy.
The rise of some of the large-language-model AI tools
presents both some new challenges for local news outlets and
some new tools that could help them develop more sustainable
business models.
We all know how important local news is for our
communities, so it is important that, as Congress engages on
this topic, ensuring that regulation of AI tools at the very
least does not further contribute to the decline of local
journalism is, in my view, very important.
I guess I have a number of questions for you in that
regard, foremost being: Are you getting any feedback from these
local news organizations and outlets during the listening
sessions that you have done, in the public inquiry that is
happening on AI, and on these copyright issues more broadly?
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes. I would start by saying, we actually
did a report, now probably close to 2 years ago, about press
publishers' rights in general, where we recognized the
challenge for local news outlets and exactly the trend that you
mentioned, and we expressed concern about that as well.
We have gotten input from--certainly from the news media
and news media organizations. I would have to go back and check
to see if any individual local news outlets filed separately.
Definitely, that area was well-represented in the comments we
received.
Mr. Kilmer. Is there an intentional effort to engage with
news organizations during the decision-making process regarding
copyright registration for AI-generated content?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, we certainly have an open door, and
we certainly talk to the News Media Association, among others,
on a regular basis about their interests and concerns.
I do not know if that answers your question.
Mr. Kilmer. Yes, I guess I am more interested in whether
there has been any sort of assertive--I believe you when you
say your door is open. I wonder if there is just any direct
effort to outreach to this industry because it is so
potentially impacted by this.
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, we have certainly reached out to them
on specific issues, you know, where we have had, for example, a
notice of inquiry or a notice of potential rulemaking--proposed
rulemaking.
We are, right now, in the process of finalizing a rule to
allow group registration of news websites in a way that has not
been possible before.
Actually, I am quite proud of the fact that we are getting
that rule completed in record time, because we issued our
notice of proposed rulemaking in January, and that rule--we are
expecting to publish the final version in July, so just under 7
months, which is the fastest we have ever been able to put
through a change like that and a new group registration option.
Mr. Kilmer. Let me ask a more, I guess, specific area.
When, you know, you are looking at potential copyright
infringements of content that is produced by local media
organizations, local news organizations, by these large
language models, has your office done outreach, you know, as
you sort of think through what those infringements might be
and, you know, how to engage on that?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, we are certainly aware of the issue
and what the infringements might be. I believe that those
interests were represented, for example, at some of the
roundtables and meetings that we held last spring and summer,
in addition to submitting comments to us in the notice----
Mr. Kilmer. OK.
Ms. Perlmutter [continuing]. of inquiry.
Mr. Kilmer. Finally, what do you need from us? You know, as
you look at specifically this intersection between your work
and local journalism, is there anything Congress can do to
better help you address that?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, that is a good question.
I think, in our report on press publishers' rights that I
mentioned, we did talk about the fact that a lot of the issues
that were raised seem to relate to areas of antitrust law and
bargaining power questions that were beyond the scope of
expertise of the Copyright Office but could make more of a
difference than anything that the copyright system could
provide.
Mr. Kilmer. OK.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Mrs. Bice is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to circle back around, Ms. Perlmutter, on the
conversation that Representative Griffith brought up about the
copyright piece.
Your office recently had an open rulemaking to authorize
not just the use or disposition of electronic deposits by the
Library of Congress but the reproduction, public display, or
performance and distribution of new copies of electronic
deposits.
I want to read to you--this is from the notice: U.S.
Copyright Office notice of proposed rulemaking concerning a
regulatory expansion that would grant the Copyright Office
authority to make or transfer electronic copies of published
works of authorship submitted by the rights holders for
registration purposes to the Library of Congress for purposes
of its digital library operations without licenses or TPM or
DRM protections and grant the Library authority to make yet
further copies and provide access to the protected works,
including over the internet, without licenses or protections.
First of all, are not those electronic deposits not
exclusively the rights of the copyright holders under the
Copyright Act?
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes. I am not sure what the quote was from
that you read.
Mrs. Bice. That is actually from the rulemaking--the
proposed rule that your office is actually putting forward.
Ms. Perlmutter. That does not sound like the language of
the rule, but I will take a look at it. But----
Mrs. Bice. Yes. U.S. Copyright Office's notice of proposed
rulemaking.
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes. The question before from Mr. Griffith
was about whether we take works that are not in digital form
and digitize them, and that, the answer is, no, we are not
doing that. The----
Mrs. Bice. It looks like you are proposing the rule to do
that very thing.
Ms. Perlmutter. No. What the rulemaking is about is, when
people deposit a work in digital form, when and in what
circumstances it can be offered to the Library to select from
for its collections.
As of now, there are some works that already the Library
can take electronic deposits, digital deposits, for purposes of
its collections, but it is a limited category. I think it is
just newspapers and serials. What the proposed rule would do
would say that the Library can select from digital deposits of
other types of works beyond just those limited categories.
It would be under the same very strict limitations, which
is that the electronic copies are only available on the
premises of the Library, on dedicated terminals, by two people
at a time who are authorized users, and do not allow any
further copying or distribution or downloading of the copies.
Mrs. Bice. OK. Thank you for clarifying that.
You are saying that if an author submits a physical book,
you are not digitizing it and then putting it in the Library of
Congress's, sort of, database to be able to share. Is that----
Ms. Perlmutter. No.
Mrs. Bice [continuing]. correct? OK. Thank you for
clarifying.
I want to pivot to a little bit of a different topic. This
year, there have been many statements that have been made by
the Office that have caused concern regarding the efforts to
modernize the Office's registry system.
During a meeting in February, the Office announced a notice
that would be published the following month in the Federal
Register to reauthorize the Copyright Public Modernization
Committee and requested applications from interested parties.
The notice was actually not published until March, and then it
was only published after Committee Members sent a letter
requesting an update.
It is my understanding that many of the Committee Members
would like to meet more frequently. Can you talk about why the
Office does not convene this critical Committee more frequently
than it does currently?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, the Committee was set up through a
regulation which entailed--which specified that it would meet
publicly twice a year. Frankly, I thought at some point we
should talk more often, and so we started having informal
briefings in between the public meetings.
The Committee was set up for a 3-year term, and it came to
an end at the end of last year. We had a final meeting where we
had a conversation with the Members about what their experience
had been and what they would like to see going forward, talked
about increasing the pace of meetings. I think at least
continuing to have informal briefings in between the public
meetings is a good idea.
Someone had said at the last meeting--had predicted that we
would publish the notice to reauthorize in mid-March. Just due
to the press of business, it ended up happening at the
beginning of May, so it was about a 6-week delay. None of that
changed what the timing would have been to get the new
Committee up and running.
The deadline for applying to be on the Committee expired
last week, and so we are looking at the applications. We will
hold the first meeting of the new Committee this fall.
Mrs. Bice. Do you believe that you should be given
additional authorities or directives to meet more frequently?
Ms. Perlmutter. I do not think it is necessary. I think we
can change the frequency of the meetings. My understanding is
that what the Members had been asking for was consistent with
what we had in mind, which was a certain number of public
meetings and then other briefings in between on specific issues
that the Members are interested in.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
Mrs. Torres is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you, Ms. Perlmutter, for being here with us today.
Some of the Members have already covered many of my
questions, but I do want to ask and cover this other very
important subject.
As we are developing AI tools, we must not forget that AI
serves as a supplement to human capabilities. In prioritizing
our core values while harvesting AI, ensuring that we hold on
to the human touch that informs our work is truly critical.
That is why I recently introduced the International
Artificial Intelligence Research Partnership Act of 2024, which
would expand partnerships between U.S. cities and cities around
the world in AI research and implementation projects that
will--or, could spur innovation and uphold our shared global
democratic values.
My question to you, Register, is, can you provide a brief
overview of key themes and issues that have emerged from the
Copyright Office's listening session on AI and copyright to
date, including any discussions on how the Office is partnering
with international counterparts?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, let me start with that last part of
the question.
We are in regular communication with international
counterparts. I mean, it is just absolutely clear that AI
technologies are being developed all around the world, by
people from different countries, that they draw on and train on
content from around the world. We always have to be aware of
the global context.
I have been in frequent conversation with counterparts and
policymakers from countries around the world that are also
examining these issues. My belief is that the more we all share
our ideas and our experiences, the more likely it is that we
will get at least compatible approaches emerging around the
world, which will avoid impeding cross-border communication and
trade.
Mrs. Torres. The European Union has been pretty aggressive.
Spain, specifically, is trying to master the Spanish version of
AI.
You know, I want to make sure that the U.S. does not miss
on an opportunity to ensure that we are working together side-
by-side to develop, you know, one policy that represents--that
is representative of all of our democratic values.
How does your office plan to update your, you know,
guidance and regulations to keep pace with future innovations?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, we are working on that right now.
Mrs. Torres. OK.
Ms. Perlmutter. We issued guidance in March of last year on
how to register works that contain AI-generated material, and
we have been able to draw on the responses to that guidance. We
have gotten, of course, a lot of questions about it,
hypotheticals, people raising issues that maybe had not
occurred to us.
Meanwhile, we keep getting new applications to register
every day. We see in the real world how this is playing out and
what the issues are.
We are going to be drawing on all of that to update our
compendium of Copyright Office practices. We do that always
through a public notice and rulemaking process, giving people
an opportunity to give us input.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you.
On the issue that was covered by my colleagues regarding
newspaper outlets, I just want to let you know I am very
concerned about, you know, any policy that would make it harder
for our newspapers, especially our small newspaper groups, to
be able to publish and correct articles as they--as the news
continues to change and evolve.
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes. Thank you.
Mrs. Torres. Please keep our office informed of any of
those issues.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
Mr. Carey is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carey. You know, I want to thank the Chairman; I also
want to thank the Ranking Member.
I think that anybody who is watching online or who is
watching on C-SPAN, I just want you to see how a Committee
works in a bipartisan way. I think the level of questions that
we have been asked--or, are asking you are very bipartisan,
because we want to get to the issues that matter. I just wish
that my colleagues on other Committees did the same thing.
I want to thank you again.
I also want to thank the witness for being here today to
really discuss this important work with the Copyright Office.
You know, the Copyright Office dates back to, what, the
1800's--you know, I am a student of history; that seems like a
long time ago to me--and serves a wide variety of interests. In
fact, the Office issued over 440,000 new registrations alone in
just Fiscal Year 2023.
Am I correct with that number? I think I am. If I am not,
you can correct me later.
Today, I want to focus on the modernization efforts of the
Copyright Office. With that being said, the Office is now
almost a decade into--I want to jump on what Mrs. Torres said,
but--the Office is now almost a decade into the development of
the Enterprise Copyright System, or the ECS, which is meant to
integrate and improve all of the Office's technology modules.
Can you provide an update on the progress made in the
modernization aspects of ECS and relate directly to the
copyright registration system?
It is all yours. The floor is yours.
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes. I will say, it has been almost a
decade since we started talking about modernization. The actual
development work started in 2020, so now about 4 years ago.
We have made a lot of progress. I spoke in my opening
statement about progress in recordation and also the
development of the Copyright Public Record System, but you are
asking specifically about registration. On that, I would say,
it has been an area where we have just recently--well, over the
last year, put a lot of our resources in particular on
expediting work on the registration component of ECS.
Working very closely with the Library's OCIO, we are making
it now a top priority and moving around some of our resources
so that we can speed up progress. That will include the launch
of a limited pilot by the end of this calendar year.
Mr. Carey. OK. That was going to kind of go into my next
question, which was: Can we expect that the registration
modernization updates will take effect all at once--you are
kind of saying we are going to do kind of a pilot program--or
were they going to be done in increments? Am I safe to assume
that we are going to do it in increments, not just all at once?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, it will be all at once in the sense
that, once the entire system is finished and we retire the
existing eCO system, that will happen at once; we will have an
entire system.
My understanding of how the IT development process works is
that we will be testing out in limited pilot with the public
different pieces at a time so that we can get input, and then
that will feed into the further development.
Mr. Carey. To kind of jump on that, do you feel that the
Office has the resources it needs to complete its modernization
in a timely manner?
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes. We have--at the moment, we have the
funding and the staff to proceed with that timing that I have
been mentioning so that we would get the limited pilot up at
the end of this year. Our goal is to be able to retire the eCO
system at the end of calendar 2026.
We have now the funding that can take us--we got the
funding in the 2025 budget to do the current plan with the
limited pilot. Then, moving forward, we will be making a
proposal in 2026 for additional funding to be able to continue
and finalize the work.
Mr. Carey. Well, I thank you for your testimony, and I
thank you for being here today.
Mr. Chairman, with that, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Lee is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you so much for being here with us today.
I would like to go into a further discussion about the
Music Modernization Act, which was signed into law back in
2018. It established a new entity to administer certain music
licenses and distribute the associated royalties. Streaming
services transfer those royalties and data to the collective
and meet certain criteria in order to obtain a so-called
mechanical license. The collective, in turn, finds the proper
copyright owner and distributes royalties back.
I am interested in talking about that mechanical licensing
collective. That is something that the Copyright Office
oversees. Is that right?
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes.
Ms. Lee. Who are the primary stakeholders that are involved
in that process?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, the music publishers, the
songwriters, and the digital services.
Ms. Lee. Coming up on the 5-year re-designation of this
collective, what would you say--are we facing a key moment
here? What work and preparation is being done for looking at
that 5-year re-designation?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, we have issued a notice seeking
public comment on the re-designation, and we are currently in
the process of reviewing all of the comments we have received.
The various time periods, I believe, are not yet final, so we
are still receiving input as well as analyzing it.
Ms. Lee. Do you have any ideas or suggestions about how
that process might be improved?
Ms. Perlmutter. We--we will have some suggestions once we
issue our report.
Ms. Lee. The timeline, then, would be: Right now you are
getting input from stakeholders, and then after that is
complete you will be issuing a report, and that report is where
you will set forth any recommendations from your office?
Ms. Perlmutter. Yes, that is correct.
Ms. Lee. All right.
Ms. Perlmutter. I just should say, I mean, we have issued
various recommendations for the MLC's operations periodically
meanwhile. It is not as if this is the first time we have
engaged in any oversight. This is the big reauthorization
period.
Ms. Lee. Are any of the recommendations that you have
issued so far ones that you would characterize as particularly
significant or things that you think are going to feature
prominently in the reauthorization?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, a number of our recommendations have
been about process. My understanding is that the MLC has been
generally following those recommendations.
We are also finalizing a rule right now that has to do with
termination rights and how that affects who is the appropriate
recipient of royalties and at what point in time by the MLC.
That is likely to have a major impact, and that might figure
into the final report as well.
Ms. Lee. Now, switching gears a little bit, I would like to
go back to this subject of artificial intelligence,
particularly as it relates to deepfakes, misinformation. These
are things that, I know, as Members of Congress, we all
continue to hear great concerns about from at home as well as
here in D.C.
I am interested in your office's--I believe you either have
issued or will be issuing a report on digital replicas. I am
interested in your perspective on whether copyright law is
potentially the right vehicle to address these challenges.
Ms. Perlmutter. You are correct; we are going to be issuing
a report very shortly, in the coming weeks, on the digital
replica issue.
There are ways in which copyright law can relate to some of
these challenges, but it does not directly protect someone's
identity against its replication.
What we have right now in the United States is a whole
array of different laws that could potentially apply in
different circumstances. There is--and a lot of them are State
laws, right? Publicity and privacy, unfair competition, and
then also the Lanham Act at the Federal level.
In our report, we are going to be looking at: In what ways
do all of these laws, including aspects of copyright law, apply
to what is happening out there in the world with these new
technologies? What are the shortcomings or gaps? Should there
be a Federal law that can possibly fill in those shortcomings
and gaps?
Ms. Lee. Can you tell us some of the ways in which you
think copyright law may have a role or may provide an avenue
for relief?
Ms. Perlmutter. Well, to the extent that the person whose
identity is being replicated is also an owner of copyright in a
work from which the replication is made, they may have
copyright claims.
There also could be possible claims arising from the
ingestion of copyrighted works that feature the voice or image
of that individual for purposes of training machine learning.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
We have concluded our questions for the panel. I will yield
to the Ranking Member if he has just a couple closing comments
before we close.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank you, the staff on both sides, Members on both
sides. I think the conversation was really an important one and
very insightful.
Thank you, Ms. Perlmutter, for--not only for being here
today and being very thorough in your responses but for your
leadership. I am sure the Chairman and I will continue to
engage with you and your team about all the exciting--and it
really is exciting--things that are happening and all the
challenges that we all collectively face.
Again, thanks for your service, and thanks for being here
today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much.
Thank you for being here, Register Perlmutter.
I know you have a team of about 500 people that work
tirelessly day-in and day-out. To those that are here and those
that are listening or watching, thank you for all the work that
is being done.
As noted kind of through our discussion today, there is a
lot of work at the Copyright Office. Technology is evolving
quickly, in particular as it relates to AI. I look forward to
the ongoing dialog about the work the Copyright Office is
doing, in particular, as we modernize and address some of the
challenges that we face.
We appreciate you being here today.
I will also note, without objection, each Member will have
5 legislative days to insert additional material into the
record or to revise and extend their remarks.
Several groups and stakeholders requested to submit letters
for the record, including: the Copyright Alliance, the National
Music Publishers' Association, the Coalition of Visual Artists,
the Association of American Publishers, the Authors Guild, the
Copyright Clearance Center, the News/Media Alliance, the
Digital Media Association, the Nashville Songwriters
Association International, the Professional Photographers of
America, and the PLUS Coalition.
I will submit these letters to the record, without
objection.
[The letters referred to follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. If there is no further business, I thank
the Members for their participation, and, without objection,
the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:54 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
