- LEGISLATIVE BRANCH ADVANCEMENT: GAO MODERNIZATION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LEGISLATIVE BRANCH ADVANCEMENT:
GAO MODERNIZATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MODERNIZATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 27, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov
www.cha.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-914                      WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin, Chairman

BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOSEPH MORELLE, New York,
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia              Ranking Member
GREG MURPHY, North Carolina          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             NORMA TORRES, California
MIKE CAREY, Ohio                     DEREK KILMER, Washington
ANTHONY D'ESPOSITO, New York
LAUREL LEE, Florida

Mike Platt, Staff Director
Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MODERNIZATION

STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma, Chair

MIKE CAREY, Ohio                     DEREK KILMER, Washington,
Ranking Member
JOSEPH MORELLE, New York

Derek Harley, Subcommittee Staff Director

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Opening Statements

Chairwoman of the Subcommittee on Modernization Stephanie Bice,
Representative from the State of Oklahoma......................     1
Prepared statement of the Chairwoman of the Subcommittee on
Modernization Stephanie Bice...............................     3
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Modernization Derek Kilmer,
Representative from the State of Washington....................     4
Prepared statement of the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee
on Modernization Derek Kilmer..............................     5
Chairman of the Committee on House Administration Bryan Steil,
Representative from the State of Wisconsin.....................     6
Prepared statement of the Chairman of the Committee on House
Administration Bryan Steil.................................     7

Witness Statements

Gene Dodaro, Comptroller General, U.S. Government Accountability
Office.........................................................     7
Prepared statement of Gene Dodaro............................     9
Tim Persons, Principal, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP...............    36
Prepared statement of Tim Persons............................    38
James-Christian Blockwood, Executive Vice President, Partnership
for Public Service.............................................    43
Prepared statement of James-Christian Blockwood..............    45
Dan Lips, Head of Policy, Foundation for American Innovation
(FAI)..........................................................    53
Prepared statement of Dan Lips...............................    55

Questions for the Record

Dan Lips answers to submitted questions..........................    74
James-Christian Blockwood answers to submitted questions.........    78
Tim Persons answers to submitted questions.......................    80

LEGISLATIVE BRANCH ADVANCEMENT:
GAO MODERNIZATION

----------

September 27, 2023

Subcommittee on Modernization,
Committee on House Administration,
House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:32 a.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Stephanie Bice
[chair of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bice, Steil, Kilmer, and Morelle.
Staff present: Hillary Lassiter, Clerk; Jordan Wilson,
Director of Member Services; Alex Deise, Elections Counsel,
Assistant Parliamentarian; Derek Harley, Modernization
Subcommittee Staff Director; Jessica Smith, Detailee; Jamie
Fleet, Minority Staff Director; and Owen Reilly, Minority
Legislative Assistant.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. STEPHANIE BICE, CHAIRWOMAN OF THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON MODERNIZATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
OKLAHOMA

Chairwoman Bice. Well, good morning. The Subcommittee on
Modernization will come to order.
I note that a quorum is presented. Without objection, the
chair may declare a recess at any time.
The meeting record will remain open for 5 legislative days
so Members may submit any materials they wish to be included
therein.
Thank you, Ranking Member Kilmer, Subcommittee Members, and
our witnesses for taking the time to be with us today.
The mission of this Subcommittee, building upon the work of
the Select Committee, is to continue to examine ways to
strengthen Congress to make it a more effective, efficient, and
transparent institution for the American people.
Today we will hear from and about the Government
Accountability Office, one of the congressional support
agencies that is truly a force multiplier. It provides
essential nonpartisan, fact-based analysis, and expertise
across a wide range of issues to support Congress in our
legislative and oversight duties on behalf of the American
people. It gets results.
I understand that there is an inside joke among friends and
supporters of the GAO that a common theme is said to run
through GAO's work, quote: Progress made, challenges remain.
While that may get a laugh from the GAO insiders, it undersells
the true value of the GAO. It can serve to underscore one of
the principal themes I would like us to cover today, which is,
what can we do to strengthen the agency for the future and
provide the additional tools it needs to support Congress and
fix the challenges that remain?
With that said, I would like to welcome Mr. Gene Dodaro,
U.S. Comptroller General of the GAO. The Committee welcomes
your remarks on the future of the GAO, the agency's strengths,
and the best practices you see working well at the GAO that
should be replicated by other agencies.
Our second panel includes two former GAO employees and a
former Senate Oversight staffer, who was an important customer
of the GAO, all of whom continue to be advocates for the agency
and can share an outside perspective on what modernization
efforts have been successful and how the agency can expand on
their prior success.
The GAO conducts oversight of our Federal agencies and
programs, identifies waste, fraud, and abuse, and analyzes the
efficacy and efficiency of Government programs. GAO reports
typically issue recommendations to Federal agencies or
highlight matters for congressional consideration, all of which
can remedy identified issues, improve program outcomes, and
reduce fragmentation, overlap, and duplication across Federal
Government. Their work has resulted in saving roughly 1.31
trillion taxpayer dollars since 2002. Indeed, for every $1
appropriated to GAO between 2018 and 2023, GAO has had a $145
return on that investment. I think we can all agree that a
Government agency saving taxpayer dollars should be recognized
for their outstanding work.
In the previous Congress, the Select Committee on
Modernization made several GAO-related recommendations focused
on strengthening and improving GAO's service to Congress.
Two of these recommendations were included in the Improving
Government for America's Taxpayers Act, introduced by my
colleague, Ranking Member Kilmer. That bill was enacted as part
of the Fiscal Year 2023 NDAA (National Defense Authorization
Act) and directed GAO to submit to Congress a targeted report
on the costs of unimplemented priority recommendations, as well
as additional policy or oversight options for Congress to
consider.
We are eager to hear how GAO has responded to those
requirements, which were designed to help Congress better
understand and more easily address the outstanding GAO
recommendations that could provide real savings to American
taxpayers.
Over time, the GAO has implemented several modernization
initiatives on its own and represents a prime example of an
agency that has evolved proactively to meet the needs of its
primary customer, Congress.
For example, in 2019, the GAO expanded its capacity for
science and technology support through Science, Technology
Assessment, and Analytics Team. The STAA Team has developed new
products and services that have provided Congress access to
scientific and technological expertise.
I look forward to hearing about STAA's modernization
efforts and how the team can be strengthened to best support
science and tech policymaking in Congress.
Finally, we will discuss the future of GAO and its vision.
For 3 consecutive years, GAO was rated the best midsize agency
to work for in the Federal Government. This notable achievement
leads to high employee motivation and, most importantly, to
results for Congress and the American people.
I look forward to hearing from our panelists about the path
ahead, the new and innovative ways in which the GAO can support
Congress, help identify savings and greater efficiencies, and
increase accountability for our Government agencies.
I want to again thank the witnesses for being here this
morning.
[The prepared statement of Chairwoman Bice follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF HON. STEPHANIE BICE, CHAIRWOMAN OF THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON MODERNIZATION

The mission of this Subcommittee, building upon the work of
the Select Committee, is to continue to examine ways to
strengthen Congress to make it a more effective, efficient, and
transparent institution for the American people.
Today we will hear from and about the Government
Accountability Office, one of the congressional support
agencies that is truly a force multiplier. It provides
essential nonpartisan, fact-based analysis, and expertise
across a wide range of issues to support Congress in our
legislative and oversight duties on behalf of the American
people. It gets results.
I understand that there is an inside joke among friends and
supporters of the GAO that a common theme is said to run
through GAO's work, quote: Progress made, challenges remain.
While that may get a laugh from the GAO insiders, it undersells
the true value of the GAO. It can serve to underscore one of
the principal themes I would like us to cover today, which is,
what can we do to strengthen the agency for the future and
provide the additional tools it needs to support Congress and
fix the challenges that remain?
With that said, I would like to welcome Mr. Gene Dodaro,
U.S. Comptroller General of the GAO. The Committee welcomes
your remarks on the future of the GAO, the agency's strengths,
and the best practices you see working well at the GAO that
should be replicated by other agencies.
Our second panel includes two former GAO employees and a
former Senate Oversight staffer, who was an important customer
of the GAO, all of whom continue to be advocates for the agency
and can share an outside perspective on what modernization
efforts have been successful and how the agency can expand on
their prior success.
The GAO conducts oversight of our Federal agencies and
programs, identifies waste, fraud, and abuse, and analyzes the
efficacy and efficiency of Government programs. GAO reports
typically issue recommendations to Federal agencies or
highlight matters for congressional consideration, all of which
can remedy identified issues, improve program outcomes, and
reduce fragmentation, overlap, and duplication across Federal
Government. Their work has resulted in saving roughly 1.31
trillion taxpayer dollars since 2002. Indeed, for every $1
appropriated to GAO between 2018 and 2023, GAO has had a $145
return on that investment. I think we can all agree that a
Government agency saving taxpayer dollars should be recognized
for their outstanding work.
In the previous Congress, the Select Committee on
Modernization made several GAO-related recommendations focused
on strengthening and improving GAO's service to Congress.
Two of these recommendations were included in the Improving
Government for America's Taxpayers Act, introduced by my
colleague, Ranking Member Kilmer. That bill was enacted as part
of the Fiscal Year 2023 NDAA and directed GAO to submit to
Congress a targeted report on the costs of unimplemented
priority recommendations, as well as additional policy or
oversight options for Congress to consider.
We are eager to hear how GAO has responded to those
requirements, which were designed to help Congress better
understand and more easily address the outstanding GAO
recommendations that could provide real savings to American
taxpayers.
Over time, the GAO has implemented several modernization
initiatives on its own and represents a prime example of an
agency that has evolved proactively to meet the needs of its
primary customer, Congress.
For example, in 2019, the GAO expanded its capacity for
science and technology support through Science, Technology
Assessment, and Analytics Team. The STAA Team has developed new
products and services that have provided Congress access to
scientific and technological expertise.
I look forward to hearing about STAA's modernization
efforts and how the team can be strengthened to best support
science and tech policymaking in Congress.
Finally, we will discuss the future of GAO and its vision.
For 3 consecutive years, GAO was rated the best midsize agency
to work for in the Federal Government. This notable achievement
leads to high employee motivation and, most importantly, to
results for Congress and the American people.
I look forward to hearing from our panelists about the path
ahead, the new and innovative ways in which the GAO can support
Congress, help identify savings and greater efficiencies, and
increase accountability for our Government agencies.

Now I recognize Ranking Member Kilmer for the purpose of
providing an opening statement.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Madam Chair.
Thanks for being with us. I do not know, do I call you
General Dodaro, Mr. Dodaro?
Mr. Dodaro. Gene is fine.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DEREK KILMER, RANKING MEMBER OF THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON MODERNIZATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WASHINGTON

Mr. Kilmer. All right. Thanks for meeting with us, Gene.
When we were walking in, you said you were in your 50th year at
the GAO. I thank you for a long tenure of service and for a
whole lot of impact. Excited to hear from you and from our
second panel as well.
I really appreciate the work that you do, the oversight
that you provide. You know, I am a big believer in the notion
of loving critics, you know, those who do not want to bash
institutions but make them better. I think the GAO is really
vital to that, certainly when it comes to Congress, but other
agencies as well.
You know, the value of representing the West Coast of
Washington State is I spend 11 hours a week on an airplane,
which means I get plenty of time to read GAO reports and get a
sense of some of the results of your work and some of the open
recommendations. Honestly, they lead to a lot of legislation
that our team does.
We just introduced a bill called the REACH Our Tribes Act,
which is focused on--which we are hoping to attach to the farm
bill, which is based on GAO reports that found that some of the
Department of Agriculture's programs do not do a good job of
engaging Tribal communities and serving Tribal communities.
We are working on legislation to direct NOAA (National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) to improve its weather
radio coverage and ensure it extends to areas at risk of
tsunami like the one I represent. That came from a GAO report.
I represent a big naval shipyard, and GAO has been super
helpful in looking at the Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization
Program.
I share that just to let you know the work you do matters
to my office and I think really matters to the Government and
to this institution. You know, it is part of the reason the
Select Committee on Modernization of Congress in the 116th and
the 117th looked at recommendations to help you do the work
that you do.
I am hoping that we can hear some updates on some of those
recommendations. One was bolstering legislative support
agencies' access to Federal data and experts. One was
bolstering bipartisan oversight training for Members and staff,
enhancing the customer experience at GAO, including increasing
presence and awareness of your work among congressional Members
and staff, and one was identifying how increased regulatory and
legal resources could help strengthen the role of the
legislative branch, which we look forward to your forthcoming
report on.
The chair mentioned the Improving Government for America's
Taxpayers Act, which I know GAO has worked to implement, and,
you know, that comes from a couple Select Committee
recommendations; the notion being that the GAO can help
Congress know about some of the open recommendations, how long
they have been open, how much money could be saved if those
recommendations were acted upon, and some legislative options
for closing those recommendation.
When you hear about the return on investment that the chair
mentioned, you guys are where it is at I think. The spirit of
the law that we passed and that was part of the NDAA was, you
know, let us get cooking on some of the recommendations you
have made.
Looking forward to hearing from you and looking forward to
hearing from our other witnesses too.
Thanks for being with us.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Kilmer follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER OF THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON
MODERNIZATION DEREK KILMER

Mr. Kilmer. Thanks for meeting with us, Gene. When we were
walking in, you said you were in your 50th year at the GAO. I
thank you for a long tenure of service and for a whole lot of
impact. Excited to hear from you and from our second panel as
well.
I really appreciate the work that you do, the oversight
that you provide. You know, I am a big believer in the notion
of loving critics, you know, those who do not want to bash
institutions but make them better. I think the GAO is really
vital to that, certainly when it comes to Congress, but other
agencies as well.
You know, the value of representing the West Coast of
Washington State is I spend 11 hours a week on an airplane,
which means I get plenty of time to read GAO reports and get a
sense of some of the results of your work and some of the open
recommendations. Honestly, they lead to a lot of legislation
that our team does.
We just introduced a bill called the REACH Our Tribes Act,
which is focused on--which we are hoping to attach to the farm
bill, which is based on GAO reports that found that some of the
Department of Agriculture's programs do not do a good job of
engaging Tribal communities and serving Tribal communities.
We are working on legislation to direct NOAA (National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) to improve its weather
radio coverage and ensure it extends to areas at risk of
tsunami like the one I represent. That came from a GAO report.
I represent a big naval shipyard, and GAO has been super
helpful in looking at the Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization
Program.
I share that just to let you know the work you do matters
to my office and I think really matters to the Government and
to this institution. You know, it is part of the reason the
Select Committee on Modernization of Congress in the 116th and
the 117th looked at recommendations to help you do the work
that you do.
I am hoping that we can hear some updates on some of those
recommendations. One was bolstering legislative support
agencies' access to Federal data and experts. One was
bolstering bipartisan oversight training for Members and staff,
enhancing the customer experience at GAO, including increasing
presence and awareness of your work among congressional Members
and staff, and one was identifying how increased regulatory and
legal resources could help strengthen the role of the
legislative branch, which we look forward to your forthcoming
report on.
The chair mentioned the Improving Government for America's
Taxpayers Act, which I know GAO has worked to implement, and,
you know, that comes from a couple Select Committee
recommendations; the notion being that the GAO can help
Congress know about some of the open recommendations, how long
they have been open, how much money could be saved if those
recommendations were acted upon, and some legislative options
for closing those recommendation.
When you hear about the return on investment that the chair
mentioned, you guys are where it is at I think. The spirit of
the law that we passed and that was part of the NDAA was, you
know, let us get cooking on some of the recommendations you
have made.
Looking forward to hearing from you and looking forward to
hearing from our other witnesses too.
Thanks for being with us.

Chairwoman Bice. Thank you, Ranking Member Kilmer.
It is with great delight that we have the full Committee
chair of the House Administration Committee Mr. Steil here with
us. At this time, I would recognize Chairman Steil for an
opening statement as well.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRYAN STEIL, CHAIRMAN OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WISCONSIN

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Chair Bice.
I will be brief. I just want to say thanks to you and
Ranking Member Kilmer for taking the lead on the Modernization
Subcommittee.
When we think about modernizing Congress, making the
legislative branch work more efficiently, I do not think there
is anything better than the GAO being here with us where you
are dedicated to figuring out ways to make our Government be
more efficient, more accountable, identify waste, fraud, and
abuse. It is one of the few things I think operates a little
bit more like a private sector business than a true Government
operation. Any private sector business, this would be par for
the course. It is too often not par for the course across
Government in our country. In identifying the savings that we
can make, making things work more efficiently, and ultimately
serving the American people better I think is essential. As we
continue our work here on the modernization of Congress, diving
in and looking at where we can take the GAO in the years ahead.
It is 102 years I believe you have been--the GAO, not you,
sir--the GAO has been in existence and looking for ways that we
can also leverage that history but also develop it for the
future so we can continue the work of weeding out waste, fraud,
and abuse, but also thinking proactively about how we can make
our Federal agencies more efficient.
The answer of ``We have always done it this way'' is
insufficient for me, and I think you bring that approach in
many ways to how we should be thinking about the Federal
Government. ``We have always done it this way'' is not
sufficient. You guys are often looking at ways to create
efficiencies.
Appreciate you being here and look forward to today's
conversation.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Steil follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION BRYAN STEIL

When we think about modernizing Congress, making the
legislative branch work more efficiently, I do not think there
is anything better than the GAO being here with us where you
are dedicated to figuring out ways to make our Government be
more efficient, more accountable, identify waste, fraud, and
abuse. It is one of the few things I think operates a little
bit more like a private sector business than a true Government
operation. Any private sector business, this would be par for
the course. It is too often not par for the course across
Government in our country. In identifying the savings that we
can make, making things work more efficiently, and ultimately
serving the American people better I think is essential. As we
continue our work here on the modernization of Congress, diving
in and looking at where we can take the GAO in the years ahead.
It is 102 years I believe you have been--the GAO, not you,
sir--the GAO has been in existence and looking for ways that we
can also leverage that history but also develop it for the
future so we can continue the work of weeding out waste, fraud,
and abuse, but also thinking proactively about how we can make
our Federal agencies more efficient.
The answer of ``We have always done it this way'' is
insufficient for me, and I think you bring that approach in
many ways to how we should be thinking about the Federal
Government. ``We have always done it this way'' is not
sufficient. You guys are often looking at ways to create
efficiencies.
Appreciate you being here and look forward to today's
conversation.

Chairwoman Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We now welcome Gene Dodaro, the Comptroller General of the
Government Accountability Office. Mr. Dodaro was nominated by
President Obama and confirmed by the U.S. Senate in December
2010 as the eighth Comptroller General of the GAO.
In his role, Mr. Dodaro helps oversee the development of
hundreds of reports and testimonies each year, paving the way
for improvements to a wide range of Government programs and
billions of dollars in taxpayer savings.
With a GAO career dating back more than 50 years, Mr.
Dodaro contributes a wealth of expertise and knowledge to the
development of GAO's strategic plans for serving Congress and
improving Government in the 21st century.
Mr. Dodaro, we appreciate you being here today.
Please remember to press the button on your microphone in
front of you so the green light is on. When you speak, the
timer will begin and turn green. After 4 minutes, it will be
yellow. When the red light comes on, your 5 minutes have
expired, and we would ask that you please wrap up quickly.
It is my pleasure to recognize the Comptroller, Mr. Dodaro.

STATEMENT OF GENE DODARO, COMPTROLLER GENERAL, U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Dodaro. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Bice, Ranking
Member Kilmer, Chairman Steil.
It is very nice to be here today. I appreciate the
opportunity to talk about GAO's important work for the Congress
and the country. I would emphasize a couple of things right up
front. One, we do work on a regular basis for 90 percent of the
standing Committees of the Congress. The scope of our work is
across the entire breadth and scope of the Federal Government.
We have subject-matter experts, technical experts, a very
multidisciplinary organization that we built over the years. As
has been mentioned already, we get results, tens of billions of
dollars of savings each year but also, importantly, beyond just
the dollar savings, the impact on improving public services,
making agencies operate more efficiently and effectively,
address risk, address fraud, waste, and abuse in the Federal
Government.
Now, my vision for GAO has always been to try to enhance it
to be an agile, dynamic organization, always working on the
most important national issues and also to be ready at a
moment's notice to do real-time auditing in national
emergencies, which is what we have done during the global
financial crisis, both with the Troubled Asset Relief Program
and also the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. Most
recently during the pandemic, we did monthly reports to the
Congress on what was happening with the $4.5 trillion in
assistance, what impact that had on the public health and on
the economy, how to deal more with transparency and
accountability issues.
Now, we do these things by constantly refining our
strategic planning and foresight process so that it enriches
our dialog with the Congress on what are the top priorities
that the Congress has and what ideas we have. We developed a
shared agenda of things to work on, and it is very--it is not
only current issues but emerging issues, and it is very
important. We try to get ahead of those things before they
become a crisis.
Second is our workforce. We are modernizing our workforce.
In addition to very senior people that have decades' of
experience at GAO, we are bringing in a pipeline of younger
people: 36 percent of our workforce is 40 or younger; 13
percent are 30 or younger.
We have a very dynamic--and this is one area that I have
encouraged other agencies to implement. We have a robust
internship program. We sell our mission. We have a good work
environment where people feel valued, respected, and treated
fairly. We give them flexibilities, and our attrition rate is
only 6 percent, which is really low. You build this
institutional knowledge. We are a knowledge organization, and
we are only as good as our people. You need to get good people.
You need to keep good people. You need to train them and retain
them. This enables us to provide the highest quality service to
the Congress on whatever challenges come our way and during
that approach.
Now, you mentioned the science and technology area. We have
tripled the size of the people in that group. We now have over
100 people with STEM degrees, 36 of them are Ph.D.s. We have
expanded our technology assessments work. We have done
spotlight work, you know, explainers of different technologies.
I want to continue to grow that. I have been trying to grow it
before Congress became a full partner with me over the decades,
and that needs to continue to grow. That is one area where I
would enjoy support from the Committee as well.
The last area that is a focus for me and GAO is trying to
get our Government on a more long-term sustainable fiscal path,
and this--I am taking two tracks on this. One is to try to
change the debt ceiling approach. I believe the approach we
have now does not change the long-term trajectory of the debt.
It causes us to pay more interest, and people stop buying
treasuries around the time there might be an impasse.
Plus, we need to plan. There is no guidepost now. We need a
debt-to-GDP target. We have laid out a plan there. Plus, we are
also working to try to--in other areas.
Now, the main drivers are healthcare costs and then
interest on the debt, but there are a lot of other areas in the
Federal Government where you can achieve savings. Witness our
results. We have got over $600 billion in financial savings as
a result of recommendations that we have made to eliminate
overlap, duplication, and fragmentation of the Government. Our
recommendations on waste, fraud, and abuse regularly, on
average the last 17 years, have over $40 billion of savings.
We are working hard to try to do in those areas, and I
would be happy to answer questions about some of the efforts
and recommendations that have been put forth by the Committee
in the Q&A.
[The prepared statement of Comptroller General Dodaro
follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF COMPTROLLER GENERAL DODARO

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Bice. Perfect. Thank you, Mr. Dodaro.
We will now question the witness, beginning with myself,
followed by Ranking Member Kilmer. We are going to alternate
questioning. Any Member wishing to be recognized should just
signal to the chair. I will now recognize myself for the
purpose of questioning the witness.
I first want to just mention that you said a couple of
things in your opening statement that caught my attention,
words like ``agile,'' ``dynamic,'' ``real time,'' ``constant
reevaluation.'' These are things that I think many of your
counterparts across Government could maybe adopt and embrace
because we do not often see that. The comment was made earlier,
you know, we continue to do the same things over and over. I
really appreciate and value the work that you are putting into
really focusing on how can we make things more successful
within the GAO.
Let me start by asking you a question. You have been with
this institution for quite some time. We mentioned earlier we
are thankful for your service of 50 years. In 2025, it will
actually mark the end of your 15-year term as Comptroller
General. As we think ahead for the agency and understand that
you want to be somewhat deferential to the process in finding
and onboarding a new leader for the agency, what are some of
the critical performance functions that should be required for
an incoming Comptroller General?
Mr. Dodaro. I think you need someone who has a broad
perspective on management issues and policy issues in the
Government. You know, GAO started out as an organization
focused on financial management issues following World War I.
We have changed dramatically over a period of time to evolve to
meet the current needs and the future needs of the Congress and
the country.
As part of doing that, right now less than 10 percent of
our workforce are financial auditors. We still audit the
consolidated financial statements of the Federal Government. We
still are financial advisors to the Congress. I have been
trying mightily in that area. The bulk of our work are
performance audits of Government programs, policies, and
issues. We have economists, operations research people, public
policy analysts. We have added scientists and, you know,
information technology, cybersecurity experts in those areas.
The GAO is really a multidisciplinary organization.
You know, while we have our roots in financial management,
still do some of the important work in that area, you need
someone who has a breadth of knowledge beyond just financial
management to be able to run GAO effectively and serve the
Congress going forward.
You need someone who can maintain our nonpartisan status.
That is essential to GAO's reputation and effectiveness. We are
one of the few institutions that are still respected for our
independence and nonpartisan status on both sides of the aisle
in both Chambers of Congress. I take great pride in that, and I
hope that the next Comptroller General can do that.
Then also you need someone who will be focused on
accountability within the organization but across Government,
but also treat our people well. I mean, it is very important.
You know, one of my emphasis as Comptroller General was to not
only have our dedicated people--we were always dedicated to the
quality of our products but not always the same level of
attention on developing our people, as individuals, as
professionals. It is very important. I try and put that on a
par, and I hope the next person recognizes that because they
are a dedicated, talented workforce, one of the best in the
world for our type of organization.
Chairwoman Bice. It sounds like this is a tall order, Mr.
Dodaro, to find someone to fill your shoes in the future.
Mr. Dodaro. I am not willing to take another 15-year term.
My wife----
Chairwoman Bice. All right. Fair enough.
You do not want to make it 65 years? I mean, that sounds
like a good, nice round number.
Mr. Dodaro. If it was up to me----
Chairwoman Bice. Let me pivot to another topic if I may.
One of the Select Committee's recommendations from last
Congress was that the Committees of jurisdiction should examine
the underlying statutory authorities for the support agencies
and determine if they need to be updated or modernized to
better support your work for Congress.
In the light of that recommendation and looking at GAO's
organic statute, which I understand is actually from the
1970's, do you have any recommendations of where Committees of
jurisdiction might consider changes or updates to improve the
agency and enhance your work and strengthen the service to
Congress?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. There have been selective updates past
1970. 1980 we were given our own personnel authority, which has
been terrific. We are not under OPM (Office of Personnel
Management) rules, regulations. We have a whole different pay
system that we have had. We are not on a GS (General Schedule)
system. Up through--the most recent change was 2017 when
Congress reaffirmed our right to go to court to enforce our
access authorities if agencies did not give us the information
that we need in that area.
You know, my feeling on this is it is very important that
Congress be very prudent in opening up the legislation for GAO.
Once you do that, you invite the executive branch to
participate in the discussion of how they are audited, and our
independence is very important. You know, because the President
would have to sign some legislation, they weigh in in that
process. Now that Congress is in control, we will have to see
what happens. I think anything that--our authorities right now
are strong. We are able to do everything we need to do for the
Congress, and I would encourage the Congress to be very
careful.
Chairwoman Bice. OK.
Mr. Dodaro. GAO is unique, you know, because we have to be
independent, and that is why we are in the legislative branch.
Chairwoman Bice. Absolutely.
Mr. Dodaro. I think--my philosophy is, if there are things
that Congress would like to have GAO do, we should have a
dialog about it.
Chairwoman Bice. Thank you for that. My time has expired,
so I need to pause there.
At this time, I recognize Ranking Member Kilmer for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Madam Chair.
I am going to try to ask, like, seven questions in 5
minutes, so all related to the Improving Government for
America's Taxpayers Act.
Again, I think the work you do is really important, but it
is only as important as like we act on. Right? To start, can
you comment on how most of your recommendations get closed out
right now?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Most of them are voluntarily adopted by
the executive branch agencies.
Mr. Kilmer. OK. What----
Mr. Dodaro. On average, 77 percent of our recommendations
are implemented within a 4-year period of time that we make
them. I send a letter to the head of every department and
agency every year with open GAO recommendations, prioritize a
few that I think are most significant.
Mr. Kilmer. Yes.
Mr. Dodaro. Now, Congress--since 2000, we have issued 1,100
matters for Congress, directly to Congress to consider; 80
percent of those have been implemented. There is a couple
hundred still open; 38 percent of those have been included in
legislation that has been introduced last Congress and this
Congress. We are working to get those implemented. It is a
big--we have a rigorous follow up process.
Mr. Kilmer. Why do one in five remain open?
Mr. Dodaro. One in five?
Mr. Kilmer. You said 80 percent get acted on, 20 percent do
not.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, right. Well----
Mr. Kilmer. Is it because they are hard?
Mr. Dodaro [continuing]. Congress is not of like mind.
Mr. Kilmer. Yes.
Mr. Dodaro. It is hard----
Mr. Kilmer. What?
Mr. Dodaro. I know this comes as a shock to you today, but
sometimes it is tough to get consensus on some of these
recommendations that we make to the Congress for them in order
to act because everything we do to the Congress requires
legislation.
Mr. Kilmer. Right.
Mr. Dodaro. The legislation sometimes is slow in coming,
you know.
Mr. Kilmer. You mentioned the report that you make to us.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Mr. Kilmer. Are there other things that you are doing to
try to increase that uptake?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, sure. Yes, one thing we do is we develop
legislative language. I just testified before the Congress, in
a 5-hour hearing I might add, on fraud, waste, and abuse coming
out of the pandemic. I have 10, 12 legislative suggestions. We
have drafted legislative language, have given it to Committees,
and are working with them to try and get that implemented to go
forward. We are very proactive in working with the Committees.
Now, we report things. The overlap duplication report that
we have every year I have added cost savings and revenue
enhancements. That is not even required under the legislation.
I use that as a platform. There is a report card in there of
how many recommendations Congress has adopted as opposed to the
executive branch.
Mr. Kilmer. Gotcha.
Mr. Dodaro. You know we report things several times. It is
in the original report. We reiterate it again in the overlap
and duplication report. Now we have this third report on open
matters that we issue to the Congress. The real work gets done
with us working with the Committees----
Mr. Kilmer. Yes.
Mr. Dodaro [continuing]. to try and encourage them to do
legislation.
The same thing on the executive branch, if the executive
branch balks, we work with them to try to get legislative
language and appropriations or authorizations to require the
executive agencies to implement our recommendations. That
routinely happens as well.
Mr. Kilmer. Can you share more about how GAO has
implemented the new law, the Improving Government for America's
Taxpayers Act, and whether you have seen any difference in
terms of how Congress responds to open recommendations?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. It has been not that long since we have
issued the reports. We have issued two; one where we estimated
the total cost of implementing our open recommendations, and we
said it would be between $92 billion and $182 billion if
Congress implemented those recommendations.
Now, what we do is we give some idea of the magnitude of
what the savings would be on our recs--millions, tens of
millions, a hundred million, billion, tens of billion--and
because, at the end of the day, the real estimate that counts
is CBO's (Congressional Budget Office) estimate, and we do not
wanted to duplicate and get in the business of trying to
replicate CBO.
Many times, when we talk to Committees they will say: Well,
it is nice we have your estimate, but unless we have CBO's
estimate--now that gets done if it gets in legislative language
and Congress asks CBO to make the estimate.
Most of the savings that we report come from third-party
estimates, you know, about what happens.
You know, while it is important for us to try to give
Congress a signal on how much money could be saved, we do not
want to duplicate CBO. They are the official scorekeeper.
Mr. Kilmer. I know you are setting up shop in Longworth,
which I am excited about. I want to just ask ahead of time,
please do not put a restraining order out against my team. It
seems like an opportunity to enact some of those
recommendations around increased staff oversight training----
Mr. Dodaro. Right.
Mr. Kilmer [continuing]. and enhancing the customer service
experience with GAO. Is that the plan?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, that is the plan. It is underway.
A couple of things I would ask for--and I think that is a
good idea. We asked years ago to get an office up here in
Congress. When I started in 1973, we had an office here in the
Capitol. It was in the basement. It was a nice, cozy place, but
it was a beachhead. We lost that over the years as things got
tied up here and a lot of renovations were underway. I think
that would help.
What also would help, the last time I was before the Select
Committee last Congress, I asked--for years I have been trying
to get into the Orientation Program for New Members, and we
have not been very successful in doing that. I would ask again
to do that because I think it is an opportunity to explain what
GAO could do for individual Members and then their Committee
assignments as well, and also to get a more prominent marking
on the House--on the home page, so there is more direction to
GAO to be able to do that. If the Committee could help us in
that regard, I think it would be a good idea. We plan to have
people up here all the time in the office and try to help, and
we have Find an Expert on Issues planned and Ask a Scientist
planned, you know, a lot of things----
Chairwoman Bice. Well, as someone who is passionate about
the New Member Orientation Program and process and wrote a
paper on how it should be changed, I now sit as the chair of
the Subcommittee I think maybe because of that. We will
certainly take your suggestions into consideration.
It is my honor to now recognize the chair of the full
Committee, Chairman Steil, for his 5 minutes' worth of
questions.
Chairman Steil. I think we got through about three of Mr.
Kilmer's seven questions.
Mr. Kilmer. No. We got through like six.
Chairman Steil. No, I am teasing. I am teasing you.
I want to pick up right where Mr. Kilmer was on how we
integrate the GAO recommendations in the Congress. You have the
beachhead coming in. You talked about training. Can you talk
about how you interact with oversight staff--I know you do some
of that work--and how we should think about that?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. No, we do a lot of work with the oversight
Committees as well. They are one of our most frequent
requesters of GAO. They sponsor the high-risk series that we
have. Now, this is a series that we started in 1990 actually.
It is probably the longest running bipartisan supported good
Government effort in our Government's history. What we focused
on initially was fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement in the
Federal Government. Then it has evolved over time to also be on
transformation.
We update the list at the beginning of each new Congress,
and we focus on recommendations in that area. I always appear
as I did in February--or I think it was March--April maybe this
year to unveil the updating of the list in that area, and that
leads to a lot of savings. Areas on the list are, like,
Medicare, Medicaid. We have got a payment problem in the
Federal Government, overpayments, since we work with Congress
to require them to be reported. They are $2.4 trillion. Last
year, it was $242 trillion alone. Fraud during the pandemic was
epic. We just issued a report that just in the unemployment
insurance area alone, there is $100 billion to $135 billion.
Chairman Steil. To dig into--so let me take that and just
shift gears slightly----
Mr. Dodaro. Sure.
Chairman Steil [continuing]. because I hold your concern.
Actually, I hold it for how the EV tax credits are going to be
paid as we go into 2024 with car dealers being the
determination and sending the money. I think that is ripe for
fraud. That is a whole separate conversation.
Mr. Dodaro. Right.
Chairman Steil [continuing]. is we look at your uptake of
20 percent remain open. We are conflicted; maybe not everyone
agrees. Could you just give a little more color as to why we
are at one out of five not being implemented?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Chairman Steil. I accept that not everybody is going to
agree 100 percent with everything that is put out by you.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. I will give you a couple good examples of
some big ticket ones that I think could be. For a number of
years--and I have been reiterating this over and over again--in
the Medicare program, if you go in for evaluation services and
you go to a doctor associated with a hospital as opposed to
going to a doctor in their own private practice in a separate
commercial building, the Government pays you more for the
doctor in the--if you equalize that, you would save $141
billion over 10 years. This is CBO's estimate.
You know, healthcare has got a lobby, and it is no surprise
to anybody, and it is tough to change some of the rules in
healthcare. A lot of our recommendations open are in
healthcare.
Chairman Steil. Are some of these recommendations then rule
changes that Congress has to enact?
Mr. Dodaro. Absolutely.
Chairman Steil. Congress is actually the block, not a
Federal Government agency that is failing to act?
Mr. Dodaro. You said ``block,'' not me.
Chairman Steil. No, you are right.
Mr. Dodaro. It requires----
Chairman Steil [continuing]. disagree or not implement the
recommendation.
Mr. Dodaro. Right.
Chairman Steil. It is the legislative side is some of this
20 percent rather than a Federal Government agency that you
identify----
Mr. Dodaro. It is a mix. It is a mix, but it is some.
Chairman Steil [continuing]. for making false payments. You
are making payments change X to Y.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, right, right, right. Yes, some require
legislation. Most of the big dollar amounts require legislative
changes.
On the administrative side, the problem we have had
cybersecurity. All right. I designated cybersecurity a high-
risk area across the entire Federal Government. The first time
we ever did that, 1997. We have issued thousands of
recommendations. Many of the open recommendations now are in
the cybersecurity area, more on protecting critical
infrastructure protection that I added in 2003. The agencies
are slow to implement these things. That is why I have
prioritized the recommendations to them.
We are now meeting with--our team meeting with the
Secretary of Agriculture Vilsack, for example, on a quarterly
basis to go over open recommendations. We do that at CMS. The
CMS and Defense have the lowest record of implementation rates,
and I have talked to them. We are working on that, meeting with
them on a more ongoing basis.
There is a culture in some of the agencies where it is just
difficult to get change in place, and DOD is one of them.
Chairman Steil. Understood.
Thank you for your time, for being here.
I know there is a lot of people on your broader team at GAO
that work incredibly hard. Thanks to them as well. Nobody can
do anything without a good team behind them.
Mr. Dodaro. Absolutely.
Chairman Steil. I know you have a lot of great men and
women that are dedicated to rooting out waste, fraud, and
abuse. There is work we can do to continue to modernize GAO,
but appreciate you being here.
I now yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes for additional
questioning.
I want to start by just touching on a couple of quick
things. You mentioned your excitement around putting in an
office in Longworth to be able to sort of highlight the work
that GAO does, and I think that is important. I do want to ask
you what other avenues you are looking at to try to build
awareness and maybe bridge that awareness gap that currently
exists.
While I will tell you that certainly we will take the
consideration of putting your information into the New Member
Orientation, the reality is there are a lot of people that want
time in those meetings, and it becomes a competition in some
ways of, you know, what is a priority.
What I would tell you is I am not sure that I have a lot of
awareness of what GAO did or does until maybe the last year or
so. For me, knowing now the reporting and, you know,
information that you are providing is incredibly crucial. I
want to help you do that, but I would also like to know sort of
how you are addressing that issue.
The second point I want to make is maybe one of more of a
little bit of a concern. You mentioned that you are focused on
being nonpartisan. That is important to you. You also said in
your comments that you have developed some legislative
suggestions. Where did that directive come from?
Mr. Dodaro. In terms of developing legislative language?
Well, we do it in two cases. One, we are asked to by some of
the Committees.
Chairwoman Bice. OK.
Mr. Dodaro. In areas that are GAO, you know, sort of
hallmark areas, like fraud, waste, and abuse, you know, I have
done that as a service in those areas, but only in those areas.
We do not get into policy areas or issues associated with that
unless we are asked to. Sometimes we provide drafting
legislative language to the Committees without any, you know,
attribution to GAO. It is just done as a service to them.
Chairwoman Bice. Perfect. I think I just want to be
cautious about that. Right? If you are providing legislative
suggestions, you could be--it could be perceived as you are
being partisan in one way or another, and I think that is
something that we want to try to avoid.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. I only do it where--this, what I referred
to, is on fraud, and fraud is----
Chairwoman Bice. Bipartisan issue.
Mr. Dodaro [continuing]. bipartisan issue I think.
Chairwoman Bice. I would hope so.
Mr. Dodaro. Nobody is supporting fraud. They want to fix
fraud.
Chairwoman Bice. Exactly.
Mr. Dodaro. I only do it in those sort of safe harbor
areas.
Chairwoman Bice. OK. Thank you for clarifying.
Mr. Dodaro. Sure.
Chairwoman Bice. You want to talk a little bit about
addressing the awareness gap.
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, yes. We have an Office of Congressional
Relations. They outreach to the Committees. One of the things
that is----
Chairwoman Bice. Let us talk about individual offices
because I think the Committees is great----
Mr. Dodaro. Yes.
Chairwoman Bice. [continuing]. and I think that is
important. I think that there is so much value----
Mr. Dodaro. Right.
Chairwoman Bice. [continuing]. in actually connecting with
individual offices, especially as an appropriator myself, you
provide a lot of information. I do not know that maybe that is
a place that has been a focus, but----
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Well, you know, we sent letters to all 80
new Members this year with a link to GAO, had a message on
there about how they could get access to our services or
whatever.
What has happened over the years, as I looked up--when I
first joined GAO, we had over 5,000 people. OK. We have got
about 3,500 right now. We--our priorities and protocols that we
have worked out with the Congress is to do work based upon--
priority one is things in law or Committee or conference
reports accompanying the law. Two is chairs and Ranking
Members. We treat both the same. Then third is requests from an
individual Member of Congress.
We have not had any--enough resources to entertain that for
a while. The Members have to go to--the individual Members
would have to go to a Committee to get support to get a GAO
report. That was not always that way.
Chairwoman Bice. OK.
Mr. Dodaro. We had more reason to interact with the Members
before, and they had more interest in receiving information
from us, so----
Chairwoman Bice. Well, I think that you all provide such a
valuable service. I understand what you are saying about
challenges, but----
Mr. Dodaro. I think what could be done to be helpful would
be for this Committee to encourage other Committees to at least
within the Committee to have a meeting about what GAO is doing
for the Committee and what all of the Members are on the
Committee because right now it is usually the chair or Ranking
Member or both that understand what is going on with their
staff. The individuals on--the Members of that Committee may
not be aware of GAO's extensive work for the Committee in on
more fulsome manner.
Chairwoman Bice. Perfect.
Mr. Dodaro. We will try to continue to meet with individual
Members' offices to try to provide the services.
Chairwoman Bice. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Dodaro. Whatever ideas you have there would be helpful.
Chairwoman Bice. Last, I want to pivot to GAO detailees,
which has become quite a fun topic for us in the office. Can
you talk a little bit about currently how many GAO detailees
are out in the field with placements either in the House or the
Senate? Have these numbers changed over time?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes. Well, we try to keep it around 12 or 14
people right now. Historically----
Chairwoman Bice. How long are they typically detailed to?
Mr. Dodaro. By law they can only be detailed to Committees
for up to a year.
Chairwoman Bice. OK. Is that how long you typically have
them there is a year?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, yes.
Chairwoman Bice. OK.
Mr. Dodaro. Sometimes it will go for 6 months. Then, you
know, if we get requests to go longer than a year, we have to
have a conversation, you know. In the 1980's, you know, when we
had many more people, we had many more detailees.
Chairwoman Bice. Yes.
Mr. Dodaro. That is an area that can be discussed----
Chairwoman Bice. OK.
Mr. Dodaro [continuing]. and it is very important. The
perception is what we try to do is balance it because, on
Committees, if you put one on one side of the aisle, you have
to probably do it on the other side.
Chairwoman Bice. Absolutely, OK.
Mr. Dodaro. You do not have that perception of trying to
tip, you know, the balance of resources that is determined by
the majority and the minority----
Chairwoman Bice. Got it.
Mr. Dodaro [continuing]. rules of the Congress.
Chairwoman Bice. My time has expired, so I am going to wrap
up there.
I am going to recognize Ranking Member Kilmer for 5
minutes.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Madam Chair.
When we were walking in, we were talking about unusual
times here in the Nation's Capitol. I am just curious, what
happens to your agency in the event of a Government shutdown?
Mr. Dodaro. You know, we keep a core group of people--
historically, we keep a core group of people here to help
Congress make the final decisions they need to make to get the
Government back open. That includes our appropriation law
people who render legal decisions on what is appropriate and
not appropriate to do during a shutdown.
By and large, we stop the work. I mean, there is only two
exceptions to the Antideficiency Act. One is to protect life,
and the other is to protect property. We protect our property.
Now, this year, we have some money that is multiyear money,
and so, like, to oversee accountability of the money being sent
to the Ukraine. We still have coronavirus money, pandemic money
for that program and Infrastructure Investment Inflation
Reduction Act. We will be able to continue some selective
audits but only because we have multiyear money----
Mr. Kilmer. Yes.
Mr. Dodaro [continuing]. and not 1-year money. Everything
else gets shut down.
Now, if Congress holds a hearing, we would bring people
back. We would bring the teams back. We react to what Congress'
needs are. Other than that--and we have to be careful because
we are the ones who render legal decisions on whether other
agencies across the entire Federal Government follow the law--
--
Mr. Kilmer. Right.
Mr. Dodaro [continuing]. during a shutdown practice.
Mr. Kilmer. OK. Well, I like that $145 return per dollar
invested. I hope we keep you running.
You know, one of the things we have talked a bit about both
on the Modernization Committee and on this Subcommittee is
artificial intelligence and its potential to help Members and
staff and support agency staff do their job more efficiently
and effectively.
One topic that I guess came up in our CRS (Congressional
Research Service) hearing is having AI generate bill summaries;
then having a human check to ensure nonpartisan summaries exist
for all of the bills Congress considers that might reduce some
of the workload.
Can you just share with the Committee about how GAO sees
the potential for AI in terms of the expertise it can offer
Congress, how the agency is using AI itself in its own day-to-
day work?
Mr. Dodaro. Yes, yes. It has a lot of potential, but, like,
with a lot of things, it has risks. You know, new technologies
have risks associated with them as well, both legal, ethical
and, you know, accuracy kind of risk.
Mr. Kilmer. Yes.
Mr. Dodaro. We are--we have an innovation lab that we
created as part of our science, technology, analytics work.
They are doing two things: One, to help us figure out how to
audit AI in other agencies. We are looking now across
Government--of the use of AI across the Government. We have
done a lot of work at DOD, for example, as they try to ramp up
to meet competition from China and other areas.
They have created an accountability framework of how we can
look at governance, data performance, and monitoring issues. We
have criteria now so that we can audit AI.
We are also looking at how we can use AI within GAO. We
have vast amounts of information, to make it more accessible
both to GAO people, and once we can demonstrate the use, we
have a large language model that we brought in right now. We
are looking at loading all of GAO reports. I mean, we have
thousands of reports over the years. You know, that information
could be queried in a much more sophisticated way. Then, once
we demonstrate the ability to do that, that we are satisfied
that it is accurate, making that available to the Congress and
all of the staff in the Congress so they could query, you know,
questions and go directly to that data base of GAO that would
not be populated by other things. You know, all of our
information is reliable and accurate and verified.
Those are a couple of applications. I think there are other
things that could be done where we could use AI to improve how
we audit. Mostly I am also preparing for what we audit.
Mr. Kilmer. Yes.
Mr. Dodaro. That is important as well so we can give the
Congress--we are also providing--that is an area we are
providing technical assistance in the development of
legislation. Part of regulating it is first defining it, and
there is a definition that is in the NDAA from 2019, but it is
pretty broad, and so we have been giving a lot of assistance to
the Congress.
In our lab, we have technologists. We have data science
people, and then we also have people who have worked in
actually developing AI models in the private sector or maybe
elsewhere in the Government.
Mr. Kilmer. Super.
Thanks, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Chairwoman Bice. Thank you.
We want to give you a huge thank you for being with us this
morning. I appreciate your testimony and your time and look
forward to continuing to working with you in the future.
Thank you, Mr. Dodaro.
At this time, we will pause to move to our second panel of
witnesses.
Mr. Dodaro. Thank you very much.
Chairwoman Bice. Excellent. I will now introduce the second
panel of witnesses.
Our first witness, Dr. Tim Persons, served as the GAO's
chief scientist and as a co-director of the Science,
Technology, Assessment, and Analytics Team until his departure
in 2023. Dr. Persons provides knowledge and expertise of how
STAA was created, its successes, and how GAO could be enhanced
moving forward.
Dr. Persons is a partner with PricewaterhouseCoopers, where
he leads the development of innovative assurance solutions for
clients in artificial intelligence and machine learning, data,
algorithms, and other digital transformations.
Welcome.
Next, we welcome Mr. James-Christian Blockwood, who
formerly served as the managing director of the Strategic
Planning and External Liaison Office at GAO. During his tenure,
Mr. Blockwood was responsible for creating GAO's strategic plan
and helped GAO identify future trends that might be of interest
to Congress.
Currently, Mr. Blockwood serves as the executive vice
president of the Partnership for Public Service.
Finally, we welcome Mr. Dan Lips, who currently serves as
head of policy for the Foundation for American Innovation, an
organization focused on developing technology, talent, and
ideas that support a better, freer, and more abundant future.
Mr. Lips' research focuses on improving governance, addressing
national security risks, and promoting innovation.
Thank you to our second panel of witnesses for being with
us today.
Please remember to press the button on the microphone in
front of you so that the green light is on. When you speak, the
timer will begin. After 4 minutes, the timer will turn yellow.
When the red light comes on, your 5 minutes have expired, and
we would ask you to kindly wrap up.
Now, at this time, I recognize Dr. Tim Persons for 5
minutes.

STATEMENTS OF TIM PERSONS, PRINCIPAL, PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS
LLP; JAMES-CHRISTIAN BLOCKWOOD, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT,
PARTNERSHIP FOR PUBLIC SERVICE; AND DAN LIPS, HEAD OF POLICY,
FOUNDATION FOR AMERICAN INNOVATION (FAI)

STATEMENT OF TIM PERSONS

Mr. Persons. Thank you, Chairwoman Bice, Ranking Member
Kilmer, and Members of the Committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to speak today about the modernization of GAO and
the legislative support agencies, as well as the importance of
building science and technology capacity and capabilities for
the Congress.
The GAO has been a vital institution, as you know, for over
a century, strengthening congressional oversight, ensuring
efficiency and accountability in Government operations. Its
commitment to accountability, integrity, and reliability have
made it one of the most trusted public sector brands in the
world.
My remarks this morning are strictly my own and based upon
my 14.5 years as GAO's chief scientist, the highest regard I
have for both GAO and Congress, and my three decades of
experience in AI, digital technologies, and innovation.
We are currently witnessing an unprecedented acceleration
in the impacts of S&T. In just the past 36 months, we have
experienced some of the fastest and most powerful technology
revolutions in human history, Messenger RNA, fusion ignition,
and generative AI are just some examples. ChatGBT itself, which
has come up earlier in the discussions, is reshaping business,
society, the Government, and doing it at an unprecedented rate.
It reached 100 million users in a mere 60 days.
These are just a few examples illustrating the need for the
shift in the clock speed of GAO and the legislative support
agencies, the concept referring to the rate at which change may
occur within an industry or organization to avoid obsolescence.
GAO's recent track record in innovation is encouraging,
reestablishing technology assessment, creating 2-page S&T
Spotlights delivered in weeks, establishing the STAA and the
innovation lab within it. There is much to commend as part of
its mission to be a leading practices Federal agency.
Nevertheless, to quote the inside GAO joke about the
standard pattern of every one of its reports, is progress made
but more could be done.
In this era of digital disruption, it is imperative the GAO
and our legislative support agencies modernize processes,
technologies, skills, and cultures not merely to keep pace with
the rapidly evolving landscape but rather to transform with
nimbleness and agility to deliver their increasingly important
professional services in an anticipatory, content-centric,
user-experience-focused manner.
The centrality of digital and data to GAO's mission and
others cannot be overstated. To ensure their success, it is
crucial that they develop and deploy state-of-the-art data
governance and digitally driven capability transformations with
decisive alacrity.
Evolutionary or half-step measures, those seemingly safer,
are not and will not be enough to keep the major risks of
irrelevance and obsolescence at bay. They must transform in
accordance with their distinct missions yet with a serious
reexamination of their content-generation operations and
delivery systems, their current authorities, their investment
plans, human resourcing, and training strategies.
Moreover, the ever-increasing volume and complexity of data
will likely require regular updates to data policies and
statutes and the establishment of key partnerships with
entities like the congressional Data Task Force. They must also
be provided with the necessary leadership and innovation oxygen
to succeed in their campaigns, all to provide content and
analysis at depth and at speed in support of the desired
evidence-based policymaking or EBP ecosystem for the Congress.
Imagine, for example, a digital dashboard tool where a large
language model technology might support just-in-time content
and insight for EBP based on data and content provided in part
by the GAO and other agencies.
Just today an article is being published in ``Nature''
describing how GPTs may be used to produce high-quality first
drafts of policy briefs, like Spotlights, ones that can be
customized for particular jurisdictions or Members and
delivered in minutes and hours versus days and weeks. It is
related exactly to what Mr. Kilmer asked earlier.
Digital technology-driven modernization transformation and
increased S&T capacity are not possible without the necessary
staff to envision, design, implement, and manage the desired
changes. Thus, in addition to authorizing the STAA in
recognition of the expanding services it provides, I endorse
the implementation of option 3 of the 2019 NAPA report, which
recommends the establishment of the Office of the congressional
S&T Advisor. This development would provide a powerful
framework for collaboration and coordination in the legislative
branch in support of S&T issues in solving what is the core
challenge, namely, the need for greater absorption in that.
To conclude, many thanks are due to this Committee for its
continued efforts to modernize GAO and the legislative branch.
Now is the time for decisive business transformation in
digital, including data governance, in support of EBP.
Authorizing STAA and establishing the OCSTA can ensure that
Congress is supported by best available rapidly and organically
integrated S&T personnel and insights.
Thank you. I will be happy to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Tim Persons follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF TIM PERSONS

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Bice. You saw me about to drop the gavel, didn't
you?
Mr. Persons. Yes.
Chairwoman Bice. Thank you, Dr. Persons. Appreciate it.
Next it is my honor to welcome Mr. James-Christian
Blockwood for 5 minutes of testimony. You are recognized.

STATEMENT OF JAMES-CHRISTIAN BLOCKWOOD

Mr. Blockwood. Chairwoman Bice, Ranking Member Kilmer, and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to
participate in today's hearing.
As the Chairwoman mentioned, I am the executive vice
president of the Partnership for Public Service, a nonpartisan,
nonprofit dedicated to increasing the efficiency and
effectiveness of the Federal Government. I will also offer a
perspective during my time when I was at GAO as a senior
executive.
There is a declining trust in Government and institutions
more broadly, and our Nation is sharply divided along partisan
lines, unfortunately. GAO is one of Congress' greatest tools
for fostering an agile, effective, trusted, and transparent
Government ready to face future challenges. I applaud the
ongoing efforts of this Subcommittee to ensure our legislative
branch agencies are prepared and equipped to respond.
As I discuss in more detail in my written statement, there
are several areas of consideration as this Subcommittee seeks
to support GAO in its efforts to provide more modern solutions
and services.
First and foremost, GAO must continue to uphold a
nonpartisan approach to its work and organizational culture.
GAO serves all Members of Congress and must always be a
stronghold for credible analysis and findings, protect its
independence, and avoid even the appearance of impropriety or
favor. This function cannot succeed without a full commitment
to nonpartisanship.
Looking forward, Congress and the administration should
prioritize an unwavering commitment to nonpartisanship in the
candidate for Comptroller General when they next appoint and
confirm this position.
Second, the Subcommittee should explore investing in and
expanding the authorities and capabilities of GAO. Given
growing Government spending, complexity of management
challenges, high risk of fraud, and recent passage of
multibillion dollar legislation, Congress should, one, increase
the size and capacity of GAO's forensic audits and
investigative service and help agencies adopt a fraud-
prevention culture; second, consider an appropriation for GAO's
Center for Audit Excellence to provide greater accountability
for Federal funds dispersed across the country, as well as
abroad; and, third, strengthen GAO's ability to ensure follow
up of open recommendations by authority and through a dynamic
interactive dashboard or other platform.
A third area of investment in GAO's capacity to address
emerging issues is strategic foresight. Strategic foresight
helps improve understanding of an organization's external
environment, mitigate risk, and take advantage of opportunities
ahead. GAO has already created several offices and functions to
engage in this work. However, more investment may be required
to advance its trend monitoring, strategic foresight, and
science and technology capacity, particularly as it relates to
better understanding generative AI, highlighting policy
implications of AI to lawmakers, and auditing the Federal use
of AI.
Fourth, GAO should invest in customer experience. A key
tenet of a modernized organization is understanding its
customers and how they experience services. Customer service is
a direct and immediate interaction between a customer and the
service provider. Customer experience reflects the holistic
journey of the customer within the organization and focuses on
fostering engagement. As such, GAO should look to best
practices in customer experience to build on its voice of the
client work and more explicitly expand its view of its customer
to include the American public. It should ensure greater
investment in IT and digital technologies to help make reports
more accessible, as well as innovative, visual, and digestible;
explore and actually go beyond that and commit to its onsite
presence within congressional office buildings to provide
Congress with greater access to needed expertise.
Fifth, Congress should consider the development of
coordinated, consolidated, and curated information. GAO and
other legislative branch agencies serve as the in-house experts
on virtually every topic Congress may need to consider on all
of those topics. However, this information is not curated and
can overlap and often contains gaps. Congress should explore
formally merging some of these capabilities or whether GAO is
positioned to serve as a clearinghouse and coordinator for
reports and information from across the legislative branch.
Finally, GAO must have access to the full range of data
necessary to do its work. Agencies may not always provide GAO
with complete access to data. Congress must ensure readily and
open access for GAO through additional authorities or guidance
to agencies. With enhanced access to data, GAO can explore
real-time audit capability and gain insight from an agency
perspective.
The future calls for greater transparency, accountability,
and modernization across Government. GAO is a leading practices
agency with a proven return on investment. Focusing on
investments and modernizing the work that GAO already does well
will help it continue to serve Congress, agencies, and the
American people.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today, and I look
forward to continuing the conversation on Government
effectiveness and modernization.
[The prepared statement of James-Christian Blockwood
follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF JAMES-CHRISTIAN BLOCKWOOD

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Bice. Thank you very much, Mr. Blockwood. I
would love to put you in charge of some agencies that need
help.
Anyway, at this time, it is my honor to recognize Mr. Dan
Lips for 5 minutes of his testimony. Mr. Lips.

STATEMENT OF DAN LIPS

Mr. Lips. Chairwoman Bice, Ranking Member Kilmer, Members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify.
As the Chairwoman mentioned, my name is Dan Lips. I am the
head of policy at the Foundation for American Innovation. I
previously served on the staff of the Senate Homeland Security
and Governmental Affairs Committee.
My testimony will focus on opportunities to increase GAO's
return on investment, improve Government efficiency, and
achieve taxpayer savings.
Over the past 20 years, as we have heard today, GAO's work
has resulted in $1.3 trillion in savings. With less than $12
billion in appropriations during that time, that means that
every dollar that Congress has provided to GAO has resulted in
more than $100 in savings. This is a really impressive track
record, but given the $33 trillion national debt and the
challenging fiscal outlook, Congress and this Subcommittee
should be considering ways to increase GAO's ROI.
Last year GAO reported that 77 percent of its
recommendations were implemented within 4 years. We are
slightly below its target of 80 percent. Today, GAO reports
that there are 5,000 open recommendations, and about a quarter
of these recommendations were made more than 4 years ago. This
is important because, according to GAO, recommendations not
made within 4 years are less likely to be implemented.
Congress and the Subcommittee I think need to ask two
questions. First, how can Congress help the hardworking people
at GAO increase their ROI by making sure their nonpartisan
reform recommendations are addressed in a timely manner?
Second, what could the Government save if all of GAO's
recommendations, open recommendations, were implemented?
Thanks to the Modernization Committee, Congress enacted a
law in December raising these issues. The Improving Government
for America's Taxpayers Act, sponsored by Representative Kilmer
and Representative Timmons, requires GAO to streamline its open
recommendations for Congress, describe additional oversight and
legislative actions that are needed, and, importantly, estimate
potential cost savings of unimplemented priority
recommendations.
In addition, report language accompanying the Fiscal Year
2023 omnibus required GAO to estimate the potential savings
that could be achieved if all open GAO recommendations were
implemented. This year GAO answered these new congressional
mandates with two reports. The first explained that, based on a
statistical analysis, implementing the 5,000 open
recommendations would save between $92 billion and $182
billion.
In this report, GAO also excited a single open
recommendation that could save $141 billion. The Comptroller
General discussed this in his questioning. Including this in
this report, asking for a summary of what could be saved across
the board, suggests that the potential savings from answering
all open recommendations would be much greater than the upper
bound estimate of $182 billion.
The second report answering the Kilmer-Timmons bill
consolidated open matters for congressional consideration and
provided some limited examples of potential cost savings that
could be achieved. Now, these are valuable reports, but GAO did
not detail all of the open recommendations that could achieve
cost savings or offer new recommendations for legislative and
oversight actions.
Building on the Modernization Committee's enacted
recommendations in the 117th, Congress should consider new ways
to increase GAO's ROI.
In my written testimony, I offered six recommendations, but
I will highlight three for the Subcommittee here. First,
Congress should require GAO to fully answer the Improving
Government for America's Taxpayers Act. While GAO will likely
be unable to provide estimates for each open recommendation,
specifically identifying all open recommendations that could
achieve cost savings and providing more options for Congress to
implement them would be a win for American taxpayers.
Second, Congress should require GAO to include target
completion dates or deadlines when issuing new recommendations.
Deloitte analysts actually recommended this change back in a
2015 report. Setting deadlines would improve transparency,
strengthen accountability, and help GAO increase its 4-year
implementation rate and ROI.
Third, Congress should better leverage GAO's ongoing
oversight of Federal misspending. Federal agencies made $247
billion in improper payments last year, including roughly $200
billion in overpayments. Recent Appropriations Committee report
language required GAO to report quarterly on improper payments.
Congress should hold hearings and work with GAO to force
Federal agencies to end the Federal Government's misspending.
To close, I urge Congress and the Modernization
Subcommittee to reauthorize GAO, consistent with the Select
Committee's recommendations to reauthorize congressional
support agencies. Reauthorizing GAO would allow Congress and
its watchdog to work together to give GAO the necessary
authorities it needs, ensure that GAO's work aligns with
congressional priorities, and improve Government efficiency for
American taxpayers.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify.
[The prepared statement of Dan Lips follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF DAN LIPS

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Bice. Thank you, Mr. Lips.
At this time, we will now question the witnesses, beginning
with myself, followed by the Ranking Member, and we will
alternate back and forth. Any Member wishing to be recognized
should signal their request to the chair.
Now I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Again, I want to thank you all for being with us this
morning.
Dr. Persons, I want to start with you. You know, we talked
a little bit about statutory authorities within the GAO, and
there is a conversation happening around giving--I am sorry--
recommending that they authorize STAA. Can you talk a little
bit about that and why you think that is so important?
Mr. Persons. Yes. Thanks, Chairwoman Bice.
The main reason is that the STAA, as it has evolved--and it
has been established, but the missions and the functions--it
continues to have added expanded mission space to it starting
with technology assessments in addition to the audits that it
does. It has a widening spectrum. Now, especially inclusive of
the innovation lab, which you heard the Comptroller General
mention that they are moving things forward, but there is, I
think, a need for those resources to be expanded and recognized
as special.
Part of this just is informed by the fact that every year
that I was chief scientist there, the Congress had language in
the conference report or others usually about pushing more and
more technology assessments, science and technology, et cetera.
It is really about the establishment of the more and the
broader spectrum of things. It also gives the team an identity
of where it can avoid jurisdictional issues. For example, STAA
does things that are technology focused, sometimes involving
IT. We also have an IT and cybersecurity team, as the
Comptroller General alluded to, that we want to make sure that
STAA would be able to do things that allow the ITC Team at GAO
to do its work in cybersecurity in an oversight capacity
primarily but then also to be able to do other work.
It really is about more and the broader spectrum of work
that they need to do.
Chairwoman Bice. Thank you.
Mr. Blockwood, let me move to you. You mentioned in your
testimony, you talked about a clearinghouse for reports. Can
you maybe expound on that a little bit more? I know, you know,
we are sort of looking at all of the functions across support
agencies as a whole and trying to determine is there overlap;
is there duplicity; are there ways that we can streamline?
You know, do we need a clearinghouse? Do we need to maybe
combine agencies? Tell me a little bit more about your thought
process on that.
Mr. Blockwood. Yes, thank you for the question.
I mean, I think there are two ways to look at this. You
know, at first, I would start with the context of, you know,
Congress is one of the most advised bodies in the world or
anywhere and receives a lot of information from a lot of
different inputs. You have information coming from the
legislative branch agencies. You have external experts. As you
go to look for information or recommendations, you would want
to be able to do that in a singular place, and that can happen
potentially through a dashboard or a way of compiling
information.
One way that I would respond to your question is, you know,
you could create a dashboard or a platform that puts customers
first and Congress first, thinking about what it needs. It
could work iteratively so that it can change over time to think
about what those changes might--what those needs might be when
it changes. It could look at data quality and what you are
actually receiving, and it could focus on really the outcome
and not necessarily the process. It is not the data base
itself, but it is what is in it and how Congress uses it.
The second thing is to look at all the different or
potential overlap that the different agencies have. CRS may
provide information to individual Members, may provide things
at a speed to which is necessary in a fast-moving environment.
GAO may provide information that is longer in depth, may be
more evidence based, and has a more rigor and methodological
approach to it.
CBO might provide estimates on particular legislation or
economic outcomes.
Chairwoman Bice. Do you think that it would be--that
Congress should take under consideration combining some of
these entities and collapsing them?
Mr. Blockwood. I would certainly recommend exploring
whether merging agencies or collapsing certain capabilities
would make sense, and I think looking at an external entity
like the National Academy of Public Administration to do a
study as to what those benefits to Congress might be would
certainly be encouraged.
Chairwoman Bice. Excellent.
At this time, I am going to throw it over to Mr. Lips.
Your recent article published in The Hill critiques the
GAO's implementation of two modernization recommendations. How
do you think the GAO could do a better job of implementation in
the future?
Mr. Lips. I think the big key would be to fully answer the
mandates in the Improving Government for America's Taxpayers
Act and specifically to break out all of those open
recommendations, 5,000 in the case of the appropriations report
language requirement, around 500 in the case of the Kilmer-
Timmons bill, and go through them and estimate where the cost
savings will be the biggest. Where can Congress get the biggest
bang for the buck? They may not be able to provide an estimate,
as we heard today, for all of them, but they can provide them
for some.
From my experience, my former boss, Senator Tom Coburn,
passed the mandate that established the annual report on
duplication. That work, as we have heard, has been--resulted in
$600 billion in savings over the past 12 years.
It is important to know--according to his former staff, I
was not working with him at the same time--GAO did not want to
do that work until they were mandated by law. They were asked
to do it. They did not want to do it, and so he passed an
amendment to a debt ceiling bill, and since then, Comptroller
General Dodaro has called that reporting requirement the gift
that keeps on giving.
I think they need to be pushed sometimes to deliver what
Congress wants.
Chairwoman Bice. Thank you for mentioning the late Dr.
Coburn, who I had the pleasure of getting to know briefly
before his passing.
At this time, I will yield 5 minutes to my colleague and
Ranking Member, Mr. Kilmer.
Mr. Kilmer. Thanks, Madam Chair.
Mr. Lips, I do not know if you want to add anything further
about additional actions that need to be taken as we are trying
to get more of these recommendations closed out and
specifically making sure that GAO implements the law we just
passed.
Mr. Lips. I think that it would be valuable. Thank you for
the question and for your leadership of that important bill and
the recommendations from the Select Committee.
I think that one of the really great things about that bill
is that it asked for additional guidance for Congress to pursue
legislative and oversight actions, really pressing them to
provide that, pressing for that list, as I mentioned, of where
the real savings could be. It is a case of Congress wanting to
help GAO help itself, so the more pressure that you can apply
and to really get them to respond could be a great win for
American taxpayers.
Mr. Kilmer. I want to ask Mr. Blockwood. You know, we have
heard about GAO being consistently rated one of the best
Federal agencies at which to work. Why do you think that is the
case? Are there any strategies that GAO is using that we should
think about encouraging other support agencies to use or even
Congress to use?
Mr. Blockwood. Yes, thank you. I mean, there is no secret
that GAO has been No. 1 in its category for the last 3 years
and the top five for the last 15, and a driver of that is
employee engagement. It does not happen on accident. It is very
intentional. Increasing employee engagement and involving them
in decisionmaking, having continuous and really effective
communication, creating time and space for innovation for
employees, creating interpersonal relationships, and, very
specifically, looking at different subsets of the employee and
hearing what their needs might be, and, importantly,
leadership. AI would recognize the current Comptroller General,
Gene Dodaro, and his leadership for employee engagement, as
well as the Executive Committee and all the senior executives
across GAO, really foster an environment that allow for that
employee engagement.
That is the main driver of why they are best places to work
and a leading best practice agency.
Mr. Kilmer. Is there anything systematically that--you
know, as a Committee that has passed recommendations
encouraging support agencies to do X, Y, and Z, is there
anything specific, if you were asked, you would say, hey, we
ought to encourage all agencies, or even Congress itself, to do
X, Y, or Z?
Mr. Blockwood. You know, I might offer two recommendations
there.
Mr. Kilmer. Sure.
Mr. Blockwood. One is in the leadership of those agencies:
when they are selected, how they are selected, and making sure
you have the commitment up front.
Then, two, making sure that there is follow up. The
Partnership for Public Service certainly has our best places to
work in Federal Government rankings. We offer briefings on how
to improve some of that employee engagement for agencies that
may not be meeting the mark, and we also offer bright spots and
promising practices for those that are doing really well and
encouraging those agencies to work with the Partnership for
Public Service, as well as other agencies, and leading OPM
officials to understand how they can better engage public
servants.
Mr. Kilmer. I want to just invite--you know, obviously, our
Committee, our Subcommittee is focused on modernization. Are
there any particular challenges that you see facing GAO in the
coming years in terms of building its capacity? Anything you
think we ought to be thinking about, and specifically with
regard to modernizing GAO so it is ready to take on the next
challenges?
Mr. Persons. Yes. Thank you, sir.
I think that a lot of the focus on--if we are thinking
about digital transformation and data modernization sort of
things, we really do have to think about at least having a look
at the authorities that are there with respect to usage of
data, especially as you are collecting data in sort of a
longitudinal sense, how it is used, how you protect things like
PII (Personal Identifiable Information), and then the various
legal statutes and things like that, the various departments
and agencies that GAO oversees--think of Health and Human
Services or Department of Defense, et cetera--that have their
own special handling.
It is not an easy task, but it needs to be done in order to
amplify and get to the future of EBP that we want to get. I
think it just has--it is warranted a look, a serious and deep
look at what can GAO do with data, how might its access
authorities be enhanced to include long-term usage, compilation
of, et cetera, to be able to do its job and deliver that kind
of--the findings, content, and so on that it is so well-known
for doing.
Mr. Kilmer. This is why we introduce the Evidence-Based
Policymaking Act, right, to actually get Congress thinking
about these things with regard to GAO and with regard to
everything else. If we are going to have evidence-based
policymaking, to your point, understanding how data is used,
how it ought to be used is really important.
Thank you for your answer. I promise, I did not put him up
to answering it that way. Thank you.
Mr. Persons. My pleasure.
Chairwoman Bice. Thank you, Ranking Member.
At this time, I recognize Mr. Morelle for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Madam Chair. I am sorry I came in
the middle of this, so I apologize. Unlike my friends, I am
probably further behind in learning about some of these issues,
but I really appreciated the testimony.
One thing that I wanted to just follow up on was a question
I think Chairwoman Bice asked of you, Mr. Blockwood. That is I
am really sort of intrigued by the idea of creating sort of
this dashboard where Congress could access different pieces of
information and help educate us and our staff about important
issues. You suggested near the end that maybe the consolidation
of those might be helpful.
I wonder, not to push back but to sort of question, whether
or not--I guess I would worry a little bit if it ended up
being, instead of a range of different places you could get
information from and different perspectives, if a consolidation
would somehow lead to less diversity in terms of thought. I
just wonder. I am certainly happy to have any of you respond to
it, but we want to make sure that we are equipped with really
good information that is helpful to us, that helps us do
analysis, helps us share information, help to ultimately come
to the right decision. We want to get to the right place.
I do not know the answer to this question. I do not have a
perspective. I would just be curious to just delve into that a
little further.
Mr. Blockwood. Great. Thank you for the question.
I would say, one, it is certainly worth exploring to better
understand what the implications might be, what the
opportunities might be there.
Two, I would say, when you talk about merging, I would
say--or when I talk about merging I mean certain capabilities,
certain units. It may not have to be wholesale, or maybe it
does, but that exploration would help define that.
When I mention dashboard, I am saying a place where
recommendations and information can be provided and you can see
where that is. When I think about the different agencies, you
know, there are unique offerings there, and I think, you know,
really one of the other things that I would consider is whether
GAO or another entity can play a coordinating, consolidating,
and curating role.
You are not actually losing that diversity of inputs and
information. You are actually gaining quicker, better access,
more digestible, to that information, which we all know you, as
Members of Congress, time is of the essence when you need to
make decisions.
Mr. Morelle. Especially when you have 5 minutes to be able
to query people. Time is of the essence.
I do not know if others had----
Mr. Persons. Yes, thanks.
I just wanted to add that it is an excellent question, and
there is good news in that. If you take the lens of the view of
like a legislative support agency like GAO from a report-
centric one and turn it into content, the technology is such
that even with a GPT or transformer-based system, you can feed
it. You can control what I call the data nutrition of what goes
in there.
If you are having--if you have and you have a wealth of
nonpartisan fact-based nonideological information in all GAO
reports, you have CRS, you have CBO, those things can be
amalgamated in a way and sourced or indexed to where they are
coming from so you can know where that is. It is not just like
opening up to the entire open world where disinformation risk
is just going to come in.
It is a very valid point, but you can control for that and
design a system to help provide these issue dashboards and do
just-in-time policies.
Mr. Morelle. Did you have anything to add?
You know, every so often you come across something, and it
sort of opens your eyes to certain things. I had this
experience this past week. I picked up a volume--book called
``Recoding America,'' Jennifer--I think it is Pahlka is how you
say the last name. I am reading it. I am only, you know, about
two-thirds of the way through, but it is really fascinating
because it centers a lot about data. It centers a lot about how
the Government does it.
I was struck again, Mr. Blockwood, when you had mentioned
about--I do not know if you used this term--but human-centered
design, which is essentially building for the user and the end
person and making sure the implementation is helpful to them
but also consistent with policy.
I wonder if any of you have had a chance to come across the
volume, if you had any thoughts about it, because it is
something I want to dig further into, but I am just curious if
anybody has had a chance to look at it. If not, I would
recommend it, and I would love to come back and then ask your
thoughts about it.
Anyone?
Mr. Persons. I have not but I will. I would be happy to.
Mr. Morelle. OK.
This is not like a test to see how well read you are. I
apologize. I am just wondering if you are familiar with it.
Mr. Blockwood. Sir, I will say the Partnership for Public
Service did actually have an event and a conversation with
Jennifer Pahlka. If you allow me, there is one thing that I
would probably draw from the comments that I would like to
highlight----
Mr. Morelle. Sure.
Mr. Blockwood [continuing]. which is customer experience.
It is nothing unfamiliar to this Committee, but really that is
a growing field, and I think what you are getting to is really
the evolution of that and moving from customer service to
customer experience, and there are ways to do that with a level
of efficiency and effectiveness that I think agencies should
adopt. GAO has some practices that it could also benefit from.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I apologize, but I yield back. Thank you.
Chairwoman Bice. Thank you, Mr. Morelle.
I recognize myself for an additional couple of questions,
and this is really open.
Dr. Persons, you kind of alluded to this when we talked
about the STAA statutory authority, but I want to open this up
to the rest and ask what other statutory authorities do you
think should be given to GAO to help them maybe more
effectively do their work?
I believe earlier in the first panel Mr. Dodaro sort of
alluded to the fact that he did not feel like there is
necessarily anything specific that was necessary, but I am
curious, having been part of the entity or a user of it, do you
feel differently, that there are some things that could be
identified to offer up?
Mr. Lips. Thank you for the question.
I would second the recommendation or endorsement of
authorizing STAA as its own entity. I think it needs
independence. I think that there could be some stronger
authorities to establish more direct reporting to congressional
requests. I think that would fill some of the gap that was left
by the OTA and the need for enhancing congressional science and
technical capacity and expertise.
One, I think GAO sometimes is reluctant to say they do not
have the authorities that they need because that puts them in a
bind when they are trying to negotiate with agencies for those
authorities. From my experience, I think they can get benefit
from Congress re-endorsing that they have these authorities.
There was a bill that moved through the Senate Homeland
Security and Governmental Affairs Committee and became law in
2019 that clarified some of their access to information that
would be useful, clarifying that. In the future, if Congress
were to require agencies to provide information and data in an
electronic and accessible format, that might help GAO be able
to provide more timely information.
I think also clarifying their ability to do work on
oversight within the intelligence community and national
security community has been an area that GAO has, from my
perspective, been trying to do but sometimes struggles. I think
there would be a real benefit to doing a reauthorization.
Mr. Blockwood. As we kind of all discussed here, you know,
GAO is a model agency. It is a leading practices agency.
Clearly what it is doing under its current leadership is
working well, and GAO itself would say, by nature of being an
audit organization, all organizations can, obviously, get
better and improve.
Seemingly, though, with GAO, it seems like most of its
issues would be centered around resources and finances. You
have agency leadership committed to improvement, committed to
understanding where it needs to improve, and I think that is a
really good first start for any agency.
You know, one of the things that I would share is that I
think there are going to be no shortages of challenges, and in
my view, it is always going to come down to about three things.
One is people. Do you have the skill, talent, and the
empowering leadership needed to work toward the most critical
issues?
The second is money. Do you have the resources, and do you
have the accountability and transparency around that to
effectively execute on your mission?
Then the third is just things. Do you have the services and
the technology to deliver, in this case, on behalf of the
American public?
I think GAO has those three elements, and as you look,
obviously, where it can improve, I think you would see some
agreement and some immediate reaction from GAO to try to do
that. Of course, they would also agree that exploring where
additional authorities or where additional help from Congress
might be needed, that they would certainly welcome it, I would
assume.
Mr. Persons. Madam Chair, all I would add is that in the
absence of the NAPA report's recommendation for a science--or
that office, then the question is, how do we solve the problem
of the absorptive capacity for S&T? A lot of that involves
people.
I noted your question earlier about how many detailees.
There is only so many that are there. It may require a look at
authorities in terms of hiring and how to--as the Comptroller
General's warning, it is about preserving GAO's independence.
It must be preserved. How can it or how might we imagine taking
a human resource that is there to help to just explain to the
Congress to do things, to push forward, to achieve that vision
of the better user experience as it were for the Congress.
I think there is something to look at there depending on
the options that the Committee pursues.
Chairwoman Bice. Perfect.
Well, that concludes questioning. I want to thank the
witnesses for their time this morning.
Members of the Subcommittee may have some additional
questions for you, and we would ask you to please submit those
questions in writing.
If there is no further business, I thank the Members for
their participation.
Without objection, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

QUESTIONS FOR THE RECORD

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
