- LOOKING AHEAD SERIES: OVERSIGHT OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

LOOKING AHEAD SERIES: OVERSIGHT OF THE
SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 12, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov
www.cha.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-358                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Committee on House Administration

BRYAN STEIL, WISCONSIN, Chairman

BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOSEPH MORELLE, New York,
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia              Ranking Member
GREG MURPHY, North Carolina          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             DEREK KILMER, Washington
MIKE CAREY, Ohio                     NORMA TORRES, California
ANTHONY D'ESPOSITO, New York
LAUREL LEE, Florida

Mike Platt,  Staff Director
Jamie Fleet,  Minority Staff Director

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Opening Statements

The Honorable Bryan Steil, Representative from the state of
Wisconsin......................................................     1
The Honorable Joseph Morelle, Representative from the state of
New York.......................................................     2

Witness Statement

Lonnie Bunch.....................................................     7

Submissions for the Record

National Museum of African Anmerican History and Culture
Whiteness Chart................................................    30
Dr. Fauci Exhibit................................................    32
June 27, 2020, Virtual Drag Queen Story Time.....................    34
June 5, 2021, Virtual Drag Queen Story Time with Ruth Allen
Ginsburg.......................................................    36
June 18, 2021, Virtual Drag Queen Art Bingo Night................    38
June 4, 2022, DC, In-Person Pride Family Event...................    41
June 3, 2023, New York, Family Program-Drag Story Hour...........    44
June 23, 2023, New York, Native Pride Extravaganza...............    47

LOOKING AHEAD SERIES: OVERSIGHT OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION

----------

TUESDAY, DECEMBER 12, 2023

Committee on House Administration,
House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:37 a.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Bryan Steil
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Steil, Loudermilk, Griffith,
Murphy, Bice, Carey, D'Esposito, Lee, Morelle, Sewell, Torres,
and Kilmer.
Staff present: Caleb Hays, Deputy Staff Director, General
Counsel, Parliamentarian; Mike Platt, Staff Director; Elliot
Smith, Staff; Evan Van Orman, Professional Staff; Jessica
Smith, Detailee; Hillary Lassiter, Chief Clerk; Caitlin O'Dell,
Legal Assistant and Deputy Clerk; Khalil Abboud, Minority
Deputy Staff Director, Chief Counsel; Enumale Agada, Minority
Oversight Counsel; Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director; Andrew
Garcia, Minority Special Assistant; Matt Schlesinger, Minority
Oversight Counsel.
The Chairman. The Committee on House Administration will
come to order.
I note that a quorum is present and, without objection, the
chair may declare a recess at any time. Also, without
objection, the meeting record will remain open for 5
legislative days so members may submit any materials they wish
to be included therein.
Thank you, Ranking Member Morelle, members of the
Committee, and Secretary Bunch, for joining us for today's
hearing.
The Smithsonian Institution is the world's largest
educational complex, comprised of museums, educational
resources, and research services. Founded in 1846, the
Smithsonian preserves our heritage and history, while sharing
its knowledge with the world.
Each year, millions of Americans visit the Smithsonian
museums, enjoying each of the spaces and educational
opportunities the Smithsonian provides. With 21 museums and
roughly 137 million objects in its collection, visitors have an
abundance of history and heritage to explore.
The Smithsonian receives $1.14 billion from the Federal
Government in the last fiscal year, two-thirds of its total
budget, and employs over 4,000 full-time employees.
Today the Committee on House Administration, which is
charged with conducting oversight of the Smithsonian
Institution, will discuss the Institution's operations and its
long-term goals.
It's been 3 years since the Committee has held a wide-
ranging oversight hearing of the Smithsonian, and a variety of
issues have come up during that time. In the last 3 years, the
Institution has frequently been in the news on some hot button
cultural topics, from panda diplomacy to museum repatriation
policies. We've seen the Smithsonian in a handful of headlines.
The Committee will explore how the Smithsonian's materials
reflect America's diversity of opinions.
As a taxpayer-funded institution, the Smithsonian must
ensure its work is not politically partisan or biased. Our job
today is to ensure the Smithsonian is acting as a responsible
steward of taxpayer dollars. The Committee will also explore
two new museums Congress has authorized and the Institution's
vision for these facilities.
In 2020, Congress authorized the creation of the National
Museum of the American Latino and the Smithsonian American
Women's History Museum. While the final decision for placement
of these museums looms, the Smithsonian's strategic plans,
annual plans, and congressional budget requests outline a
robust and complex enterprise, but do not articulate a long-
term strategy yet for the two new museums. Without a clear
long-term strategy, the museums may find it hard to balance
long-term visions with the more mundane daily operations which
are so critical for success.
Today's hearing will examine both the day-to-day operations
of the Smithsonian while also looking to its long-term goals.
As chairman, I am committed to ensuring our institutions
are working in the best interest of the American people.
Mr. Secretary, I appreciate you being with us today. I look
foward to our discussion. In particular, I look forward to
hearing more about the--what I've been told is the original
Cheesehead. After a loss of our Green Bay Packers last night to
the New York Giants, it's a little tough to look at the
Cheesehead this morning. But I appreciate you being here. I
look forward to our conversation.
I'll now recognize the ranking member to provide an opening
statement.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for convening this
hearing.
I take no sides between the--you're a New Jersey guy, so
you probably appreciate the Giants who play in New Jersey, and
the Packers will play in Wisconsin. But I appreciate you being
here. We're really grateful to the chairman for convening it,
and this hearing providing oversight over what I think is one
of the crown jewels of America, the Smithsonian Institution. I
certainly welcome Mr. Secretary for being here as our witness.
As the chairman said, since its founding more than 175
years ago, the Smithsonian has become the most visited museum
complex on the planet. It has grown to 21 museums, numerous
research centers, a library system, a network of hundreds of
affiliates, and the National Zoo. As one of the world's
foremost research entities, the Smithsonian is on the cutting
edge of advances in science, in the arts, and in the
humanities.
Just last month, the Smithsonian partnered with NASA to
unveil a fragment of an asteroid currently in orbit around the
sun. Truly remarkable. As we speak, Smithsonian scientists are
studying these asteroid samples to provide insight in how water
or organic molecules first reached Earth billions of years ago.
The knowledge they gain will inform our understanding of the
solar system for generations to come. And anyone can go look at
this piece of asteroid for free. It's truly remarkable that
we're able to do it.
A bit closer to home, while all sad to say good-bye to the
National Zoo's giant pandas, Americans should take solace
knowing that the Smithsonian experts' observations and research
over the last several decades has played a significant role in
moving giant pandas off the endangered species list.
Despite the Smithsonian's many successes, it is not without
challenges. These challenges must be addressed so the
Smithsonian can continue its great mission for the next 175
years and beyond.
Earlier this year, I requested an update from you, Mr.
Secretary, on the Smithsonian's response to allegations of
sexual misconduct from more than a dozen female scientists at
the Smithsonian's Tropical Research Institute in Panama. The
allegations are deeply unsettling and the conduct described is
completely unacceptable. I am very grateful for the Secretary's
thoughtful response and the creation of the Smithsonian's Civil
Program, a centralized resource for employees to report
harassment and other inappropriate behavior, and look forward
to continued updates this morning.
In addition, while I am thrilled Congress authorized the
National Museum of the American Latino and American Women's
History Museum on the overwhelmingly bipartisan basis, I remain
frustrated that the original House-passed legislation was
amended to make the law conflict with itself. After the House
passed legislation declaring it Congress' intent that the
museums be on the National Mall and even requiring certain
locations on The Mall be considered, the Senate added language
prohibiting the museums from being built on the National Mall.
Obviously, that makes no sense, especially since the language
expressing Congress' intent and requiring a site on The Mall be
considered stayed in the bill. So I'm hopeful we can work
together to fix the law to ensure these important new museums
take their rightful place on America's front yard.
In the meantime, I'm interested in learning about the
progress made in developing exhibitions and programs for these
museums. I'm especially interested in how the Smithsonian
ensures it maintains curatorial independence at a time when
many look to explore cultural issues to score political points.
I'm also eager for an update on the Smithsonian's efforts
to right a revolting historic wrong, the 19th and early 20th
century practice of removing brains from deceased Black and
indigenous people for study without the consent of them or
their families. There aren't words in the English language
sufficient to capture just how repugnant and dehumanizing a
practice this was.
Earlier this year, I sent Secretary Bunch a letter asking
for details on the Smithsonian's plans to repatriate and return
the human remains to victims' families. I, again, appreciate
Secretary Bunch's response detailing the work of the
Smithsonian's new Human Remains Task Force, as well as, sir,
your public apology on behalf of the Institution. I'm looking
forward to hearing more this morning, again, about the work of
the task force and about any headway that has been made in that
repatriation effort.
Finally, I am interested in learning more about efforts to
strengthen the Smithsonian's infrastructure and facilities. I
hope your updates on renovations to the Air and Space Museum,
my all-time favorite place in the world, status of the deferred
maintenance backlog, and actions taken to protect collections
against the effects of climate change.
So again, Mr. Secretary, thank you for--not only for being
here today but for your continued public service to the
country.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Without objection, all other members' opening statements
will be made part of the hearing record if they're submitted to
the Committee clerk by 5 p.m. today.
Pursuant to paragraph B of Committee rule 6, the witness
will please stand and raise your right hand.
[Witness sworn.]
The Chairman. Let the record show that the witness answered
in the affirmative and may be seated.
I'll now introduce our witness. Secretary Lonnie Bunch
assumed the role as the 14th Secretary of the Smithsonian on
June 16, 2019. As the Secretary, Mr. Bunch oversees 21 museums,
21 libraries, the National Zoo, numerous research centers, and
several educational units and centers. Previously, Mr. Bunch
served as the founding director of the Smithsonian's National
Museum of African American History and Culture.
Secretary Bunch, we appreciate you being here today and
look forward to your testimony. As a reminder, we've read your
written statement, and it will appear in full in the hearing
record. Under Committee Rule 9, you're to limit your oral
presentation to a brief summary of your written statement,
unless extended. Please remember to turn on your microphone so
that members can hear you. I now recognize you, Secretary
Bunch, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. LONNIE G. BUNCH III, SECRETARY OF THE
SMITHSONIAN, SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION

Mr. Bunch. Thank you so much.
Chairman Steil, Ranking Member Morelle, and all members of
the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
I hope you do take some time to see these amazing
artifacts: the original Cheesehead, to be able to look at a
mourning watch from Mary Todd Lincoln, to look at some of the
pins that were given for the suffrage movement. So I want to
make sure you spend some time looking at that today.
Since I became Secretary in 2019, I have been impressed and
gratified by the support of Congress, the administration, and
the American public. At the Smithsonian, we help advance the
civic, educational, scientific, and artistic life of this
nation. The support we receive enables us to engage with and
educate people on important topics, like the essence of the
American experience, the diversity of world cultures, the
sustainability of the planet, and the nature of the universe.
One of my goals as Secretary is to reach every home and
every classroom in the country, sharing our content to
celebrate our achievements and help us grapple with
contemporary issues, all of which helps us to come together and
to work toward a better shared future.
Our educational programming is becoming more crystallized
as we establish strategic collaboration with organizations like
the 4-H club, Boys and Girls Clubs of America, and PBS. We are
hosting students to Washington for facilitated learning
experiences with Smithsonian educators centered around civic
engagement.
At the same time, we're bringing our content to others
through these partnerships. For example, we are currently
developing a pilot program aimed at the Boys and Girls Clubs,
focusing on civics and history, which we hope to take
nationwide in 2026.
As you've mentioned, our world-class scientific endeavors
also continue, with efforts as varied as helping the first
image--capturing the first image of a black hole, to running a
century-long reforestation project. Not only does our science
provide an incredible return on investment to the American
people, it's work that can only happen at the Smithsonian, and
it's work that researchers around the world rely upon. As I
look ahead to the future of this institution, I'm excited by
what lies ahead for the world's largest museum, education, and
research complex.
The nation's 250th anniversary will be launching point for
the transformation of the Smithsonian into an institution that
better meets the needs of the nation. That pivotal event will
not only serve as a celebration of where we've been, but also
give us a glimpse at a more nimble, more relevant, and more
effective institution, proving that the Smithsonian matters
today, tomorrow, and every day and in every part of the
country.
To coincide with that event, we have programming that will
both celebrate and contemplate who we are as a Nation and the
Smithsonian's place in it. We will invite Americans to explore
all corners of our complex histories and find ways of moving
forward together in our shared future.
The renovated Air and Space Museum should be fully open to
the public in time for the commemoration. I have asked my team
to work toward temporary opening of the Castle, so the public
can explore and celebrate that as part--as we look to the
250th.
The world is rapidly changing and, with it, so are the
needs and expectations of the American people. As we look ahead
to the next 250 years, the Smithsonian will need to adapt. We
want to become a more digital institution that uses tools like
AI in a responsible way. We want to provide resources to help
communities understand challenges, like the challenge of
climate change. We must help our citizens become more engaged
and help them become better informed and have civil discourse
on important topics that affect us all. Building the
Smithsonian American Women's History Museum and the National
Museum of the American Latino will help us tell a more robust,
expansive version of the American story.
As impressive as these museums will surely be when they
rise on the National Mall, they will only represent a fraction
of the Institution's transformation in years to come. With your
support, we will build on our resources, our expertise, and our
trust. We will restore our aging facilities while creating new
ones. We will take advantage of technology and partnerships to
reach more people than ever, and we will chart a bold, new
course for the Smithsonian that strengthens our shared future.
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to testify before
you today, and I'm now happy to answer any questions you have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bunch follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Secretary Bunch. Thanks
for being here today. I'll recognize myself for 5 minutes for
the purpose of asking you questions.
I'd like to drill down a little bit into the broader
spending request of the Smithsonian and, in particular,
balancing the backlog of maintenance with the two new museums
that are coming online in the not too distant future. So as I
understand it, with the Smithsonian there is about $2 billion
in backlog for maintenance of current facilities. Is that
accurate?
Mr. Bunch. That's correct. I think we've done a new program
that gives me more assessments, but I think it's a little more
than 2 billion.
The Chairman. Inside of that, is the Smithsonian request
for funding to Congress, it seems that it's only half of the
broader recommended range of 2 to 4 percent of the physical
plan's aggregate current replacement value, meaning are we
falling further behind on deferred maintenance if we fulfilled
the Smithsonian's request?
Mr. Bunch. The plan would be that we want to make sure that
we can utilize all the resources you give us. Part of what I'm
trying to do now is be more strategic in terms of how we
utilize our capital budgets as well as our building maintenance
budget. Therefore, we've done things like, when we built--
redone the Air and Space Museum, it's allowed us to reduce our
current backlogs.
I think the reality is we need the support that you will
give us, and any dollars that you give us we do use toward
building, to make sure we can handle the backlog as effectively
as we can.
The Chairman. In the funding request, is the amount of
funds as requested sufficient to not fall further behind in the
backlog or do you feel that that's the sufficient amount to not
fall behind?
Mr. Bunch. I think it'll help us move forward, but we're
going to continue to ask for more moving forward in the future.
The Chairman. Okay. The reason I ask, right, is we have the
two new museums that we're looking to bring online. I think
you're uniquely qualified in that role of your previous work on
the African American History Museum. As we look at that, the
broader focus here on the strategic planning and your efforts
to bring that forward and whether or not we're prepared to move
that forward, could you give color as to where you're at in the
broader strategic planning process for the two new museums, in
particular, the location of those two new museums?
Mr. Bunch. So the challenge with the two new museums are
that we have to make sure that we get the site selection
resolved, because there's very little we can do without the
site selection. We have been very successful with fundraising,
and we have raised over $60 million for each museum already,
but that will really only grow once we can point toward here's
where these museums would be.
Part of what we've done, though, is recognize that we don't
want to wait until these museums are up. They may be 10, 12
years away. So we've already begun to do things like more
online work to give people that history about women or about
the Latino community. We've also created a new Latino
exhibition gallery that will allow us to demonstrate to the
public, here's the stories we can tell, and get people excited
about it.
The bottom line is that we are ready to move forward. We're
going to need, however, more support to be able to build the
staffs for those museums, to be able to make sure that we can
get the ultimate decisions about site and ultimately
construction. What I will say, though, based on my experience,
is that we are able to--as we build the new museums, we're able
to get funds that'll pay for construction and HVAC and a lot of
things that we normally have to ask Congress for. So it's
really a crucial moment in the history of these museums to see
where we are going to be over the next year.
The Chairman. In the time that I have left, let me shift
topics, if I can. I had my nieces and nephews out to D.C.
recently. They got to see the pandas before they departed. I
can tell you for our--kids love the pandas. But as we dive in,
we think about what's called panda diplomacy, if you will.
There's a policy side to this as well.
One is, as I understand it, the National Zoo paid China $10
million to loan the giant pandas for 10 years. Is that
accurate?
Mr. Bunch. That's correct.
The Chairman. Then that loan was extended throughout that
time, beginning from 2000 all the way through until this year?
Mr. Bunch. We negotiate every year, yes, to extend the
loan.
The Chairman. Is there a consideration to extend that if
the pandas came back then? Is that an ongoing negotiation?
Mr. Bunch. We would like to have the pandas back, and we
would like to negotiate with the Chinese to do just that.
The Chairman. At any time has the Smithsonian ever changed
or compromised any public content to appease or accommodate
China or any other foreign government?
Mr. Bunch. Definitely not.
The Chairman. Do you have policies in place to ensure that
wouldn't happen during the negotiation?
Mr. Bunch. We do. Then we also make sure that as part of
the negotiations, the staff recognizes that this is really
about the science and the pandas and not basically compromise
our status in working with the Chinese.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
I now will recognize the ranking member for 5 minutes for
the purpose of asking questions.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, thank you, Mr. Secretary, for being here. I do want
to--in just the few minutes I have, I do want to, as I
mentioned in my testimony, just focus for a moment or two on
the Smithsonian's past practice that I mentioned of taking
human brains from deceased Black and indigenous people for
study without their knowledge or consent.
You mentioned in your testimony the formation of the Human
Remains Task Force, which has been tasked with determining the
best way to return and repatriate human remains. So I wonder if
you could just talk a little bit about how the members of the
task force were selected, whether or not their representatives
from those impacted communities are part of the task force? If
you can give us a timeline for what you think is a reasonable
period when the remains will be repatriated, and sort of how
you measure the success of this effort given that timeline and
given the task in front of you.
Mr. Bunch. Like you, I was very upset when I learned about
these human remains. My goal was, very quickly, to really have
a new policy that allows us to understand how we were going to
return remains, what kind of research we should still do.
Therefore, I put together a committee of people--the best
scholars, some community people, both internal and external to
the Smithsonian--to help us think these issues through; to ask
fundamental questions as, what is the role of human remains at
the Smithsonian? What's the difference between human remains
that we have consent versus that we didn't have consent? How do
we return these human remains? How do we work with communities?
So my goal is to get this report and to use that report to
then reshape the Smithsonian policies. My goal would be that,
over the next year, we'll be able to frame the policies,
understand what the resources are needed to be able to return
material, but also to be able to make clear that if we're doing
any research on human remains, here's the limit, here's what's
possible, and here's what we're not going to do.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you. That's important. So, obviously,
consent would be a big part of that. And I'm assuming that
would be a mandatory minimum that people give consent prior to
their demise, and that the family members be at least aware of,
or if it's posthumously, that the family would give consent. So
as we go forward, I would love to continue to be kept abreast
of your efforts over the next year.
How are you dealing with the--I don't know how many remains
you still have. I know some had been returned, but I think a
relatively small number. I think the amount, the number was
well in excess of 200----
Mr. Bunch. Yes.
Mr. Morelle [continuing]. brains and human remains that you
said. I just wonder what the status of repatriation is.
Mr. Bunch. So the status of repatriation is that there's
probably over 20,000 remains in the Smithsonian.
Mr. Morelle. Oh, wow.
Mr. Bunch. Most are of Native American, but we're also now
looking at other communities. What we're doing is, by this task
force, is to help me understand what do we need to put in place
to return that material, to reach out to communities. My goal
would be that material that we do not have consent for, we
should really work toward either returning or reburying this
material.
So my goal is to get an understanding of what it's going to
take to do all of that, and this task force will help me do
that. And then I'll make some determinations how we move
forward.
Mr. Morelle. Your expectation on when you believe that will
be done?
Mr. Bunch. Well, I expect to get the report in the next
week or two. I want to use, then, the next 6 months of the year
figuring out exactly what we're going to do, what policies get
changed, what are the financial needs to do this, and begin to
move forward on returning materials.
Mr. Morelle. Gotcha. Thank you for that. I look forward to
continue being updated on that.
I want to switch topics with my remaining minute that I
have. I know that you've expressed your support for building
both the Latino and the Women's Museum on the National Mall. I
just wondered if you could give us a sense of why you believe
it's important for them to be there as opposed to being in
other places?
Mr. Bunch. You know, building the National Museum of
African American History and Culture on the National Mall was
transformative not just for the museum, but for the country,
because the National Mall is where the world comes to learn
what it means to be an American. And there's something powerful
about having these museums on The Mall, so that people can
understand that they're part of the American story.
Also, being on The Mall ensures they get the visitation
they deserve, that millions of people will come explore these
questions. Because the great strength of the Smithsonian is
people will come and wrestle with questions that they won't in
their hometowns. So we want people to do this. I think it's
really important that we build these museums on The Mall so
that they can be symbols of America for the world to see.
Mr. Morelle. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back my time.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Loudermilk is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Bunch, good to see you again.
Mr. Bunch. Good to see you again.
Mr. Loudermilk. Appreciate you being here. Appreciate some
of what was just said regarding the American story. It's very
important that we preserve the history and the heritage of our
Nation. One of those just being who we are as a people, as well
as our government. Our rights that we have, being especially
First Amendment right comes up quite often these days. As I
explain to people that the First Amendment doesn't exist to
only protect the speech you're comfortable with, but the things
you're uncomfortable with.
It brings me to--one of my favorite museums that you have
as an Air Force veteran, as an aviator, and aviation
enthusiast, and it's one of the closest museums to Capitol
Hill, which is one that I tend to visit frequently. Especially
when you do the movie nights or the IMAX, I think there's a lot
of great things that goes on there. But earlier this year at
the Air and Space Museum, you had to settle a lawsuit that was
filed against the museum when students were kicked out for
wearing pro-life hats. It was a huge concern. Still a large
concern. Especially when you talk about the American story,
these young people have their rights to express their political
beliefs as well.
Now, we've been assured that this was a mistake on the part
of the security guards being misinformed, but is this
reflective of a broader bias by the Smithsonian or was this an
isolated incident?
Mr. Bunch. This is clearly an isolated incident. Because
think about that day, the March for Life, there were hundreds
of people that went to different parts of the Smithsonian and
were accepted, no problem at all. It was a mistake where we
have a policy that says you cannot bring in posters and
placards. But other than that, you're entering in. A new
security man made a mistake. That, in essence, what we do is as
soon as we found out, we corrected it that day.
I also then made sure that we had new training. We have a
policy that any time there's a demonstration on The Mall, that
morning, all security are briefed on what the rules are to be
able to make sure that people's First Amendment rights are not
challenged by the Smithsonian.
So this was a mistake, and I think we've corrected it.
We've not had any other problem since that moment.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. So are any other changes other than
the ones you just outline that you have made, increased
training, and better communication?
Mr. Bunch. Yes, I think that's what's really important to
make sure that works. Then we test to make sure--I give a
briefing after every demonstration if anything happened. So
we're on this as part of the process of improving the
Smithsonian communications.
Mr. Loudermilk. But even if there was a demonstration,
somebody shows up wearing a, you know, Life Matters shirt.
Mr. Bunch. Yes.
Mr. Loudermilk. They're fine? Okay.
Mr. Bunch. No problem.
Mr. Loudermilk. Move on to another subject. In 2022,
Smithsonian hosted an annual folk life festival with the United
Arab Emirates Ministry of Culture and Youth as the headline
sponsor. This followed an announcement in 2017 of an agreement
between the Smithsonian and the UAE to collaborate on cultural
content and capacity development programs.
It opens the question as to why a foreign nation would be
allowed to sponsor an American folk life festival in the first
place or, as you said, the American story, and what, if any,
influence UAE had on the curatorial decisions for the folk life
festival. Months after this festival, The Washington Post
reported that U.S. intelligence officials had compiled a
classified report on the UAE's attempts to influence domestic
American politics.
So my question is, does the Smithsonian accept money from
foreign nations to fund its exhibits and events?
Mr. Bunch. The Smithsonian--the folk life festival is one
of those moments where we do a domestic program and an
international program.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay.
Mr. Bunch. And that the Smithsonian has received support
from nations that are being part of the festival. What we made
clear, however, is that support has nothing to do with content.
They're not involved in the decisions about what is actually
shown. It really is a support to bring performers and scholars
over. But we're very clear that money from anyone really does
not get to tell the Smithsonian what the interpretations, what
the work that we're trying to do.
Mr. Loudermilk. So what policies do you have in place or
programs in place to ensure that foreign investment will not
influence in one way or the other what you display or what goes
in the museums or what you highlight?
Mr. Bunch. We have written policies to do that. We also
have several opportunities to vet these things. So that when
issues are brought forward at a festival, for example, first
it's the responsibility of the festival director to make sure
that his or her staff is following the rules. Then we bring it
up to a higher level within the central administration that we
make sure that there aren't those moments where funding really
reshapes the kind of work we want to do.
Mr. Loudermilk. Alright. Well, thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Sewell is recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Sewell. Well, welcome, Secretary Bunch. It's a pleasure
to see you again.
As the Representative of a Alabama civil rights district
and a daughter of lifelong educators, I am committed to doing
the work to ensure that we preserve, protect, and tell the
complicated story of our Nation.
Every day visitors from across the globe come to the
Nation's Capital to explore exhibits that inform the events
that shape the foundation of America.
In your testimony, you mention that one of the goals that
you have in the 15-year strategic plan for the Smithsonian is
to increase their reach in education, scholarship, and
scientific research, because I know that you believe, as I do,
that every home and every classroom should have the advantage
of understanding and knowing our great American history.
I also believe that knowledge should be accessible for
everyone, not just those who can afford to come to the;
Nation's Capital. This is why I am excited that the Alabama
Humanities Alliance and the Smithsonian Museum on Main Street
Program collaborated to host a traveling exhibit called
Crossroads: Change in Rural America. The exhibit explored ways
that rural communities have evolved over the 20th century. In
fact, one of the five stops along the way was the Selma to
Montgomery trail, which has been a project of mine from the
moment I got into Congress. This exhibit highlights the Black
Belt of which Selma is considered the Queen City. You've had
many chapters that have had an opportunity to really play a
role.
Since 1997, the Alabama Humanities Alliance has partnered
with the Smithsonian Museum on Main Street to bring 11 national
exhibits to Alabama, and it covered 57 communities across our
state. I want to encourage those collaborations and hope that
you will continue to make sure that, in your strategic plan,
that you carve out resources so that the Smithsonian exhibits
can really travel to every classroom in every corner of
America.
In your testimony, you mentioned several ways in which
you've tried to expand the Smithsonian's reach, both through
high-tech digitalization as well as low-tech means like the
Rural Initiative.
Another way the Smithsonian reaches more people is through
the Smithsonian affiliate's program. The Birmingham Civil
Rights Institute in Birmingham, Alabama, is a Smithsonian
affiliate, and a phenomenal teaching experience for those of us
who live in Birmingham and who frequent Birmingham and want to
learn the civil rights history.
How do you think affiliates benefit from the Smithsonian's
central? I also want to get to the importance of your curated
independence when it comes to, you know, when it comes to your
curation. I think it sort of gets to my friend's concern about
foreign influence. I would also suggest that you should have
independence in telling the story so that we get the full story
and not just part of a story.
So can you start with the affiliation program, and then
talk about what your definition of curated independence is?
Mr. Bunch. I am convinced that the Smithsonian has to
really have relationships in rural communities throughout the
United States, and we're looking at all the resources we have
to do that. Some is digital, of course. But others are the
kinds of inexpensive traveling exhibitions that can be in many
parts of the country. We also want to bring more of our staff,
making presentations, that basically created a rural initiative
to say that the Smithsonian needs to make sure that it's paying
attention and it's learning from rural communities. So making
sure the Smithsonian is beyond Washington is one of my major
commitments. But the other point that you've touched on is
really important to me as a former curator, is that the
Smithsonian's greatest strength is its scholarship, is its
curatorial integrity, is its opportunity to bring the best
thinking from around the world to shape what the Smithsonian
does. There are always disagreements over the subjects that we
explore, the interpretations. But the Smithsonian is never a
place that is really about from the left or from the right.
It's really a place that says, what is the best scholarship,
what are the things we can explore? That means that there are
times that we're going to raise issues that not everybody is
going to be excited about or that not everybody is going to
understand. But I think the great strength of the Smithsonian
is that its job in some ways is to use our scholarship to
define reality and give hope. I think that's what we do when we
have the independence to do the work we try to do.
Ms. Sewell. Well, congratulations on your tenure so far,
and we look forward to your continued success.
Mr. Bunch. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentlewoman yields back.
Mr. Griffith is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I truly appreciated in your
opening when you said you wanted to explore all corners of our
complex history. I think that's where it sometimes can get
dicey. But I will tell you, I think the affiliate program is
very good. Ms. Sewell mentioned it. In my district, in Bristol,
Virginia--of course, it's the split city, Bristol, Virginia,
Tennessee--we have the birthplace of country music, which is
also an affiliate and giving another view of rural America.
Just like in Ms. Sewell's district, there's a view of that
history. It's important that we study all of these, and I agree
with that.
Now, you're already planning for our Nation's 250th
anniversary. I'm excited about it. I appreciate you mentioning
that in your opening.
I assume that the pillars of your strategic plan--digital,
nimble, trusted source, science, and education--will be
critical in guiding those efforts. Am I correct in that?
Mr. Bunch. That's absolutely right.
Mr. Griffith. Yes. As a part of that complex history and
all corners, there are certainly things we can highlight that
are not positive, but I'm hopeful that for our 250th
anniversary you will be depicting things that I think we can
all be proud of: the patriotic and proud depiction of our
Nations founding and of the Founders and their contributions.
Not perfect. We need to focus on all of it. I agree with that
as well.
But we do need, I believe, to include the Declaration of
Independence and the Constitution as showcasing those in our
anniversary events because, while not perfect, those documents
laid the groundwork, not just for the United States and our
ability to create a more perfect union, but as guideposts for
the world as we move to a better world; again, not just here
but worldwide.
Can you share some of your thoughts on that and where
you're going with that 250th anniversary and what you plan to
highlight?
Mr. Bunch. I believe that it's crucially important for the
Smithsonian to be part of the glue that helps hold the country
together. And part of that is really celebrating our history,
is exploring the fact that the Founding Fathers and Mothers,
the Founding documents shape not just who we are, but who the
world is. So we want to be able to celebrate that.
We also want to be able to talk about America is a work in
progress, that what you see are many of those challenging
moments, that there are people that are really trying to say,
how does America live up to those ideals? How does America
really build on the declaration of the Constitution? So we want
people to understand that we are going to celebrate a country.
We're also going to commemorate. Because we want them to
understand that, by looking at the past, looking at the full
past, it doesn't mean that we're running away from difficult
things, nor does it mean that we're really being critical of
the country. We're really saying is that America's a place that
has changed over time, and part of that change has been trying
to live up to those ideals. So we want to celebrate that by
telling the full story of the country.
Mr. Griffith. Well, I do believe that what happened was
exceptional--not perfect, but exceptional--and truly has
changed the world. I think we should celebrate it. So I
appreciate hearing those comments.
I'm going to switch gears a little bit and give you a
gimme. I'm interested in all kinds of things, particularly the
natural sciences, but can you describe some of the biggest and
most impactful scientific research projects that the
Smithsonian is currently working on?
Mr. Bunch. Oh, my goodness.
Mr. Griffith. I know there's a lot.
Mr. Bunch. I mean, for me, I'm excited about the work that
we're doing in space. I think the discovering image of the
black hole, really doing the work on the sort of material
that's in space has been amazing for us. I think that we really
are doing things that are going to allow us to continue to sort
of educate the public but also challenge science to do more.
I'm also really taken by the work that we're doing at the
Tropical Research Institute, the kind of hundred-year-old study
that helps us understand climate change and reforestation.
In some ways what I think is wonderful about the
Smithsonian science is that it really is science, but it's also
science contextualized. We help people understand what this
means for the broader society, what it means for culture. So
for me, science has always been one of the pillars of the
Smithsonian, and I'm so proud that it is.
Mr. Griffith. Well, and I'm glad. I really hope that you
all continue to do good work.
What percentage of your budget is dedicated to pursuing
scientific research?
Mr. Bunch. I would say that I'm not sure exactly the
number, but I would say at least a third.
Mr. Griffith. Just because I'm curious, because I said I
love the natural sciences, do you use the creatures at the zoo
to see--you know, to check into things like animal
intelligence? Do you do research there?
Mr. Bunch. We do a lot of different kind of research. A lot
of our work with the zoo is about animal conservation. The work
with the pandas or trying to make sure they were no longer
endangered. We do a lot of work with cheetahs and a variety of
animals. So I think that we do a lot on conservation. And then
our research is used by those scientists that are exploring
other aspects of animal intelligence. So in some ways the
Smithsonian is foundational to what other scientists are also
doing.
Mr. Griffith. Alright. I thank you.
My time is up. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Dr. Murphy is recognized for 5 minutes.
Dr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for coming and visiting with us today. I've
always been a great, great lover of museums. Wherever I travel,
I'll always go to a museum because I just--I'm a lover of
history. I'm a lover of the human experience.
A few months ago, I took my 26-year-old son, we went--he's
in NASCAR, and we went over to look at some of the exhibits
there. And it's wonderful to see such joy that he had in a
field that he's now fully immersed in.
I will tell you, I loved my experience, but a couple of
things bothered me there. You said earlier that you don't
believe partisanship and everything. Let me ask you again about
partisanship. Where does that belong in our Smithsonian?
Mr. Bunch. Smithsonian really is a place that shouldn't be
partisan. It's a place that's driven by scholarship. It doesn't
mean there aren't interpretations that people don't always
agree with, but we're really driven by scholarship.
Dr. Murphy. What bothered me--what really actually just
kind of stiffened me up because I didn't understand, I didn't
expect it from this institution is that there was an exhibit on
Nixon. It wasn't a cartoon that was put up. It was something
put up by Smithsonian staff that described nasty Nixon, boom,
boom, boom. Then they said something also pejorative about
Ronald Reagan on a written placard from the Smithsonian, and it
took me back. That's not the Smithsonian I remember.
So, you know, delving into this a little bit more, I found,
contrary to what you said, a lot of partisanship. You guys have
this wonderful exhibit praising the super czar Dr. Fauci.
Because amidst a cacophony of misinformation and denial, the
advice of Dr. Fauci, the Nation's leading epidemiologist, rang
true. Well, we found out since that time that Dr. Fauci lied.
There's point-blank evidence that he covered up the fact that
the virus did come from Wuhan's lab. So I don't think he's a
superstar. I don't think he was praised. He absolutely lied to
the American public. As a physician, he's damaged the
reputation of the institutes of medicine across this country.
So this was something taken by the left, praising somebody who
actually lied to the country. I'm hopeful that there'll be some
revision of what's gone back and actually truth be told that he
was praised, but then he really was shown that he lied to
further his own interest.
Let me get something back to really--you know, I want you
to succeed because I think when everybody talks about the
Smithsonian, they talk about greatness. This is all something
when you live from a kid, when you make the visit to
Washington, DC, it's all about going to the Smithsonian. You
get in the Air and Space Museum, and you marvel at things.
But I will tell you, when I saw this exhibit in 2020 that
talked about whiteness, whiteness in 2020, here we are, we are
trying to have a society that rather than having all these
silos and everybody being told that you're in privilege, you're
in this, you're in that, and trying to pull things together,
partisan politics is now trying to divide us. I'm going to go
through this, and this is just baffling to him.
This is in the Smithsonian, assumptions about White
culture. It says, Rugged individualism, family structure,
emphasis on scientific method, history, Protestant work ethic,
religion, no tolerance from deviation from a single God
concept. This is absolute anti-racial propaganda. Why would
anything like this be in the Smithsonian Institute?
Mr. Bunch. Now, it's my understanding, what I think you're
seeing--I can't really see it--is----
Dr. Murphy. You should be very well versed in this. You
were the head of the Smithsonian at this time.
Mr. Bunch. No, let me explain. What it is is there was a
document that is the whiteness document that was put up online
that I took down immediately, because I think that the document
itself was wrong and flawed. I do think, however, it's
important for the Smithsonian to help the country grapple with
questions of race. So I'm not going to run away from that. But
I agree with you very much that that document is not the kind
of document that should be at the Smithsonian. If it's what I
think it is, I pulled that down.
Dr. Murphy. How does this help us with race?
Mr. Bunch. That's why I pulled it down.
Dr. Murphy. All it does is divide us. This is divisive
language saying that White people, we don't tolerate any
deviation except a single God concept.
Mr. Bunch. Like I said----
Dr. Murphy. How is that helpful? I don't understand that. I
wish someone could explain that to me.
Mr. Bunch. I pulled that down.
Dr. Murphy. It's not White people, it's not Black people,
it's not Latino people. We're Americans. I just--this is
really--it hurts my heart, because I think instead of us coming
together in the last several years, we have poured more silos
based upon the amount of melanin in our skin than has ever been
seen in our history. It is just--it is pathetic that the site,
the bastion of history in our Nation that sits on the
Institution is reinforcing those things. So I am just sad about
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mrs. Bice is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary Bunch, for being with us this morning.
In your opening statement, you wrote that you believe we should
be--the Smithsonian should be in every home and every classroom
in the country. You also stated in your testimony a few minutes
ago that the Smithsonian should never come from a place of left
or right.
Secretary, are you familiar--do you know the number of drag
shows that the Smithsonian has hosted in the last 3 years?
Mr. Bunch. No, I don't.
Mrs. Bice. Six. Four of those were targeted at children.
That going back to June 27 of 2020, an online event at the
American Art Museum, listed under the kids and families
category, a virtual drag queen story time, Ruth brings fun for
the whole family as she reads classic nursery rhymes and tales
for children, June 5, 2021. June 18, 2021, a virtual drag queen
art, bingo night. June 4 of 2022, another event targeted at
children.
My question is this: You know, how does hosting drag shows
for children help the Smithsonian achieve their mission of
catalyzing public engagement and sparking curiosity by learning
the connection--sorry, learning by connecting the knowledge,
resources, and expertise of the Smithsonian with vital network
of cultural and educational organizations? What culture is
exposing children to overly sexual material appropriate?
Mr. Bunch. I think it's not appropriate to expose children
to drag shows. I'm surprised, and I will look into that.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you. I appreciate that. This recent one
was actually June 23rd of 2023, at the American----
Mr. Bunch. But that was geared not to children at all, is
my understanding, in New York City.
Mrs. Bice. But how is that actually relevant at the
education aspect? I mean, even if it's not to children, why are
we talking about that issue?
Mr. Bunch. I think it's important----
Mrs. Bice. I think there's many other things that we should
be looking at.
Mr. Bunch. We are doing so much more. That is a small part
of whatever we do. The reality is that the Smithsonian is
trying to make sure that it embraces the totality of who we are
as Americans. But this is not the major part of what we do at
all.
Mrs. Bice. Well, while I appreciate that it's not a major
part, thankfully, I recognize--I think that certainly the
targeting of children is completely inappropriate. I appreciate
your opportunity to look into that, and I look forward to
hearing a followup framing on that.
Now, to pivot--well, let me also ask one last question.
Were there any taxpayer funds used for those shows, that you're
aware of?
Mr. Bunch. I have to look into that. I know that
Smithsonian resources are used in a variety of ways, but I'm
not sure.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you for that.
Pivoting now, how does the Smithsonian plan to ensure that
the Women's History Museum represents a wide diversity of
thought and perspectives among American women and avoid
engaging in progressive identity politics? And what are the
sort of specific plans or initiatives that you're looking
forward to?
Mr. Bunch. The goal of the Women's Museum is to explore the
history of women by helping people recognize in new ways the
names they know, to find new stories that they don't know
anything about, but to basically say that we want to use
women's history as a lens to understand what it means to be an
American, to see it through the eyes of women. I think that we
are clear that, as we move forward, we'll hire scholars and
curators and begin to develop what are the ideas we will
explore. That's in the future.
My goal is to recognize that we have to tell a broader
story. But my goal is to make sure that this is a story shaped
by scholarship that helps us understand the story of women in
this country.
Mrs. Bice. Do you believe that you will have some of these
particular initiatives included in the potential exhibits that
also reflect the Christian community and the conservative
women's organizations that has sort of shaped--and you actually
brought some items from the suffrage movement, which I
appreciate. Some of that was very much sort of a Christian-
based focus. Do you plan on including this as well?
Mr. Bunch. Absolutely. The Smithsonian will explore a
diversity of opinions and that--in essence, one of the things
that the Smithsonian's done is really made sure that issues of
religion are central to part of the interpretations we're doing
throughout the Smithsonian.
Mrs. Bice. Well, and as a followup--if I may, Mr.
Chairman--I would say that Alice Mary Robertson was the first
woman ever to serve in the state of Oklahoma in U.S. Congress.
She was also the first woman to provide--I'm sorry--preside
over the United State House of Representatives. So I hope that
she will be included in your museum in the future.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield.
The Chairman. The gentlewoman yields back.
Mr. Carey is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carey. Well, I thank the chairman. I want to thank the
ranking member for having this hearing.
Mr. Secretary, it's a pleasure to be here with you today. I
appreciate your testimony. I'm going to go into a couple
things. I know the ranking member and I have had this
discussion, as well as the chairman. Are you familiar with the
Arts and Industry Building?
Mr. Bunch. Yes, I am.
Mr. Carey. What is that building currently being used for?
Mr. Bunch. The Arts and Industries Building is probably my
second favorite building on The Mall, and that the Arts and
Industries Building is being used for activities and events
right now. The challenge of the arts and industry is that when
it was created in 1881, it was a state-of-the-art museum.
Unfortunately, it's not now, and that there's millions of
dollars to turn that into a more formal museum.
Mr. Carey. Well, let me ask you, so were there any concrete
plans for the museum in the next 3 to 5 years, that you know
of.
Mr. Bunch. At this stage we want to use the museum as part
of the celebration for the 250th anniversary, and we're
developing what those plans can be.
Mr. Carey. Well, one of the things that I--and your staff
has been great to work with. I actually got a tour of that
facility. I have three children, but big age difference. I have
a 22-year-old, and I have a 4-year-old and a 2-year-old. So we
came to--so they came to visit me here in D.C. with the 2-and
the 4-year-old. And it had been a while since I had been
looking at museums, children's museums, to be honest with you.
I noticed that we do have a National Children's Museum, but
right now it's currently occupying what was space that was for
other federally--a federal building. I'm actually the lead
sponsor for the National Children's Museum Act, which is going
to require GSA to actually pay the rent for that facility.
But after going through that building, I truly believe that
that would be a perfect location for a national children's
museum. I understand because of the windows, and I know that
there's been a lot of--there was a model--a remodel done in the
1940's that took some of the space. And I know it would require
a lot of work.
I think that the Children's Museum is doing a fantastic job
right now. But as you said, and I think your point was really
well clear, the National Mall is where people come to learn
about the American story. I truly believe, like you, that's
probably one of my favorite buildings on The Mall. But I think
it would be a great way for our children to have a place to go
and to learn. You don't have to worry about historical
documents, and make this more of a hands-on type of museum. Not
to mention then, of course, it's located right in front of the
carousel, which I believe that you guys just sent to my home
state of Ohio to be reserviced. So I think it'd be a wonderful
location.
Any thoughts on what it would take to remodel, in terms of
financing, a facility of that nature to make it a children's
museum? I know I'm hitting you out of the blue on this, but
just roundabout numbers?
Mr. Bunch. It's hard to get you an exact number. For
example, we spent almost $300 million just to stabilize the
roofs.
Mr. Carey. Yes, I saw that.
Mr. Bunch. So I think it's millions of dollars to do this
to make sure that it can be used in any way for--effectively
for the public. I think if congress says to us, explore that
question, we will.
I agree with you very much that there is almost nothing
more powerful than a good children's museum. I think that while
the Smithsonian does a nice job with young people in various
stages, I think the children's museum is a very powerful and
important thing to happen, and we'd love to have you help us
talk about what's possible.
Mr. Carey. Well, and I appreciate that, Mr. Secretary,
because, I will tell you, I was very impressed with--and I've
gone to a lot of children's museums, as you can imagine now.
And we have a wonderful facility in Columbus. It's called COSI.
It's a hands-on facility. I know that Indianapolis does a
wonderful job. And I think the one that we have here in D.C.,
with the limited funds that they have, they do a remarkable
job.
But it was surprising to me that we don't have something
like that on The Mall.I truly believe, just looking at the
building, the majesty of that building, the history of that
building, looking at some of the pictures, I do believe it's
the type of facility that could be a very--it could be utilized
for hands-on for children in the learning of our country.
I'm going to pivot real quick because I know that there's
some other questions. I only have 40 seconds. But what is the
Smithsonian's long-term plan to address deferred maintenance?
And if you can do that in 30 seconds, you'll be a miracle
worker.
Mr. Bunch. The plan is, first of all, be much more
strategic; to have an understanding of exactly what we have,
put in new systems in place to do that. Then to look at how we
can make the most impact based on the capital money that we've
been given to do this. So I think that this is one of my No. 1
priorities. As you know, anybody's got an aging building,
you're going to have problems with deferred maintenance. So
we're working on this every day.
Mr. Carey. Mr. Secretary, I'm going to give you a pass.
Since you did send the carousel to Ohio, I won't give you a lot
of pushback on the fact that we've got Wisconsin cheddar
sitting on the desk there.
So, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman will be reminded there's
nothing better than Wisconsin cheddar. He does yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, good morning. So my mother and my grandparents
traveled from Puerto Rico to the United States in a pursuit of
a better life. Something that I am deeply proud of. My family's
story has been one of success. My mom came to the States at the
age of one with her seven brothers and sisters.
The American Dream of hard work and the freedom to pursue
economic opportunity has been fulfilled for many American
Latinos, and we want a museum that can proudly reflect this
point of view and this journey.
With that in mind, I am a little concerned with what I've
read in the news about the Molina Family Latino Gallery and the
exhibits that it produces, which some say depict Hispanics as
victims, as Army deserters, as traitors, and as people not
fully invested in this great country and all it has to offer.
I have many constituents back home and in New York and in
the Fourth congressional District who are of Latin-American
descent, some of whom fled this country due to violence,
political, and economic turmoil inflicted by communist
governments and insurgents.
Is the National Museum of the American Latino committed to
telling the experience Latin Americans faced and their
contributions to our Nation.
Mr. Bunch. There is no doubt that is our priority. The best
way I can explain that to you is that the Molina Gallery really
ought to be a testing place, that it should be a series of
eight or nine or 10 exhibitions that happened before the
building is up so that we actually make sure that we've made
the mid-course corrections we need to tell the stories we want
to do.
I really think that if you look at the example of the
African American Museum, which really tells both difficult
stories and stories of resiliency and hope, you'll find the
same thing in the National Museum of the American Latino.
Mr. D'Esposito. So in the authorization for the National
Museum of the American Latino, it's written that the board of
trustees is responsible for ensuring, and I quote--this is the
mission--that the exhibits and programs of the museum reflect
the diversity of the political viewpoints held by Latinos of
the United States on the events and issues relating to the
history of Latinos in the United States of America.
Does the Smithsonian take this provision seriously?
Mr. Bunch. It is one of the most important things we do, to
find the diversity of opinions and diversity of stories. And I
can assure you that museum will do just that.
Mr. D'Esposito. Okay. You mentioned that this specific
exhibit, I guess, is a test. So as a former museum director
yourself, how will you address concerns about political bias in
exhibits?
Mr. Bunch. Part of it is by putting together a diverse
group of scholars that will help shape what the museum will do.
Second, I've created a process where we vet exhibitions.
Traditionally, we vet exhibitions early in the process
conceptually. What I've done is add a second bounce. It allows
us to look more concretely at exhibits, the artifacts you use,
the words that are written. So it will also help us ensure that
we're making sure that the museum is telling the story from a
nonpartisan point of view.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, I hope that that continues. I really
hope that that is the mission, because I don't believe that
exhibits should be used as tests. I think we should vet them
properly and make sure that when the Smithsonian, which is an
institution people travel throughout the world to visit, and we
shouldn't have exhibits that are test cases. They should be
tried and true and vetted so that you are living out the
mission of what we're supposed to be doing there.
Mr. Bunch. Let me--if I can correct that. What I mean by
test, it's not that we're just trying anything willy nilly;
it's to see how the public engages around certain ways we
interpret history. So for me, that was really the key to the
success of the African American Museum, to actually take
examples over a period of 8 or 9 years and say, here's where we
can do this better, here's where we can do this differently,
here's where the public engaged, here's where we need to teach
the public better.
So for me, it's really just one of the tools to make sure
that that museum will be what we want it to be when it opens.
Mr. D'Esposito. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
We've concluded our formal questions here, Secretary Bunch.
But in consultation with the ranking member, we know you
brought five items out of a collection of about 137 million
items. And one of them, of course, has caught my attention,
because I'm told it's the original Cheesehead. I'd love to
yield you 5 minutes or more, if you need, just so you can walk
through the five unique items you brought before us, because
the history and the richness that the Smithsonian Institution
has in its collection is just so incredibly unique. If you
will, we'll give you a few minutes just to describe the five
items before us.
Mr. Bunch. Well, the Smithsonian has 155 million objects in
its collection, so we wanted to give you a few that you could
look at. I mean, I think that, obviously, the Wisconsin
Cheesehead from 1990, crucially important because it really is
a symbol of Wisconsin. It's a symbol of the Green Bay Packers,
which my Giants defeated, but it is--what it is--it is really
an example of the----
The Chairman. I did consider reclaiming my time in that
moment, but continue on.
Mr. Bunch. You know, so that's really important.
I think the other thing is that, here you have is an M1
helmet. This was really used by a Puerto Rican brigade who
really won sort of valor fighting in the Korean war, and we
wanted to be able to use that to tell that story.
Also, you have pins here that are ``Jailed for Freedom''
pendants, which were really about women's suffrage, women
demanding that they had the right to vote, and they were then
sort of arrested, and these are pins to commemorate that.
We also have Mary Todd Lincoln's mourning watch. So when
Abraham Lincoln was assassinated, Mary Todd Lincoln, as you
would expect, was devastated, and this watch was given to her
as a way to always make sure that she kept Abe Lincoln close.
So we have an array of things that really give you a different
story.
The last piece is a piece of trench art from World War I.
As you know, during the war, there were these moments of real
terror and moments of boredom, and many of the soldiers created
art. This is a piece that was created out of shells that is in
the shape of a book that was really used to store material.
But, again, it just demonstrates the array of things that are
part of the Smithsonian collections.
So I would say to you that anytime you want to come and
have me give you my tour of Smithsonian collections, please let
me know.
The Chairman. We thank you. Maybe the ranking member and I
can take you up on that. It is a cherished institution. It's
one that, as noted by I think almost all of our members, that
we enjoy being able to visit. We appreciate your testimony here
today and for you joining us.
Members of the committee may have some additional questions
for you and we ask that you please respond to those questions
in writing.
Without objection, each member will have 5 legislative days
to insert additional material into the record or to revise and
extend their remarks.
If there's no further business, I thank the members for
their participation. Without objection, the meeting stands
adjourned.
[Wherepon, at 11:40 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
