- MARKUP OF H.R. 7319, END ZUCKERBUCKS ACT OF 2024; H.R. 7321, ELECTRONIC FILING OF ELECTIONEERING COMMUNICATIONS REPORTS ACT; AND H.R. 4486, HIRING PREFERENCE FOR VETERANS AND AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MARKUP OF H.R. 7319, END ZUCKERBUCKS ACT
OF 2024; H.R. 7321, ELECTRONIC FILING OF
ELECTIONEERING COMMUNICATIONS REPORTS
ACT; AND H.R. 4486, HIRING PREFERENCE
FOR VETERANS AND AMERICANS WITH DIS-
ABILITIES ACT

=======================================================================

MARKUP

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 14, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov
www.cha.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-012                      WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin, Chairman

BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOSEPH MORELLE, New York,
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia              Ranking Member
GREG MURPHY, North Carolina          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             NORMA TORRES, California
MIKE CAREY, Ohio                     DEREK KILMER, Washington
ANTHONY D'ESPOSITO, New York
LAUREL LEE, Florida

Mike Platt,  Staff Director
Jamie Fleet,  Minority Staff Director

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Opening Statements

Chairman Bryan Steil, Representative from the State of Wisconsin.     1
Ranking Member Joseph Morelle, Representative from the State of
New York.......................................................     3

Submissions for the Record

House bill H.R. 4486.............................................     4
Morelle Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. 4486.....     8
Morelle amendment to H.R. 4486...................................    11
Courthouse News Service article..................................    16
Election Assistance Commission and Rutgers University joint
report.........................................................    20
House bill H.R. 7319.............................................    81
Chairman Steil Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
7319...........................................................    87
Morelle amendment to H.R. 7319...................................    92
CNN article......................................................    97
House bill H.R. 7321.............................................   106
Roll call votes..................................................   109

MARKUP OF H.R. 7319, END ZUCKERBUCKS ACT OF 2024; H.R. 7321, ELECTRONIC
FILING OF ELECTIONEERING COMMUNICATIONS REPORTS ACT; AND H.R. 4486,
HIRING PREFERENCE FOR VETERANS AND AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT

----------

February 14, 2024

Committee on House Administration,
House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:19 a.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Bryan Steil
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Steil, Loudermilk, Griffith, Bice,
Carey, D'Esposito, Morelle, Sewell, and Kilmer.
Staff present: Alexander Deise, Counsel; Caleb Hays,
General Counsel and Deputy Staff Director; Thomas Lane,
Elections Counsel and Director of Elections Coalitions; Kristen
Monterroso, Director of Operations and Legislative Clerk;
Caitlin O'Dell, Legal Assistant and Deputy Clerk; Michael
Platt, Staff Director; Grace White, Communications Director;
Jordan Wilson, Director of Member Services; Khalil Abboud,
Minority Deputy Staff Director, Chief Counsel; Jamie Fleet,
Minority Staff Director; Andrew Garcia, Minority Special
Assistant; Sarah Nasta, Minority Elections Counsel; Sean
Wright, Minority Chief Counsel; and Nikolas Youngsmith,
Minority Elections Counsel.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. BRYAN STEIL, CHAIRMAN OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WISCONSIN

Chairman Steil. The Committee on House Administration will
come to order.
I note that a quorum is present. Without objection, the
chair is authorized to declare a recess at any time.
As Chairman of this Committee, I am committed to bringing
common-sense election integrity measures to the floor. Today we
have an opportunity to strengthen Americans' confidence in our
elections and to encourage participation.
I want to thank the Ranking Member and his team for working
with us to move measures through this Committee.
Over the past year, we have held 10 hearings and two public
roundtables, with 45 witnesses on the issues of voter
confidence. Last week, we examined the influence private
funding has on our elections.
Zuckerbucks, a shorthand term for private funding of
elections administration, has distorted Americans' confidence
in our elections. In response to last week's hearing, we will
consider legislation that removes preferential tax treatment
for organizations that are providing this funding to State and
local offices.
This legislation will also prohibit the acceptance of
private funding for elections administration in the Nation's
capital where Congress has power, per article I, section 8,
clause 17 of our Constitution, to exercise legislation in all
cases whatsoever over the district.
Outside of D.C., States across the country have stepped up
to prevent undue influence from private funding in our
elections. Today we can move one step further by passing the
End Zuckerbucks Act of 2024.
Earlier this week, I spoke with local election officials
who are gearing up for the next election. Secure elections
require proper administration. Election workers are an integral
part of the process. They ensure our elections are administered
fairly, transparently, and without bias.
Next, we will also consider legislation that allows States
to give a hiring preference to veterans and Americans with
disabilities who are willing to serve as poll workers.
I thank Mike Garcia of California for sponsoring this
legislation, which is a component to the bill of the American
Confidence in Elections Act.
Veterans have served our Nation with distinction and
commitment, and many are focused on continuing to serve our
country. We want to recognize the important public service
given by those Americans with disabilities. We must find ways
to encourage more Americans to become poll workers, as our
elections would not run smoothly without local and State
election officials stepping up to serve their communities.
I look forward to seeing Mr. Garcia's common-sense bill
passed today to support our veterans and Americans with
disabilities.
Last, we will consider legislation to increase transparency
in our elections. Since 2000, Congress has worked to require
the FEC to make electronic filing mandatory for most political
committees and other persons. However, these electronic filing
requirements have not yet been expanded to cover electioneering
communication reports.
The bill we will consider today makes electronic filing
mandatory for entities reporting more than $50,000 in
electioneering communications in a calendar year. The bill
increases transparency and accountability in our elections.
Each of the bills considered today will increase confidence
in our elections and promote transparency. I look forward to
seeing these pass Committee.
I will now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle, for 5
minutes for the purpose of offering an opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOSEPH MORELLE, RANKING MEMBER OF THE
COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION, A U.S. REPRESENTATIVE FROM
NEW YORK

Mr. Morelle. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, to you and
to the Members and staff who have worked with our team on the
three bills in front of us.
Pending the outcome of amendments that I may offer, I may
support this legislation.
All of the bills are related to the Committee's elections
jurisdictions, and elections sit at the very heart, indeed, are
the very heart of this country and our democracy.
The franchise is a fundamental political right because it
is the preservation of all rights. So many of the core rights
that define us, the way we express ourselves, where and how we
pray, if we do, who we build our lives with, when and how and
whether we have children, all of those are guarded by the
ballot box. As Members of the Committee on House
Administration, we must be guardians of that ballot box. We
must be custodians of the right to vote so generations to come
will hold these same rights and freedoms that we cherish.
It is incumbent upon us not only as elected Members of
Congress but as Members of this Committee to do whatever we can
to protect and preserve the right of every eligible American to
participate without undue restrictions in the open and
transparent elections that shape our national conversations.
I will have more to say on the bills as they are called up
for consideration individually, and I look forward to
considering them and considering whether they do their part to
strengthen our democracy and to protect our fundamental rights.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Without objection, the opening statements of all other
Members will be included in the record.
As required by House rules, the substantive copy of the
measures to be considered today have been made available to
Members and the public at least 24 hours in advance.
I now call up H.R. 4486, Hiring Preference for Veterans and
Americans With Disabilities Act, sponsored by Congressman Mike
Garcia of California, and a component to the American
Confidence in Elections Act. This bill clarifies that with
respect to hiring election workers, a State or local
jurisdiction may give preference to veterans or individuals
with disabilities.
I will now yield 5 minutes to Mr. Loudermilk to speak on
the bill.
[House bill H.R. 4486 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Loudermilk. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I do want to lend my support for H.R. 4486. This bill will
expand the existing preferential hiring treatment for veterans
and Americans with disabilities to include election positions.
As a veteran myself, I believe this is not only important
to provide support to our veterans, many who come back from
combat zones, from hazardous duty, and they are looking for
gainful employment. A lot of times veterans find, especially
those that may be in more infantry-oriented positions in the
military, which are extremely important to the safety and
security of our Nation, there are not quite so many private
sector jobs available for someone who is a professional
infantryman. Being able to get a position in such an important
role is very important to our veterans.
Beyond that, as a veteran myself, one thing that veterans
are taught is to--attention to detail, and details matter very
much. My experience in the military, there were rules,
regulations, standard operating procedures, guidelines,
checklists to guide us in a lot of the critical duties that we
would have to do. The reason that there was so much critical
information is because details matter, and also integrity
matters when it comes to defending our freedom.
Poll workers play an important role in the election
process, and they help to promote free and fair elections. That
is why it is important to have people that understand that
details matter, that rules matter, that integrity matters, that
law matters, and being able to make a decision not upon your
just personal preference but by what the law requires and what
the regulations require.
Veterans have served our great Nation with distinction and
commitment. As I said, their training and discipline and
dedication make them an ideal choice for these roles.
With those things in mind, Mr. Chairman, and also including
Americans with disabilities in this hiring preference, we
acknowledge that the contributions they can bring to our
electoral process is invaluable.
With this, I would like to urge my colleagues to support
this bill.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
I will now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle, if he
would like to give a statement on the bill.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have an amendment at the desk.
Mrs. Bice. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Morelle. Oh, I am sorry.
Yes, I will reserve until it is appropriate----
Chairman Steil. Very good.
Mr. Morelle [continuing]. to offer the amendment.
Chairman Steil. The clerk will please report the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 4486, to clarify the State or local----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the first reading of the
bill is dispensed with.
Also, without objection, the bill may be considered as read
and opened to amendment at any point.
[Morelle Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R.
4486 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. I now recognize myself to offer an
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute.
The clerk will please report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment in the nature----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the reading of the
amendment is dispensed with.
Without objection, the Amendment in the Nature of a
Substitute will be considered as original text for the purpose
of further amendment.
Do any Members seek to be recognized?
Mr. Morelle, for what purpose does the gentleman seek
recognition?
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I now--sorry I jumped the gun. I have an amendment at the
desk.
Chairman Steil. The clerk will please distribute and report
the amendment.
Mrs. Bice. Mr. Chairman, I reserve a point of order.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman from Oklahoma reserves a
point of order.
Mr. Morelle is recognized for 5 minutes in support of the
amendment.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Morelle amendment to H.R. 4486 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

It is vitally important that Congress does everything it
can to ensure that people with disabilities are able to freely
exercise their right to vote, but far too many people with
disabilities continue to face significant barriers to the
ballot box.
An estimated 30 million eligible voters in the United
States have disabilities, but according to a 2022 Election
Assistance Commission report, one in five voters with
disabilities either needed assistance or had difficulty voting
in 2022. I think all Members of the Committee would find this
unacceptable.
According to the same report, people with disabilities have
a 20 percent likelihood of having difficulties voting in person
compared with just 6 percent for folks without disabilities,
and the problem is nationwide.
Last year, the United States Department of Justice filed a
lawsuit against Los Angeles County alleging that the county
discriminated against voters with disabilities by failing to
comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. According to
the Department of Justice, one voter that relied on a
wheelchair had difficulty casting her ballot during the August
2019 special election at a senior facility in Chatsworth,
California, a town now represented by the bill's sponsor,
Congressman Garcia.
House Democrats have long sought to make voting access
easier for voters with disabilities, including through the
Freedom to Vote Act, which was opposed by Members of this--of
the House Republican majority.
The amendment would add a sense of Congress to the bill,
simply clarifying that Congress has a duty to fully fund
accessibility at voting locations to ensure that every
American, regardless of whether they have disabilities, is able
to access and cast a ballot.
I urge my colleagues to support voters with disabilities by
supporting the amendment.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Is there further debate on the amendment?
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes to speak on the
amendment.
In general, the sense of Congress, as proposed by my
colleague, I am supportive of. As we look at section 5, I am
supportive in theory. I think there is some details we would
want to work out about how we would work through making sure
that those funds are available.
If the gentleman is interested in a friendly amendment of
striking section 5 at this time, I would be willing to be
supportive of the amendment. If he would like to insist, that
is fine as well. We can vote on it in that manner.
I do think it is worthy to explore this issue. I think it
just would take us some additional time to make sure we dig
through the details of what that funding structure would look
like to make sure that our polling locations are accessible,
which I think we broadly all share and understand is a true
goal. I just want to make sure as we look at that funding
structure that we get it right.
I would--if the gentleman is interested in that friendly
amendment, I would be supportive. If not, something we should
definitely review and consider down the road.
I am happy to yield to the gentleman.
Mr. Morelle. Yes, thank you.
I appreciate the willingness to work together. I feel like
removing section 5 would undermine our efforts to find adequate
funding, but--so I would prefer to leave it in. I recognize
that may lose support here, but I also would welcome the
opportunity to continue to talk about this issue moving
forward.
With that, I will yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
I reclaim my time.
I appreciate that. I think it is something we should
continue to work on. I am going to recommend a vote against
this amendment at this time, but it is something that I am
fully supportive of continuing the dialog to look for ways that
we can make sure all of our polling locations are accessible to
every American.
I yield back.
Is there further amendment--is there further debate on the
amendment?
Ms. Sewell is recognized.
Ms. Sewell. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am glad that we are discussing this legislation today
because I would like to revisit our conversation on the ACE Act
about making voting easier for our men and women in uniform.
In 2020, only two-thirds of the military Members were
registered to vote, compared to 83 percent of civilian voters.
I wanted--I want to offer a straightforward amendment that
would streamline resources for servicemembers by providing them
with all of the key details that they need to know about the
voting process, whether they are at home or abroad.
However, in lieu of offering an amendment, I wanted to ask
the Chairman if it would be--if he would be willing to have a
follow-up conversation with me about this issue. I believe that
we should be able to find a bipartisan solution that will
ensure that all servicemen and -women have access to every
possible avenue that can help them cast their ballots.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
Is there further debate on the amendment?
Seeing none, does the gentlewoman from Oklahoma insist on
her point of order?
Mrs. Bice. No, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. If no, the question is on the amendment by
the gentleman from New York.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
amendment--in the opinion of the chair, the noes have it, and
the amendment is not agreed to.
Mr. Morelle. May I ask for a recorded vote, Mr. Chair?
Chairman Steil. A roll call vote is requested.
The clerk will please call the roll.
The Clerk. Chairman Steil?
Chairman Steil. No.
The Clerk. Chairman Steil votes no.
Mr. Loudermilk?
Mr. Loudermilk. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Loudermilk votes no.
Mr. Griffith?
Mr. Griffith. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Griffith votes no.
Dr. Murphy?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mrs. Bice?
Mrs. Bice. No.
The Clerk. Mrs. Bice votes no.
Mr. Carey?
Mr. Carey. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Carey votes no.
Mr. D'Esposito?
Mr. D'Esposito. No.
The Clerk. Mr. D'Esposito votes no.
Ms. Lee?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Morelle?
Mr. Morelle. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Morelle votes aye.
Ms. Sewell?
Ms. Sewell. Aye.
The Clerk. Ms. Sewell votes aye.
Mr. Kilmer? Mr. Kilmer?
Mr. Kilmer. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Kilmer votes aye.
Mrs. Torres?
[No response.]
Chairman Steil. Have all Members voted?
Does any Member wish to change their vote?
The clerk will report the tally.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, the noes are six, and the ayes are
three.
Chairman Steil. The amendment is not agreed to.
Do any other Members seek recognition?
If not, the--for what purpose does the gentleman seek
recognition?
Mr. Morelle. I would just ask to seek unanimous consent
that the following be added to the record.
First, a June 2023 article from the Courthouse News
Service, ``Feds sue L.A. County over disenfranchised disabled
voters,'' and the second is the Election Assistance Commission
and Rutgers University joint report, Disability and Voting
Accessibility in the 2022 Elections.
Chairman Steil. Without objection.
[The articles referred to follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Does any other Member seek recognition?
If not, the question now occurs on the Amendment in the
Nature of a Substitute offered by myself.
All those in favor, please signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
amendment is agreed to.
The question now occurs on ordering H.R. 4486, as amended,
reported favorably to the House.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
motion to report is agreed to.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid upon
the table.
I now call up H.R. 7319, the End Zuckerbucks Act of 2024.
The bill is sponsored by Representative Claudia Tenney of
New York and cosponsored by Representative Tom Cole of
Oklahoma.
[House bill H.R. 7319 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Zuckerbucks, or the private funding of our elections, is
election interference, plain and simple. Last week, we heard
testimony explaining the outsized influence Zuckerbucks has
played in our recent elections.
The American Confidence in Elections Act, which passed out
of our Committee last summer, ended this tax exempt status for
501(c)(3) org groups like the Center for Tech and Civil Life
that seek to influence our elections through private money.
The bill combines Representative Tenney's End Zuckerbucks
Act of 2023 with Mr. Cole's provisions to prohibit Zuckerbucks
applied to the District of Columbia. As 27 States have now
banned Zuckerbucks, Congress needs to take steps where the
Constitution allows to ensure our elections are free from
private influence.
I will now yield 5 minutes to Mrs. Bice to speak on the
bill.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As we learned at last week's Zuckerbucks hearing, in the
runup to the 2020 election, Mark Zuckerberg and his wife gave
$350 million to the leftwing organization, the Center for Tech
and Civil Life. CTCL then, in turn, contributed millions of
dollars in the guise of COVID pandemic preparedness to swing
States like Pennsylvania, Georgia, Wisconsin, Arizona,
Michigan, Nevada, among others, to drive up Democrat turnout
and help Joe Biden become President.
Rep. Sewell even said last week, ``All of us can agree that
no private funding should be funding our elections''.
The private funding of election administration is bad
policy. It does not ensure confidence in our elections. To be
quite frank, if a rightwing group like the Koch brothers, for
example, were providing these funds instead of CTCL, the
Democrats on the other side would be rightly outraged.
Last week's Zuckerbucks hearing also taught us that banning
Zuckerbucks is bipartisan. Twenty-seven States have prohibited
Zuckerbucks, including Pennsylvania, where its Democrat
Governor signed the ban into law. Kansas, Kentucky, and North
Carolina became law without the Governor's signature.
In 2020, CTCL gave my home State of Oklahoma roughly $2.5
million. In response to trying to take over the elections in
Oklahoma, the legislature acted swiftly in banning Zuckerbucks.
Federal law prohibits tax-exempt status for groups like
CTCL that provide private funding to election offices across
the country. It makes no sense that this legislation, rightly,
removes that tax break.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
The clerk will please report the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 7319----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the first reading of the
bill is dispensed with.
Also, without objection, the bill should be considered as
read and open to amendment at any point.
Chairman Steil. I now recognize myself to offer an
Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute.
[Chairman Steil Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to
H.R. 7319 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The clerk will please report the amendment.
The Clerk. Amendment in the nature of a substitute----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the reading of the
amendment is dispensed with.
Without objection, the Amendment in the Nature of a
Substitute will be considered as original text for the purpose
of further amendment.
Does any Member wish to seek recognition?
For what purpose does the gentleman seek recognition?
Mr. Morelle. Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment at the desk.
Chairman Steil. The clerk will please distribute and report
the amendment.
The Clerk. Add at the end of the following: Secretary [sic]
of, Federal payments to State and local government----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, further reading of the
amendment is dispensed with.
[Morelle amendment to H.R. 7319 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. For what purpose does the gentlewoman seek
recognition?
Mrs. Bice. I reserve a point of order.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman from Oklahoma reserves a
point of order.
Mr. Morelle is recognized for 5 minutes in support of the
amendment.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
We had, as you indicated, a hearing on this topic last week
during which I expressed my views on the bill. Frankly, nothing
I heard in the testimony from witnesses gives me pause about
charitable foundations offering support for election officials.
I will not use more of the Committee's time by repeating the
other things that I said last week, except to note that the
newest version of this bill would once again violate the
principles of home rule for the residents of the District of
Columbia, which House Democrats have long supported.
I also think this is a good opportunity for us to truly put
our money where our mouths are. Election administrators have
told us time and time again in hearings that we have had that
they need additional funding to run safe and secure elections.
Last week, we heard from one of our witnesses, Professor
Zackary Mohr, about the significant costs of conducting
elections in the United States.
In his Fiscal Year 2024 budget, President Biden called on
Congress to appropriate $5 billion over the course of a decade
to support election administrators across the United States.
This amendment would authorize that vital appropriation to this
bill, because if this Committee plans on borrowing election
administrators from receiving much needed supplemental support
from nonpartisan, nonprofit organizations, the least we can do
is ensure they have the resources they need to run safe, free,
and fair elections.
It would also require the Election Assistance Commission to
speak to a bipartisan group of State and local election
administrators and submit a report to the director of the
Office of Management and Budget to ensure that the voices and
views of local officials are heard in the budgeting process.
Without this amendment, all this Committee is doing is
cutting election administrators' legs out from under them,
leaving them high and dry as we rapidly approach a nationwide
and critical Presidential election.
I urge my colleagues to support election administrators by
supporting this amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I appreciate the gentleman's concern on funding for
elections. I think it is something worthy of our conversation.
We have done some work at this Committee as it relates to
improving the grant-making process at the EAC. I think there is
some real opportunities to continue on that work regarding
transparency.
I think the broader funding request in the--in this
amendment is somewhat not germane. For purposes of this and
maintaining our kind of collegial markup here, I am not going
to make that a parliamentary procedure. I am going to recommend
a vote against this because I do not think it really hits to
the core of what we are trying to do, which is really address
the fact that the private funding in our elections causes a
reduction in people's confidence in their elections. I think we
have a real opportunity to find that bipartisan support to
remove that.
I am willing to continue working and dialoguing on ways
that we can improve the grant-making process through the EAC. I
think it is important to make sure that our elections are
properly funded. I think it is heavily dependent on State and
local funding. We could have that debate elsewhere.
I am gone to be recommending a no vote on the amendment, as
offered, but I do appreciate the gentleman's concern to make
sure that there is funding for our elections.
I yield back.
Is there further debate on the amendment?
The gentleman from Virginia is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. I would agree in part and disagree in part
with the Chairman.
I agree that this is probably not the right time and place
for this, but we need to have a discussion. My concern about
the money--and the money always concerns me--but my concern
about the money is is that we do not have anything in there
that creates a level playing field or maybe addresses some of
the problems, which is why I kind of like the study language,
because we heard from actually the Democrat witness last week
that you have to be careful because you want to make sure that
the rural areas are probably getting a little more help because
they need different help than they might need in the more urban
areas.
I think the study is a great idea. I think, before the
study, it is premature to figure out whether or not we should
be spending the money and how much we should be spending. I
think we probably need to build in a formula to make sure that
there is not a disparity between the various different types of
populations. When I say that, I am not talking about the
demographics of the people; I am talking about the geography of
the land.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
Is there further debate on the amendment?
Ms. Sewell. I move to strike the last word.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Sewell. As the Ranking Member of the Election
Subcommittee and the sponsor of the John Robert Lewis Voting
Rights Advancement Act, I care deeply about our responsibility
to ensure our elections are secure and accessible. However,
elections cannot be secure or accessible if they are not
properly funded.
It saddens me that this Committee has chosen to pursue
legislation that will suppress get out the vote efforts instead
of focusing on properly funding our elections and expanding
access to the ballot box.
For far too long, election administrators have been turning
rotten lemons into lemonade with inadequate resources. The
consequences of inadequate resources is long lines, polling
station changes without notification, ballot shortages. Far too
often these consequences disproportionately impact minority
communities.
It is time that we address the funding gap by pursuing
robust public funding to ensure that election workers have what
they need to equitably run elections, protect election workers,
and safeguard our democracy.
When Republicans decide to join Democrats in adequately
funding safe and accessible elections for all Americans, it
will be open to considering proposals to eliminate private
funding. However, I cannot help but notice that the House
Republicans' Fiscal Year 2024 budget zeros out funding for
election security grants in Fiscal Year 2024 budget during a
Presidential election year.
Congress cannot step in to provide assistance every once in
a while. We have a responsibility to equitably fund elections
every election cycle.
Today's bill, I believe, is a distraction from the real
issues facing voters. From fake robocalls funded by
conservative operatives like Elon Musk spreading election
disinformation and misinformation on his platform, rightwing
interests seem hell-bent on keeping Americans from the ballot
box.
I will be voting no on the underlining legislation, yes on
the amendment.
I ask unanimous consent from the Chairman to put into the
record this article entitled, ``How a Biden AI robocall in New
Hampshire allegedly links back to a Texas strip mall.''
Chairman Steil. Without objection.
[The article referred to follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Sewell. Mr. Chairman, since last week's hearing, new
evidence has emerged about recent fake AI-generated robocalls
urging New Hampshire voters not to vote for President Biden in
the primary. It turns out that the funding stream behind these
robocalls are linked to the same billionaire I talked about
last week who funded Ms. Mollie Hemingway's organization, The
Federalist. You may recall that Ms. Hemingway was one of the
witnesses in last week's hearing for the majority.
During last week's hearing, I made note of the connection
between Ms. Hemingway's employer, who paid for the January 6th
rally that led to the violent insurrection. It just so happens
that Richard Euland (ph) is also the largest funder of the Life
Corporation, the company responsible for the fake AI-generated
robocalls to New Hampshire last month.
I point this out not only as a hypocrisy but to note that
we should really be worried about equitably funding every
election, not just sometime. I cannot understand why the
majority would totally zero out election integrity grants for
the 2024 Presidential election.
Nothing is more important than ensuring that all Americans
have access to quality--to the ballot box and can vote for the
candidate that they choose, free of any sort of AI-generated
robocalls and other deceptions.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time. I hope that
we can work together on trying to figure out ways that we can
actually adequately fund elections through public funding.
Thanks.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
Is there further debate on the amendment?
Does the gentlewoman from Oklahoma insist on her point of
order?
Mrs. Bice. No, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. If no, the question is on the amendment by
the gentleman from New York.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the noes have it, and the
amendment is not agreed to.
Mr. Morelle. May I ask for a recorded vote?
Chairman Steil. A roll call vote is requested.
The clerk will please call the roll.
The Clerk. Chairman Steil?
Chairman Steil. No.
The Clerk. Chairman Steil votes no.
Mr. Loudermilk?
Mr. Loudermilk. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Loudermilk votes no.
Mr. Griffith?
Mr. Griffith. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Griffith votes no.
Dr. Murphy?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mrs. Bice?
Mrs. Bice. No.
The Clerk. Mrs. Bice votes no.
Mr. Carey?
Mr. Carey. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Carey votes no.
Mr. D'Esposito?
Mr. D'Esposito. No.
The Clerk. Mr. D'Esposito votes no.
Ms. Lee?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Morelle?
Mr. Morelle. Yes.
The Clerk. Mr. Morelle votes no.
Ms. Sewell?
Ms. Sewell. Aye.
The Clerk. Yes. Mr. Morelle votes yes.
Ms. Sewell?
Ms. Sewell. Aye.
The Clerk. Ms. Sewell votes aye.
Mr. Kilmer?
Mr. Kilmer. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Kilmer votes aye.
Mrs. Torres?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, on this vote, there are six noes
and three ayes.
Chairman Steil. The amendment is not agreed to.
Do any other Members seek recognition?
If not, the question now occurs on the Amendment in the
Nature of a Substitute offered by myself.
All those in favor, please signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
amendment is agreed to.
Mr. Morelle. May I ask for a recorded roll call?
Chairman Steil. A roll call vote is requested.
The clerk will please call the roll.
The Clerk. Chairman Steil?
Chairman Steil. Aye.
The Clerk. Chairman Steil votes aye.
Mr. Loudermilk?
Mr. Loudermilk. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Loudermilk votes aye.
Mr. Griffith?
Mr. Griffith. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Griffith votes aye.
Dr. Murphy?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mrs. Bice?
Mrs. Bice. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Bice votes aye.
Mr. Carey?
Mr. Carey. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Carey votes aye.
Mr. D'Esposito?
Mr. D'Esposito. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. D'Esposito votes aye.
Ms. Lee?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Morelle?
Mr. Morelle. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Morelle votes no.
Ms. Sewell?
Ms. Sewell. No.
The Clerk. Ms. Sewell votes no.
Mr. Kilmer?
Mr. Kilmer. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Kilmer votes no.
Mrs. Torres?
[No response.]
Chairman Steil. Have all Members voted? Have all Members
voted?
Does any Member wish to change their vote?
The clerk will please report the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, on this vote, there are six ayes
and three noes.
Chairman Steil. The amendment is agreed to.
The question now occurs on ordering H.R. 7319, as amended,
reported favorably to the House.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it. The motion
to report is agreed.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider----
Mr. Morelle. May I have a recorded vote on that?
Chairman Steil. A recorded vote has been requested.
The clerk will please call the roll.
The Clerk. Chairman Steil?
Chairman Steil. Aye.
The Clerk. Chairman Steil votes aye.
Mr. Loudermilk?
Mr. Loudermilk. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Loudermilk votes aye.
Mr. Griffith?
Mr. Griffith. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Griffith votes aye.
Dr. Murphy?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mrs. Bice?
Mrs. Bice. Aye.
The Clerk. Mrs. Bice votes aye.
Mr. Carey?
Mr. Carey. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Carey votes aye.
Mr. D'Esposito?
Mr. D'Esposito. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. D'Esposito votes aye.
Ms. Lee?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Morelle?
Mr. Morelle. No.
The Clerk. Mr. Morelle votes no.
Ms. Sewell?
Ms. Sewell. No.
The Clerk. Ms. Sewell votes no.
Mr. Kilmer?
Mr. Kilmer. No.
Chairman Steil. Mr. Kilmer votes no.
Mrs. Torres?
[No response.]
Chairman Steil. Have all Members voted?
Does any Member wish to change their vote?
The clerk will report the tally.
The Clerk. Mr. Chairman, on this vote, the ayes are six and
the noes are three.
Chairman Steil. The order to report favorably to the House
has been agreed to.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid on the
table.
I now call up H.R. 7321, the Electronic Filing of
Electioneering Communication Reports Act, sponsored by Mr.
Morelle of New York.
The Ranking Member and I cosponsored this legislation. The
bill amends the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 to
modernize certain reporting requirements for electioneering
communications.
The FEC, the Federal Election Communication--the Federal
Election Commission, enforces Federal campaign finance laws
that require entities to file electioneering communication
reports. However, while Federal law requires almost all reports
filed with the FEC to be done electronically, the
electioneering communication report must be filed on paper in
most cases.
Unfortunately, paper filings are subject to delay due to
post office processing or disruptions in the delivery of mail.
Electronic filings are not. This legislation requires most
electioneering reports to be filed electronically. This
promotes transparency to the FEC, can publicly post--this
promotes transparency as the FEC can publicly post these
reports as soon as practical, rather than having to wait to
receive the report in the mail.
This legislative change has been a top priority of the
nonpartisan legislative recommendations from the FEC in 2021,
2022, and 2023. In addition to bipartisan support, we have
worked with our Senate partners in crafting this language.
I will now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle, for 5
minutes to speak on the legislation.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This is a meaningful bipartisan act to ensure that the
public receives important information about election-relevant
communications. I am happy to introduce it with my friend and
partner, the chair, Mr. Steil. I hope it can move rapidly to
the floor and then to the President's desk for signature.
As the Federal Election Commission has informed Congress,
compared to data from paper records or paper reports, data from
electronically filed reports is received, processed, and
disseminated more easily and efficiently, resulting in better
use of resources. Reports that are filed electronically are
normally available to the public and may be downloaded within
minutes. I agree, in contrast, paper filings take days to be
available to provide critical information to the public.
The Supreme Court has long recognized that disclosure
requirements are vitally important to provide the electorate
with information, quote, ``as to where political campaign money
comes from and how it is spent,'' unquote.
American voters are best equipped to choose our leaders
when they have the most fulsome, most up-to-date information at
hand. This bill will aid every American voter to exercise their
fundamental rights.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chair, for your cooperation and help
of staff and the Members. I fully support this bill and hope we
will ensure passage.
Thank you, and I will yield back.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back.
The clerk will please report the bill.
The Clerk. H.R. 7321----
Chairman Steil. Without objection, the reading of the bill
is dispensed with.
Without objection, the bill should be considered as read
and open for amendment at any point.
[House bill H.R. 7321 follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Do any Members wish to seek recognition?
Ms. Sewell, for what purpose does the gentlewoman seek
recognition?
Ms. Sewell. I move to strike the last word.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Sewell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to just echo the sentiments of Mr. Morelle that
this is a common-sense bipartisan bill. Look forward to voting
for it. I think it is really important that we provide timely
disclosures of communications, election communications, to all
persons. I think this goes to the heart of election integrity,
and I fully support this bill and look forward to voting for
it.
Thanks.
Chairman Steil. The gentlewoman yields back.
Does any other Member seek recognition?
If not, the question now occurs on ordering H.R. 7321, as
amended.
Reported favorably--not as amended because we did not amend
it.
If not, the question now occurs on ordering H.R. 7321
reported favorably to the House.
All those in favor, signify by saying aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it. The motion
to report is agreed to.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid upon
the table.
This concludes the order of business for today's markup.
Pursuant to House rule XI, clause 2(l), I ask that the
Committee--I ask that Committee Members have the right to file
with the clerk of the Committee supplemental, additional,
minority, and dissenting views on each of the items marked up
today.
Without objection, also, the staff is authorized to make
necessary technical and conforming changes.
If there is no further business, I thank the Members for
their participation.
Without objection, the Committee on House Administration
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:58 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Roll call votes follow:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
