- MEMBER DAY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEMBER DAY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 8, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov
www.cha.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-911                       WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Committee on House Administration

BRYAN STEIL, WISCONSIN, Chairman

BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOSEPH MORELLE, New York,
H. MORGAN GRIFFITH, Virginia              Ranking Member
GREG MURPHY, North Carolina          TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             DEREK KILMER, Washington
MIKE CAREY, Ohio                     NORMA TORRES, California
ANTHONY D'ESPOSITO, New York
LAUREL LEE, Florida
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------
Page

Opening Statements

The Honorable Bryan Steil, Representative from the state of
Wisconsin, Chairman............................................     1
The Honorable Joseph Morelle, Representative from the state of
New York, Ranking Member.......................................     2
The Honorable Claudia Tenney, Representative from the state of
New York.......................................................    32

Prepared Statements

The Honorable Kelly Armstrong, a Representative from the state of
North Dakota...................................................     6
The Honorable Steve Cohen, a Representative from the state of
Tennessee......................................................     9
The Honorable Raja Krishnamoorthi, a Representative from the
state of Illinois..............................................    13
The Honorable Larry Bucshon, a Representative from the state of
Indiana........................................................    16
The Honorable Rashida Tlaib, a Representative from the state of
Michigan.......................................................    21
The Honorable Pramila Jayapal, a Representative from the state of
Washington.....................................................    30
The Honorable Claudia Tenney, a Representative from the state of
New York.......................................................    34
The Honorable Abigail Spanberger, a Representative from the state
of Virginia....................................................    36
The Honorable Chip Roy, a Representative from the state of Texas.    42

Witnesses

The Honorable Andy Kim, a Representative from the state of New
Jersey.........................................................    49
The Honorable Angie Craig, a Representative from the state of
Minnesota......................................................    51
The Honorable Warren Davidson, a Representative from the state of
Ohio...........................................................    53
The Honorable Steny Hoyer, a Representative from the state of
Maryland.......................................................    59
The Honorable Richard Hudson, a Representative from the state of
North Carolina.................................................    62
The Honorable Sara Jacobs, a Representative from the state of
California.....................................................    63
The Honorable Troy Nehls, a Representative from the state of
Texas..........................................................    66
The Honorable Mike Quigley, a Representative from the state of
Illinois.......................................................    69
The Honorable Nikema Williams, a Representative from the state of
Georgia........................................................    72

MEMBER DAY

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 8, 2023

Committee on House Administration,
House of Representatives,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:38 a.m., in
room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Bryan Steil
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Steil, Loudermilk, Griffith,
Murphy, Carey, Lee, D'Esposito, Morelle, Sewell, Kilmer, and
Torres.
Staff present: Tim Monahan, Staff Director; Caleb Hays,
Deputy Staff Director and General Counsel, Acting
Parliamentarian; Nick Crocker, Deputy Staff Diector; Hillary
Lassiter, Chief Clerk; Jordan Wilson, Director of Member
Services; Cade Alcock, Assistant Clerk; Ryan Arient, Staff
Assistant; Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director; Khalil Abboud,
Minority Deputy Staff Director; Matthew Schlesinger, Minority
Oversight Counsel; Eddie Flaherty, Minority Chief Clerk; Owen
Reilly, Minority Professional Staff Member; and Andrew Garcia,
Minority Staff Assistant.
Chairman Steil. The Committee on House Administration will
come to order--in part to have Mr. Murphy no longer be speaking
ill of me for attending late.
[Laughter.]
I am very concerned about what any motion might be for my
tardiness. Sincerest apologies.
I note that a quorum is present. Without objection, the
Chair may declare a recess at any time.
Thank you all for participating in the Committee on House
Administration's Member Day. Our Committee has jurisdiction
over a broad range of issues.
One of our primary responsibilities includes oversight over
the day-to-day operations that keep the House of
Representatives running. This includes oversight over House
officers, the key leadership across the legislative branch,
like the Architect of the Capitol, as well as the countless
administrative and technical functions of the chamber.
Further, as part of our official duties demonstrated this
week, we authorize the budget of committees and individual
member allowances, known as the MRA.
House Administration also has a role to play in considering
potential updates to the STOCK Act.
We want to hear from members as we examine ways to make
improvements and increase transparency and accountability. We
have also increased our education and outreach efforts,
alongside the Ethics Committee, to ensure members fully
understand current rules on trading stocks and the reporting
requirements.
This committee also oversees the management of important
historical and national institutions, such as the Library of
Congress and the Smithsonian Institution. We must ensure all
taxpayer-funded entities are being good stewards of taxpayer
dollars.
That being said, we are tasked with ensuring the
legislative branch as a whole is operating effectively and
transparently for all members, staff, and most importantly, the
American people.
House Administration also has oversight over the security
in the House of Representatives and on Capitol Hill, with
Capitol Police, the House Sergeant at Arms, and the Capitol
Police Board all under our jurisdiction. We must ensure both
safety and access for the millions of Americans who visit the
People's House.
Especially with our campus now fully accessible to the
public, thanks to the House Republican majority, our
responsibility is even more imperative to guarantee we provide
a safe, secure, and open campus.
Also within our committee's broad jurisdiction is the
oversight of federal elections on behalf of the House of
Representatives. However, our role is limited and we must keep
the federal government in check from overstepping onto state
sovereignty, which is protected by the United States
Constitution.
Our goal is promoting faith in our elections process and
outcomes by promoting policies that make it easier for eligible
Americans to vote and harder to cheat. When Americans have more
confidence that their ballots will count, they are more likely
to vote.
To do so, we will hear from state and local elections
officials on what is working and what isn't working in
elections across our country. From there, we will help
facilitate discussions on best practices that states can
consider and ensure that federal policies don't get in their
way.
Today we will hear testimony from our colleagues on these
various topics.
Thank you to everyone who has taken time to testify before
our committee today. We appreciate you making the time. I look
forward to hearing your testimonies and having productive
conversations which will better aid our work to strengthen this
institution and serve the American people.
I will now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle, for 5
minutes for the purpose of making an opening statement.
Mr. Morelle. Thanks so much, Mr. Chairman, for calling the
meeting.
I thank the members appearing before us for their testimony
today. I have the utmost respect and admiration for our
colleagues who are testifying.
I would ask, Mr. Chairman, that you allow me to treat the
witnesses as hostile, particularly Messrs. Armstrong and
Krishnamoorthi.
[Laughter.]
I am grateful for them all being here. This is of
particular importance because at our core this committee is a
customer service organization. You are our customers. The
feedback we gather today will go a long way toward allowing us
to make the institution of the House stronger, which, in turn,
leads to all of us being able to have better representation for
our constituents.
The committee has a--as you indicated, Mr. Chair, and it
bears repeating--a diverse jurisdiction, ranging from Capitol
security to oversight over the museums and national cultural
institutions, to election administration, the regulation of
campaign finance.
I know in previous years, although I was not a member of
the committee, I understood that members have testified about
each of these issues to help inform the committee about its
work. I look forward to that tradition continuing today.
Just last week we heard testimony from committee chairs and
Ranking Members on the funding for the various committees of
the 118th Congress, which, in turn, helped to inform us on the
resolution that I know we will be considering later today. I
think it is a testament to how much this committee values the
input from our colleagues and the members, their perspective,
particularly on a bipartisan basis.
I join with you and Members of the Committee in welcoming
people, and I am grateful that they are here this morning. Look
forward to their testimony.
I will yield back.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much.
Without objection, all Members' opening statements will be
made part of the hearing record if they are submitted to the
Committee Clerk by 5 p.m. today.
Today we will hear from three panels of members wishing to
speak on policies within our jurisdiction. Each Member will be
recognized for 5 minutes. Once all Members of the panel have
delivered remarks, any Member wishing to be recognized for the
purpose of questioning the panel should signal to the Chair.
We will begin from my left to right for opening statements
and begin with you, Mr. Kelly Armstrong.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. KELLY ARMSTRONG, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH DAKOTA

Mr. Armstrong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
For 1,026 days, the House of Representatives was closed to
the public. Over the course of this period, appointed
leadership within the administrative bodies of this institution
pushed the limits on the curtailment of civil liberties and
historic norms of the U.S. Congress.
The House Sergeant at Arms and the U.S. Capitol Police
instituted operational changes that hindered access to
legislators and increased surveillance on Members, staff, and
the public.
On March 12, 2020, the Sergeant at Arms barred open access
to the House Office Buildings in response to COVID-19. In this
unprecedented move, the public was prevented from freely
entering the House Office Buildings to engage their legislators
and redress their grievances, a constitutionally protected
activity under the First Amendment.
More than 1 year later, the Sergeant at Arms modified this
protocol and instituted an official business visitor program to
allow an extremely limited number of individuals to enter into
the House Office Buildings.
This OBV process granted access to individuals who were
pre-registered with the Sergeant at Arms, presented a form of
identification to be checked by relevant staff, and issued a
badge corresponding with the location of the pre-arranged
meetings. The OBVs were subsequently prevented from moving
through the buildings without a staff escort.
This process, which was ostensibly predicated on guidelines
from the Office of the Attending Physician to address the
COVID-19 pandemic, remained woefully inadequate, poorly
implemented, and chilled the ability of constituents to
petition their Members of Congress.
These policies culminated in an act as a significant
obstacle, if not an outright deterrent, to a considerable
number of Americans wishing to exercise their constitutional
rights.
Following leadership and law enforcement failures that left
the U.S. Capitol vulnerable on January 6, 2021, congressional
law enforcement bodies initiated or proposed a variety of
programming changes that furthered the alarming trend of data
collection and surveillance.
At the direction of then Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi,
retired Lieutenant General Russel Honore led the Task Force 1-6
Capitol Security Review, which made several recommendations to
address security issues facing the Capitol.
Among the most contentious were advising that screening
procedures and background checks be implemented. The review
stated that, as part of an effort to decrease insider threats,
the Capitol should apply background checks to each holder of an
identification card, a process that would deviate from the
longstanding practice of deferring to employing House Members'
hiring decisions.
The Task Force 1-6 report suggestion for enhanced
background checks and intelligence-gathering policies coincided
with a Sergeant at Arms initiative designed to identify threats
from individuals working within the Capitol complex.
Then Sergeant at Arms Walker testified before the House
Appropriations Committee that his office had developed an
insider threat awareness program, in coordination with the
intelligence community, Department of Homeland Security, and
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to identify employees who
lose their compass and individuals whose allegiances have
changed.
This policy, whether it was implemented or not, combined
with Sergeant at Arms Walker's subsequent rationale, should
cause concern for Members from both parties because of numerous
unanswered questions and a lack of robust statutory guardrails.
Regardless of whether the discussed insider threat
awareness program-proposed background checks or pandemic-era
visitor policies are warranted, these initiatives should not be
developed in the isolation of institutions governed by
appointees of the majority, regardless of which party holds
power.
Rather than utilizing a surveillance program designed with
no apparent concern for civil liberties or concern for
constitutionally safeguarded functions, this body must engage
in a transparent legislative process that is unambiguous,
protective of speech, and defends the rights of all who come to
the United States Capitol.
While I know it is not this committee's jurisdiction, I did
this in Rules last night on the First Amendment. I did it last
week in Energy and Commerce on data collection by the
government. I am going to go back to a subcommittee hearing
with DHS in front of us about a domestic surveillance program.
What is in this committee's jurisdiction should be--this
place is the center of democracy in the free world and it has
freedom of movement for any one of our constituents who wants
to come here. We can't lose that. We can't have people
utilizing whatever excuse they can to do domestic intelligence
gathering on our staff, the press, or any of our constituents
who come here to redress their grievances with government.
We have to get better at this. This is the existential
threat that our citizens face from our own government in the
21st century.
I appreciate the opportunity to talk to you all, and I
yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Armstrong follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Armstrong, for
your comments on that really important topic.
Mr. Cohen, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. STEVE COHEN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF TENNESSEE

Mr. Cohen. Thank you, sir. It won't take that long. It is a
very simple request. That is that this committee look into
changing the identifying articles that we have to identify the
states in the tunnel between Rayburn and the Capitol where we
have our subway.
For time immemorial, we had the flags of the states that
were beautiful and represented the states fairly clearly. We
took them down when Mississippi's flag, with the Confederate
flag part of it, became a controversy. Mississippi now has
another flag called the Magnolia Flag. I presume we have still
got the other 49 flags. The expense would be one flag for
Mississippi.
I would suggest we put the flags back up. There is no
reason to have them down when there is not a Confederate flag
among them.
I think the coins, to be honest, are rather blah, kind of
like a 1930's black-and-white movie with the sound not very
good. They are just awful. You don't see it. It doesn't come
out at you and you go, ``Oh, that is Georgia or Virginia,'' or
wherever. It just doesn't show.
You could put up the flags and the coins or you could just
get rid of the coins. The Senate still has the flags. I would
think we are the 50 states, the United States, that you look at
it, and I think it would be nice, more attractive, and local.
It has kind of cured itself of the problems, the Confederate
flag.
With that, I thank the Chairman for having the meeting. I
yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cohen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much.
That was an issue I was unaware of. I appreciate you coming
in and sharing that with us.
Mr. Krishnamoorthi, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RAJA KRISHNAMOORTHI, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Krishnamoorthi. Thank you, Chairman Steil. Thank you,
Ranking Member Morelle and Members of the Committee. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify before you today about the need
to ban Members of Congress from trading individual stocks,
bonds, and other similar financial instruments.
Maintaining the public's faith in government is pivotal to
preserving Congress' institutional legitimacy. Frequent reports
of suspicious stock trades, failures to comply with the STOCK
Act, and revelations that Members of Congress can actively buy
and sell the stock of companies they regulate or to which they
appropriate money have shaken the public's faith in Congress'
ability to make decisions purely in the public's interest.
This leaves our constituents on occasion with the
impression that we are serving our own financial interests,
rather than their interests.
That is why it is crucial that we prohibit Members of
Congress from trading individual stocks, bonds, or other
similar financial instruments. Members should not benefit from
insider financial information obtained as a result of their
positions, nor should they have financial interests cloud their
policymaking.
A congressional stock trading ban is extremely popular with
the American people. Overall, three-quarters of voters support
prohibiting Members of Congress from trading stocks while
serving in office. The support holds true across partisan
lines, with 70 percent of Democrats, 78 percent of Republicans,
and nearly 80 percent of Independents in favor of a stock
trading ban.
Nonpartisan experts also strongly support these commonsense
reforms. This level of cross-partisan public and expert support
is a mandate for comprehensive action in this Congress.
Last Congress, I worked collaboratively with Democrats and
Republicans who share the fundamental goal of fighting
corruption and rebuilding confidence in our institutions. There
is no better evidence of that common purpose than the many
strong bipartisan proposals which exist, such as my own
bicameral, bipartisan Ban Conflicted Trading Act.
While the specifics of different pieces of legislation
differ, their spirit is the same. That is why I am optimistic
that in this 118th Congress we can work together to develop and
pass comprehensive, bipartisan, bicameral legislation to ban
congressional stock trading.
That said, it is important that any final legislation
include a set of policies that would address the multiple
related problems that arise from Members owning and trading
individual stocks. Specifically, as seven other Members and I
stated in a letter to Speaker McCarthy last month, any final
legislation on a stock trading ban should include the following
three components.
First, it should cover all Members of Congress, their
spouses, and dependents under the age of 18.
Second, it should require them to either divest prohibited
investments within 120 days of an effective date, place such
investments in a truly qualified blind trust, or it should
require them to diversify such investments by placing them in
widely held, diversified mutual or exchange-traded funds or
U.S. Treasury bills, notes, or bonds.
Third, it must contain clear enforcement mechanisms and
penalties that are sufficient to ensure Member compliance,
while omitting any gimmicks, carve-outs, or exemptions that
undercut the purpose of the legislation.
The American people widely support these policies across
partisan and ideological lines and have given us a mandate to
pass clear and comprehensive legislation. There is just not any
excuse not to act any further on this particular issue. It
should be a top priority of this Congress to finally pass this
legislation.
In July 2022, then Leader McCarthy promised to take action
on a stock trading ban should he become Speaker. I respectfully
encourage Speaker McCarthy to follow through on this commitment
by bringing strong, comprehensive legislation which meets the
above principles to the floor as expeditiously as possible.
I also respectfully request this Committee, the House Admin
Committee, to hold a bipartisan hearing, at least hold a
hearing on this particular issue, putting in place a
congressional stock trade ban, and work in a bipartisan fashion
to advance comprehensive stock trade ban legislation.
To summarize, I respectfully request that you folks please
hold a hearing on this issue as soon as you can.
Again, I thank you for your time. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Krishnamoorthi follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Krishnamoorthi.
Mr. Bucshon, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. LARRY BUCSHON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF INDIANA

Mr. Bucshon. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I will start by expressing my appreciation to the Chairman,
the Ranking Member, and the Members of the House Admin
Committee for hosting Member Day and for soliciting input from
fellow Representatives on actions the House of Representatives
should take to improve operations within this body.
I want to bring the Committee's attention to what I
consider an urgent need to increase the accountability in the
Office of the Attending Physician.
I think most of you know that I was a doctor before I was
in Congress. Many of you are no doubt familiar with the office,
as it provides medical assistance and advice to Members of
Congress, Justices of the Supreme Court, congressional staff,
and visitors to the United States Capitol. I have spoken to Dr.
Monahan concerning my thoughts on this subject.
As you know, the Attending Physician is a medical officer
assigned by the Department of the Navy. Individuals assigned to
the position generally serve for an extended period. In the 95
years the office has existed, only seven individuals have
served--except, of course, the first one served for 40 years.
The current Attending Physician has held the role since 2009,
and I am not passing judgment on him.
Though much of the OAP's, Office of the Attending
Physician's, work occurs behind the scenes, it has repeatedly
come to the attention of Congress and the public over the last
3 years in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic. Concerns were
raised that the office can be used for political purposes, that
the Attending Physician is or was forced to act without using
science to justify their actions, and there is a lack of
accountability for OAP decisions. Actually, it can put the OAP
in a very difficult spot.
During the 117th Congress, I worked with then Ranking
Member Rodney Davis and staff of the House Administration
Committee to draft H.R. 4862, the Office of Attending Physician
Independence Act. I intend to reintroduce this legislation in
the coming weeks. Though I believe past work on the language
has brought it to a good place, I certainly invite additional
feedback from Members or committee staff on how we can make
this better.
The Office of the Attending Physician Independence Act
would change the process for selecting an Attending Physician
and create additional accountability for the role. It would
resemble the process that we currently have for selecting and
maintaining the Architect of the Capitol.
Specifically, the bill would establish a commission to
recommend individuals for appointment to the position of
Attending Physician. The commission would recommend at least
three individuals who are medical officers of the Navy for the
role. The President would select one of these three individuals
to serve as the Attending Physician and then be Senate
confirmed with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The individual selected as the Attending Physician would
serve for a specific period of time yet to be determined, with
the option of being reappointed, potentially multiple times.
Finally, the Office of the Attending Physician would be
subject to oversight by the Committee on House Administration
and the Senate Committee on Rules and Administration.
My goal is to ensure that the Office of Attending Physician
is one that all Members can respect without concern that its
actions or advice are based on anything other than science and
reason.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to weigh in. I look
forward to working with all of you on this important issue.
Thank you. I yield.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bucshon follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Bucshon.
Ms. Tlaib, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RASHIDA TLAIB, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Chairman Steil and Ranking
Member Morelle, and, of course, our House Members on this
Committee. Thank you so much for allowing us to come before
you. Much of the work that you do here directly impacts how
effective we are in serving the residents that elected us.
Two years ago, Mr. Chair, I discovered that the young
parents on my staff based in the district were not offered the
same access to childcare. If you are based in Washington, DC,
you had access to childcare facilities offered by the House.
However, our whole team based in the district was not afforded
any help or assistance with childcare.
We all know disparity in childcare benefits between D.C.-
based staff members and staff based in the home district. Right
now, many of you, it could be shocking to you all to realize
that.
Based on feedback and challenges faced by staff in our
districts, I urge the committee to ensure childcare benefits
are equitable among all congressional employees.
I, along with many of my colleagues, welcomed the expansion
of authorities for the development of childcare subsidies
program for staff under the Consolidated Appropriations Act of
2023.
This will allow, Mr. Chair, funding to be used for
childcare in the House of Representatives and gives the
Committee on House Admin the authority and responsibility in
implementing this program.
Childcare is one of the biggest challenges for
congressional staff, in maintaining congressional staff, and
hurts our retention of very well-experienced and talented
members of our staff. You all know retention really, truly does
impact consistency of services for our residents.
It is also not lost on any Member of the House that the
cost of childcare varies greatly from state to state. The
challenges with cost and access are inherent to any discussion
on childcare and cannot be discounted as you begin to implement
this program.
As we know, according to various reports, the annual cost
of, like, infant care in Michigan, for instance, is $11,000. In
New York, it is $15,000. Again, it varies state to state.
We should make sure, and we already know we can, and should
make sure that this considerable expense is easier on our staff
and that we are fair when we do implement it.
I strongly believe that a program mirrored off of the
student loan repayment program could prove successful for
offering childcare subsidies to both our district office
employees, as well as our Washington, DC.-based office staff.
Again, it is not a perfect program, though, by the way, but
it can, again, offer some sort of guidance as you think about
how to implement this program. I welcome the opportunity, Mr.
Chair, to assist and partner with the Committee on House Admin
to develop benefit programs for the offices to provide more
benefits, again, for all employees.
I further urge the Committee to please conduct a needs
assessment. Talk with the Members and parents. I know, as
somebody that was a young parent working for the House Majority
Floor Leader in the Michigan Legislature, how challenging it
was to travel between various communities and, of course,
making sure that we cover such a large geographic area, many of
us multiple counties, multiple cities, and so forth.
Again, I greatly appreciate your time and attention to this
critical matter to help our offices ensure that their staff and
their families can thrive while they work for our various
offices and on behalf of our families.
Thank you, and I yield.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Tlaib follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Ms. Tlaib.
Thank you all for your testimony.
We now have time for Members here of the Committee to ask
questions. We will do this somewhat informally. Just signal to
the chair if you have a question of our panelists.
I will recognize Mr. Morelle.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you.
First, I wanted to just ask Mr. Armstrong, I know that when
I was in my previous iteration as a Member of the Rules
Committee, you came off and talked about individual rights,
civil rights, civil liberties. I appreciate your commitment to
it.
I think, though, in understanding what you are saying, I
think even you would agree there needs to be some balance. I
mean, as much as this is open and Americans have the right,
obviously, to come to their seat of government, there needs to
be protections to make sure that we adequately secure the
place.
Could you just further elaborate on how you would seek to
achieve that balance?
Mr. Armstrong. Sure.
Mr. Morelle. Or do you not?
Mr. Armstrong. No, no. Absolutely.
Mr. Morelle. Maybe the premise to my question is wrong.
Mr. Armstrong. This is the fantastic push and pull that
exists here, and this is why this Committee is so important. We
have former law enforcement on this end.
If you give law enforcement a job to secure what they will
call priority targets in a hard structure, they are going to
put up fences. They would put up a moat. They would put
alligators in the moat if they could. They would do background
checks on everybody. They would do all of those things. Their
job is to protect the Capitol and the people who work in the
Capitol.
It is this Committee's job to balance those most
restrictive means with what we want to accomplish for our
constituents. Outside of anything else, that was my biggest
problem with this program. It never came in front of this
Committee. It never came in front of an open and robust debate.
There are a lot of--I mean, there are always going to be
balances to people who are in public life. The reality of what
occurred, I mean, there are a ton of different questions.
If they are doing background checks on my employees, what
if something is flagged? What happens next?
Mr. Morelle. So you are----
Mr. Armstrong. Because my employees don't work for Speaker
Pelosi. They don't work for Speaker McCarthy. They work for the
citizens of North Dakota. Can they ban them from the building?
I am an ex-defense attorney. I very much would hire a
convicted felon who has gone through that process. He is going
to flag on a background check.
Are they doing it to the press? They get badges.
I mean, the question isn't about concerning and protecting
this building. The question is about this Committee being
involved in making those final decisions.
Mr. Morelle. I see. Okay. You are not arguing one way or
the other about which techniques----
Mr. Armstrong. Oh, I have very----
Mr. Morelle. I know you--yes.
Mr. Armstrong. I have very strict--I have very significant
personal opinions----
Mr. Morelle. I am sure you do.
Mr. Armstrong [continuing]. which may be in the minority on
some issues.
Mr. Morelle. Your argument here is that the Committee ought
to have a more robust process as you are determining what that
balance is appropriately.
Mr. Armstrong. I think domestic intelligence gathering in
general is a very dangerous path to go down. When your stated
message from law enforcement--and I don't care if they work for
Ms. Tlaib or Mr. Armstrong or whoever--when your stated
position is we are going to check their social medic accounts
to see if employees have lost their way, that should be very
scary. I mean, there is a reason we very strictly define things
for criminal activity. That is very ambiguous depending on the
lens through which you are reading it.
Mr. Morelle. Got you. No, I appreciate that very much.
Ms. Tlaib, first of all, you point out something I think
all Americans face, not just our district office employees, and
I know you and I would see eye to eye on this, that the
challenge--particularly for women, because, let's face it, even
in our very progressive, advanced society women are still
primary caregivers for children across the country--that having
women back in the workforce, protecting them, allowing them the
opportunity to advance in their careers is still a problem when
it comes to the cost of childcare.
I don't know if you want to comment further, but I think
this is----
Ms. Tlaib. No, I think, for me, my goal is to make sure
that you all apply it equitably. Again, I had no idea that our
district staff had no access to childcare. Even the childcare
program that is here, which is much more affordable and
everything, there is a 2-year waiting list. It is broken. I
know that.
The fact that my district-based staff didn't have any sort
of access to some sort of assistance, especially because we
know that we did the student loan program primarily because
retention and it was very hard. We are not a corporation. I
know we don't have that kind of resource and stuff and we have
to be careful with the public tax dollar.
I think for our families, they do want consistency in
services, they do want to build out. I want our staff to be
able to stay longer with us as they grow their family. I really
think it has become a challenge when our district staff, again,
is not offered the same kind of benefits. I just think it is
unfair.
Mr. Morelle. Got you. It is more about the equitable
treatment of Washington versus our district office personnel. I
appreciate that.
With that, I will yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much. The gentleman yields
back.
Mr. D'Esposito, did you have a question you wanted to ask?
Mr. D'Esposito. Not so much a question, but more of a
comment regarding Mr. Armstrong's testimony.
I think what is important is that since this Committee has
been put together and we have had our opportunity to meet as a
caucus, one of the things that is a priority is to make sure
that any sort of politicization of the Capitol Police is
removed from what is going on, on this Hill. I think that there
is a good step in the right direction.
As someone who has worn the uniform, as someone who has
responded to those calls, something that is very important is
when you respond to a 911 call or you are called to help
someone, no one ever asks whether you are--what political party
you are from. That should not only be in the street, but it
should be here on Capitol Hill.
I know that I am going to do my best to work to make sure
that this Committee is a part of every decision that is made
and to remove any politics from the Capitol Police.
Chairman Steil. Yield back. Thank you very much.
Mr. Griffith, you are now recognized.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much.
Dr. Bucshon, would you have any objection if we tinkered
with your bill a little bit and took the President out of it?
One of the things that I am anxious to do is to start
recognizing Congress has certain prerogatives. It doesn't
matter who the President is, somebody on our side, I am not
sure what that formula ought to be, but somebody on the
legislative branch side ought to be picking all of these people
who work for the legislature in the end.
Mr. Bucshon. Yes, obviously, I want to bring more
accountability to the office. I did work with Rodney last
Congress and this what is we came up with. This is a starting
point, not an end. Absolutely I want us to work together.
It actually benefits the Office of the Attending
Physician--I talked to Dr. Monahan--that it puts them in a
better place, because they don't have the feeling that there is
any political influence on their decision making as a physician
and the advice that they give.
I am absolutely open to whatever this Committee thinks will
work and that we can get across the finish line to accomplish
those goals.
Mr. Griffith. I appreciate that.
Congresswoman Tlaib, if you can help me out, because I am
probably doing something wrong. We have childcare in my office
for the folks but we don't pay for it. They pay for it
themselves. The House has the childcare available but we pay
for it--but we don't pay for it in our office. Is that
something I am----
Ms. Tlaib. Yes, it is just an affordable option. We do--I
believe we do offer.
Mr. Griffith. Okay.
Ms. Tlaib. It is much, much more affordable, according to
my D.C.-based staff.
It is available. They do pay for it themselves, but it is
at a lower rate, sir.
Mr. Griffith. Okay. I just want to look into that, because
I agree we should have options for our staffs back home.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes.
Mr. Griffith. In some areas there might not even be
adequate childcare available, and that is always an issue,
particularly in rural areas like I represent. Alright.
Mr. Armstrong--if I might continue, Mr. Chairman, I am
going on a roll.
First, let me say I like your concept. We will have to take
a look at it. I am actually one who has had on the payroll a
convicted felon in the past. If they have paid their time and
they are doing right in society today, that doesn't cause me a
great concern.
It does cause me some concern that somebody might be
flagging them and what is my role. If they find something and I
haven't been told about it, that is one issue. How deep are
they diving? As you said, isn't that my job as the person who
is actually hiring them?
Would you like to respond to that?
Mr. Armstrong. That was my question with the original thing
anyway, is I didn't know what the remedy was, what the due
process was. I mean, I generally don't like domestic spying in
general. I think we should all be in that case. Take it away
from that side of it.
I am not--a policy change from intelligence leadership or
Capitol Police leadership----
Chairman Steil. Will the gentleman check if his microphone
is on?
Mr. Armstrong. Oh, sorry. Okay.
Chairman Steil. We can hear you clearly, but I don't know
there are others who may not be able to.
Mr. Armstrong. When you are making a drastic change about
anybody who has an employee card that gets into this building
about what you are going to require and do all of those things,
you should probably lay out how that works after you find
something. Like, again, they can't fire my employee but could
they bar them from the building?
Every member of the press, conservative press, liberal
press, print press, TV press, has a badge.
There is just, without real significant guidelines in place
for how that happens, just the opportunity for abuse exists. I
am not sure what the remedy would have been to begin with. I
mean, I get an MRA. I get to spend it how I want. I get to hire
who I want. My LD can't do the job if he is barred from coming
into the building because of a background check. Nothing of
that was ever laid out, and that is a real problem.
Mr. Griffith. Anything else you want to add at this time?
Alright.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much.
I appreciate all of our panelists here.
I just have a quick question and maybe a comment.
In regards to Ms. Tlaib, to what is really an important
issue: How do we make sure people have availability for
childcare?
The D.C. campus is a shared expense where it is subsidized
by the House, and Members who utilize that service or staff who
utilize that service for their children are also paying in, in
a structure that I think you correctly identify as an issue as
we think about staff who are at each of our respective homes,
me, Wisconsin, you, Michigan.
Mr. Bucshon, we are going to definitely be looking into the
issue that you brought up about how some of these appointments
are made. That was really crystallized I think on this
Committee's work on our oversight of the Architect of the
Capitol, which is a very complicated process for that
appointment. It is something I think we need to work with our
colleagues in the Senate to reestablish the authority of
Article I, which I know is dear to Mr. Griffith's heart as
well.
Then, finally, if I could just ask a very brief question of
you, Mr. Armstrong. Could you just comment on how we should be
thinking in this Committee, when we are doing our oversight
over the Capitol Police Board, the Capitol Police structure,
depoliticizing, as Mr. D'Esposito said, how do we--how should
we be thinking about protecting due process rights for
individuals, either staff or individuals who want to visit the
Capitol campus?
Mr. Armstrong. The first answer to that is recognize that
they have a tough job. This is a tough place to secure. This is
a tough place to secure on a random Wednesday. They are going
to bring you proposals--you are lucky you have law enforcement
on your Committee--that from their perspective work.
The single best way to do it, whether it is in an open
forum or a robust forum, is that you have to be involved in the
final decision. It is every elected Member on this Committee's
job to weigh the balance of absolute security for access to
redress your grievances with your government.
If they are making decision--and then my personal request
to each and every one of you, if you are making a force change
posture, if you are making any of those things, background
check, security, any of those things, make sure you clearly
delineate out what the process is if that is picked, because
that is one thing law enforcement--I mean, they are not the
prosecutor. They are not the defense attorney. They are not the
judge. Their job is to protect us, our staff, and the people
who come here. It is your job to figure out how do you deal
with that next.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much. I couldn't agree more
that we should be more involved in our oversight role as it
relates to a whole host of agencies, including Capitol Police.
Appreciate your testimony today.
We will pause while the next panel comes in and assembles.
[Recess.]
Chairman Steil. We thank the Members for joining us here
today for an opportunity to hear from our colleagues on the
work that we do here on this Committee.
We are going give each Member of our witness panel here 5
minutes for opening statements, and then we will open it up to
Members of the Committee to question our witnesses. We are
going to go from my left to the right, starting with Ms.
Pramila Jayapal.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PRAMILA JAYAPAL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Ms. Jayapal. Thank you so much, Chairman Steil, Ranking
Member Morelle, and Members of the Committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today.
I would like to address the ethics problems created when
Members of Congress own or trade individual stocks.
Eleven years ago, President Obama signed the Stop Trading
on Congressional Knowledge, or the STOCK Act, into law. The
STOCK Act clarified that Members of Congress were liable under
existing insider trading law and required disclosures for any
securities transactions.
While this law created more transparency and scrutiny over
Members of Congress who practice dubious trading techniques,
lawmakers and their spouses can still purchase and sell stock
in corporations that they are responsible for regulating.
Last year, an investigation revealed countless violations
of the STOCK Act. Despite these violations, government
officials suffered few fines or penalties for their misconduct.
Even more concerning, the fines and penalties that were
enforced served as little deterrent to the future violations of
the law. For example, the penalty for violation of the
disclosure provisions in the STOCK Act is at minimum $200.
Compared to the significant profits that Members may make from
a conflicted asset, this penalty is a drop in the bucket.
Last Congress, Congressman Matt Rosendale and I introduced
the Bipartisan Ban on Congressional Stock Ownership Act, with
Senator Elizabeth Warren and Senator Steve Daines leading in
the Senate. I look forward to reintroducing this bill with my
colleague Matt Rosendale and also Congressman Ken Buck.
This bipartisan, bicameral bill bans Members of Congress
and their spouses from owning and trading individual stocks,
bonds, commodities, futures, and other securities.
Our bill also has exceptions. It does not ban common,
widely held investments that do not present a conflict of
interest and are suitably diversified. The bill gives Members
180 days to come into compliance after its enactment, with a 5-
year deadline for complex assets such as hedge funds or venture
capital funds.
The Bipartisan Ban on Congressional Stock Ownership Act is
distinct from several existing proposals because it does not
allow for the creation of qualified blind trusts.
While blind trusts are well-intentioned, they are often not
truly blind. In fact, blind trusts may be known or easily
discovered by their grantor. For example, if a Member holds
millions of dollars in stock of one corporation and this stock
is placed into a qualified blind trust, they can be reasonably
confident that they don't own alternative stock for an extended
period.
To ensure that Members do not pose such conflicts of
interest during their public service, full divestment is
necessary. As full divestment is a big sacrifice--we recognize
that--our bill permits the deferral of taxation on capital
gains on investments that Members and spouses divest under its
authority.
There are several proposals in the House and Senate to
address stock ownership in Congress, and what is good about
that is many of these are bipartisan proposals and it is an
issue that Members, both Democrats and Republicans, are
passionate about.
That is why I am proud to have this bipartisan bill and
also to be working with other Members who also have strong
bipartisan bills to put together what could be the strongest
proposal that we can do.
As long as Members of Congress are allowed to hold and
trade stocks, the door to corruption remains open, and we lose
credibility with our constituents who are relying on us to make
sure that we are doing what is in their best interest, not in
ours.
The American people widely support a stock ownership
legislation across partisan lines, and they are calling on
Congress to act. I hope that in this session we will be able to
finally pass a bipartisan proposal to address congressional
stock ownership.
I remain available for any questions.
Thank you. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Jayapal follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Ms. Jayapal.
Ms. Tenney, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CLAUDIA TENNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Ms. Tenney. Good morning, and thank you, Chairman Steil and
Ranking Member Morelle and the House Administration Committee,
for giving me the opportunity to speak with you today.
I serve as co-Chair of the House Election Integrity Caucus.
Our caucus was founded after the 2020 election and currently
has almost 70 members. The Election Integrity Caucus is driving
commonsense policy solutions that restore faith in the
democratic process and improve the administration of elections.
Today, I want to discuss two of these proposed solutions.
First, we recently introduced a resolution calling for an
amendment to the U.S. Constitution to prohibit individuals who
are not citizens of the United States from voting in federal,
state, and local elections.
Multiple jurisdictions around the nation, including New
York City, San Francisco, Vermont, and the District of
Columbia, have attempted to water down our sacred right of
citizenship by extending the right to vote to noncitizens. It
is time to restore confidence in our elections and rebuild
faith in our self-governing constitutional republic by making
it explicit that only American citizens are permitted to vote
in U.S. elections. This includes local, state, and federal
elections.
Second, the Members of the House Election Integrity Caucus
are renewing our push to federally ban what are known as
``Zuckerbucks.''
As you know, Mark Zuckerberg was able to spend nearly $300
million influencing election officials around the country in
2020. In a surprise to no one, 92 percent of Zuckerberg's money
went to Democratic districts where it was used to boost
turnout, register voters, and enhance ballot harvesting
operations.
In the 117th Congress, the Election Integrity Caucus led
the charge to ban Zuckerbucks and successfully pressured the
Facebook CEO to end his blatant electioneering in the 2022
midterms.
We are not stopping our fight, because shady groups are not
stopping theirs. Last month, DeKalb County, Georgia, accepted a
$2 million election grant despite a statewide ban on such
donations.
Without a federal ban, left-wing groups and others will
continue trying to buy off our election officials and unfairly
influence the process. Our End Zuckerbucks Act amends Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code to stop shady nonprofit
organizations from providing direct funding to official
election organizations. This includes any state, local
government entity or any government election organization.
Big tech giants should not be able to bypass state
legislatures and directly shape the policies of the boards of
election or election administrators. Our bill closes this
loophole that left-wing and some other nonprofits are using to
exercise inappropriate and corrupt influence over our
elections.
Thank you once again for the opportunity to discuss these
important issues with you.
I am grateful to your leadership, Chairman Steil and I look
forward to continuing the partnership between the Election
Integrity Caucus and the House Administration Committee.
Thank you so much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Tenney follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Ms. Tenney and thank
you for your work on this important issue.
Ms. Spanberger, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF VIRGINIA

Ms. Spanberger. Thank you, Chair Steil, Ranking Member
Morelle, and Members of the House Administration Committee, for
providing us with the opportunity to testify today and for
providing me with the opportunity to testify on a matter that
is foundational to our responsibility of representing the
American people--and that issue is trust.
Last April, many of you in this room heard directly from
experts on the need for reforms that can rebuild this trust. At
that hearing, Mr. Chairman, I believe you highlighted in your
statement that it is important to, quote, ``provide confidence
to the American people and that we avoid the appearance of an
impropriety''--and I couldn't agree more.
Members of Congress, both those who sit on this Committee
as well as those who are elsewhere in the Halls of Congress,
have access to privileged information not generally available
to the public. That is the nature of our jobs, and that is the
trust that is afforded to us.
Every day we attend closed-door briefings, sometimes
classified briefings, we hold special hearings, and we
participate in private meetings, often with CEOs of publicly
traded companies.
We, the people's elected officials, have access to
information that can move markets. We, those who have been sent
to Washington, DC, to represent our constituents, are expected
to use this information to make smart decisions, not to benefit
our personal financial portfolios.
However, trust has broken down, and major contributors to
this breakdown include the perception of conflicts of interest,
the never-ending parade of suspiciously timed trades, and
Congress' refusal to put guardrails on our own ability to buy
and sell stocks while in office.
Ten years ago, Congress passed the STOCK Act. This law was
meant to prevent lawmakers from using private information for
their personal benefit. It was intended to build back trust.
While the STOCK Act has increased transparency and put in
place an ethical standard by which Members should hold
themselves accountable, its ultimate goal has not yet been met.
The STOCK Act has not erased unethical or questionable
activity, nor has it erased the public's perception of such
activity.
Instead, we find ourselves in familiar territory. Congress
has an abysmal approval rating. Trust is at an all-time low. I
consistently hear from frustrated citizens across Virginia and
the country who are far from surprised when yet another
headline pops up in the news about a politician using their
position in a committee or their access to information for
personal gain.
Unfortunately, these reports of suspicious trades by our
colleagues are nothing new. After the Great Recession, we saw
trades that caused enough consternation among the American
public that it finally forced Congress to pass the STOCK Act.
Yet the STOCK Act has not gone far enough, and we need to
accept that the STOCK Act has not yet achieved its mission. The
law expects that Members of Congress will police themselves,
but that has not yet worked.
During the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we heard a
familiar refrain. Reporting showed Members buying and selling
stocks of companies that made cleaning supplies, medical
equipment, and pharmaceuticals, long before most of the public
was aware of the coronavirus' severity.
These violations of trust were not constrained to either
party. Lawmakers on both sides of the law were repeat
offenders.
To think that at the start of a once-in-a-generation global
pandemic, lawmakers found time in their schedules to buy and
sell stocks? This is the issue at hand.
They made these transactions at the expense of doing their
jobs--at least that is how the public perceives it.
They bought and sold these stocks instead of preparing for
the pandemic--at least that is how the public sees it.
They used their time with their often-precious and jam-
packed schedules to make a dollar, to call in a trade, rather
than update their constituents, check on their local healthcare
providers, or seek more resources for nursing homes--that is
how so many constituents perceive it.
Since 2020, report after report has highlighted Members
buying and selling stocks in companies with whom they met.
Reports have made very clear that lawmakers routinely vote on
legislation that will impact their individual stock portfolios
in a profitable way.
That is why we must hold ourselves accountable and show the
American people that we are working for them. That is why our
bipartisan TRUST in Congress Act can and will make a
difference.
The TRUST in Congress Act would require that Members of
Congress, as well as their spouses and dependent children,
either divest their assets completely, place their assets in a
widely held diversified fund, like mutual funds or ETFs, or
place them into a qualified blind trust. These assets would
stay in a blind trust for the entirety of their tenure on
Capitol Hill,
My colleague Congressman Chip Roy of Texas and I introduced
this bill in 2020 after hearing about these reports that I
mentioned. The TRUST in Congress Act is the most bipartisan
bill tackling this issue. It has more than 50 cosponsors thus
far this Congress, both Democrats and Republicans. There is
strong enthusiasm across the political spectrum and at home.
This January was the third time we introduced this bill,
and I do hope it is the last. Representative Roy and I are
hopeful to have honest, fruitful, and effective conversations
about how we can move this legislation forward and restore the
trust that people should have in Congress.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Spanberger follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Ms. Spanberger.
Mr. Chip Roy, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CHIP ROY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Roy. Thank the Chairman, thank the Ranking Member,
thank the Committee for your time. Glad to be here with my
friend, the gentlelady from Virginia, Abigail. I appreciate it.
We have now done this for three Congresses, and I think it is
important.
I don't come here saying that I think I have got all the
answers or that I know exactly what we should do or shouldn't
do. It is hard.
Here is the simple thing: We don't want to be projecting to
the American people that we are somehow making decisions, when
we are doing our job here, that is connected to our own profit,
our own personal financial stake.
I think the transparency that was embraced a decade ago was
a step in the right direction so that people can understand.
We also, as going through all this, know the burdens that
go with that and so forth. We know that when you have Members
coming into Congress, if they have to divest themselves
entirely of their life's work, dump their equities between
November election and January 3, that may not attract a whole
lot of people to want to come serve in Congress.
We have got to find a way to do this that recognizes the
reality that if you are trading equities in the middle of while
you are doing your job, that raises certain questions, it just
does, if I am sitting on the Judiciary Committee and we have
got an antitrust bill before us to break up Google, or to
debate the size and scope and power of Big Tech, or if we are
having conversations and somebody has a big position in Tesla
and they are advancing EV mandates and that we should be
investing in batteries, or if you are a Texan and have
significant ownership in oil and gas and that might raise
certain flags.
I do and have had. My wife's family, grandfather, worked
for Phillips Petroleum in Phillips, Texas, just up there north
of Amarillo.
The reality is we have got to send a signal to the country
that we are not profiteering--or, the other side of this that
people don't talk about very often, we are not actually making
decisions on policy because of our position and choosing to
take a walk on some policy choice or engage in some policy
choice because of some position that we might have financially.
I think this is something that we should take up, but I
think it should be one of those where we are sitting at a
roundtable and we figure out how to do this the right way.
Because I have talked to people. We embraced the idea of
broadly traded mutual funds is a good place to land, blind
trust.
I have had several Members come up to me and go, ``Well, I
tried to look into a blind trust because I wanted to send a
signal that I was not doing something I shouldn't be doing, and
it is really complex and hard.''
Well, maybe we could simplify that. Maybe we can come up
with a structure that makes it work so that you can take your
life's work, move it over here, and have true blindness, to the
gentlelady's point earlier.
What I think we have got to do, though, is address it. This
can't be one of those things that we just kind of walk along
and avoid it. Let's sit down, figure out how we are going to do
it, and do it in a way that the American people actually
believe that we are doing it for their best interest and not
just to score political points. This isn't just to say, ``Oh,
look at us, we have got a big win that we have cleaned up
Congress finally.''
We need to do something here that just sends a signal that
we get it, we shouldn't be day trading while we are voting on
the crap that our day trading is affected by.
With that, I will yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Roy follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Steil. Thank you very much, Mr. Roy.
We are now going to take names. We are going to go throw
people into a queue, do it a little bit informally, and jump
around.
I am really excited about this topic and appreciate the
work that you are both doing in this space. I think one of the
big concerns is sometimes the appearance of impropriety that
exists amongst the American public.
One of my goals and commitments here is to restore trust,
accountability, transparency to the American people about how
Congress is operating, and that includes that appearance of
impropriety that I think can exist.
In your research on this bill and in this space, do you
think that we need a solution that is broader than just Members
of Congress in the House and the Senate, that we should also be
looking at the executive branch as well? Or do you think that
the focus should remain mostly here between Members and
Senators?
Mr. Roy. Do you want to?
Ms. Spanberger. I will go first on this.
I want to have broad ethics reforms for everyone. That
would be an ultimate goal.
Chip and I have chosen to focus our legislation on
Congress, the House of Representatives and the Senate, because,
quite literally, we need to get our own house in order.
Notably, the executive branch has really strong and in some
case very similar requirements related to divestiture for many
executive branch employees, which I think can serve as an
important model.
Broadly speaking, I support the notion and the principle of
expanding this across branches of government, but I think that
we have a responsibility to get it right with us. We wanted to
be focused in creation of our legislation and so focused it on
Congress, on the legislative branch, but I have no opposition
to expanding it more broadly.
The intent here is to really get it right. The judicial
branch versus the executive branch versus the legislative
branch, understandably, we have different priorities. We are
the one taking votes and moving markets. It does seem that we
should be addressing that issue. We are the ones who get people
to elect us and deserve that trust.
Mr. Roy. I would answer it in general agreement. Probably a
little bit more aggressively in the view of we should apply
this to the coequal branches because every opinion the Court
hears is touching on these issues. Every one of the, frankly,
to my political philosophical chagrin, the executive branch has
a whole heck of a lot to do with the regulatory state and
impacting business maybe in ways that none of us have the power
directly. I mean, there are individuals who work for agencies
who have significantly more power than any one of us do.
I think we should absolutely be looking at that across the
board. I cosponsored legislation with Senator Cornyn--or I did
the companion--applying to the judiciary the same kind of
transparency that we had in Congress. I think we ought to be
figuring out how to treat the branches equally.
Chairman Steil. I tend to agree with you that I think this
is broader. I think one of the areas I think we are also going
to have to explore is what I would call senior staff as it
relates to that. As we know, some of those folks are as equally
involved in the decisionmaking process as some rank-and-file
Members here.
I think we have some great examples of where things have
been done correctly. We see that in some of the executive
branch agencies where there are some IRS tax treatments that
allow Members to be able to escape from some of their previous
investments when they come into Congress so that they will
remove that appearance of impropriety, one of the things we are
going to work on this Congress.
I appreciate your time.
I am going to yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Morelle.
Again, if Members want to get in the queue, just signal to me.
Mr. Morelle.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and thank the
witnesses for being here.
I went through this personally. Near the end of my first
term, I decided--I didn't have a lot of stock. I was a public
official for far too long, I am sure, to gain much. Sold
everything, put it into exchange-traded funds and mutual funds.
I assume neither of you object to those kinds of broader
vehicles to invest in?
Mr. Roy. No. In fact, the legislation contemplates exactly
that.
Mr. Morelle. Yes.
I would say this, and I think, as the Chairman said, I tend
to agree that something shouldn't be done unilaterally within
one branch of the government. I really do think that the genius
of the Founders in creating three separate branches means that
each has significant power and authority to regulate the
activity of American enterprise, commerce, all things that we
do. If we are going to apply this, it seems to me it ought to
apply equally to all the people who help make decisions and
govern the country.
A couple things that I would just note, and perhaps you
meant this when you referenced tax treatment. If Members come
in and are required to sell equities and have to pay
significant capital gains, there ought to be, I think, ways to
adjust. I know I did when I sold everything. The tax bill was
significant. It didn't give me pause, I did it anyway, but, I
mean, that is like an additional, almost like a penalty
required.
I don't know if either of you want to comment on that.
Mr. Roy. If I could address that, Ranking Member.
I agree. That is one of those things that I think we have
got to work through, that you don't want to make it a
disincentive for someone to serve. It is like, ``Okay, well, I
have worked up a life and I am going to have to liquidate all
these, take a tax hit.'' They may not be able to do that. I
think there are ways we can address that and we should. That is
what we need to thoughtfully do.
I would make one other point. You talked about your course
of action. My course of action, probably rather stupidly, has
been I have just sat on what I had, which was fairly modest in
the grand scheme of the world, since I have come in. It is just
sitting there. Whatever handful of equities I owned I haven't
sold. That is not a great financial strategy. They are
literally just sitting there.
Mr. Morelle. I am not a financial adviser, but I agree with
you, that doesn't sound like the best financial----
Mr. Roy. Right. My point is, in part because I didn't want
to, especially once we were going down this path, look like I
was trying to game the system at all.
I will give you one other example. There was a pipeline
company that was running a pipeline through my district in the
Texas Hill Country. I was chastising them for running the
pipeline under two rivers that are west of Austin.
I sought counsel from Ethics and I said, ``Alright, I am
about to rip into these guys and I hold equity in this pipeline
company that I had before I ran for Congress. If I sell that
now, what does that look like?'' They advised, ``You may not
want to sell that now, because you are publicly beating the
snot out of them for running this pipeline under the river.''
That just shows you the world we operate in, and we ought
to figure out a way to avoid that if we can.
Mr. Morelle. Well, I agree. It is interesting you said
that. In my prior life, I was in the New York state Legislature
and owned some health insurance stocks and then was named the
Chairman of the Insurance Committee. I said to my adviser or
broker, whatever, financial adviser, please do not buy any
more, do not sell any more. It felt awkward still to own it.
I do like, I mean, the notion of divesting, but to think
about the tax implications so we are not unduly
[inaudible].
The last comment I would make too is, particularly when it
is service of your senior staff members, if we are going to ask
people to sacrifice to come into government to play a role that
benefits society, I think we have to compensate people well
enough to justify at least giving back some of the sacrifice
they are going to have to make.
That is why I think even around, I think for us, around
compensation of Members, et cetera. I know people don't like to
touch the subject and no one is clamoring in the public for
Members of Congress to be making more money.
I do think you will have a hard time attracting quality
candidates if they know, first of all, compensation hasn't
changed in, I don't know, a decade or more, and you will be
divesting your financial investments for the opportunity to
serve here.
It is a privilege, but I think we all collectively need to
think about how to balance those interests so we can continue
to attract quality people who wish to serve not only in
Congress but on staff and in senior positions throughout the
government.
I won't ask you to comment. That is just my opinion.
I will yield back.
Mr. Roy. I will comment to say--and understand, none of us
ever want to touch that subject. It is curious to me that we go
through this, and we have got the constitutional amendment--
which has an extremely interesting history tied, by the way, to
a Ph.D. student at the University of Texas in Austin, about how
that amendment got adopted in the 1990's. I actually think it
is a good amendment. I actually think it is a good thing that
you can't affect your existing salary in the current Congress.
We vote all the time on salary increases for judges, for
executive branch officials, and yet, we are in this kind of
infinite do loop here as a political matter.
It seems to me that, looking across the entirety of the
three branches, in my belief, if you are truly looking at the
branches equally, then we need to think about that, and we need
to think about how all of those rules and how compensation and
stuff plays into that.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Griffith.
Mr. Griffith. Thank you very much.
I do like the idea of spreading it across other areas. We
have all heard of executives in the--people in the executive
branch who got paid pretty good salaries, had important
positions, were in a place to influence contracts being let,
and sometimes sole source, and making millions in the private
sector as well.
That creates a concern. I have heard it from my
constituents, who don't normally pay attention to those things.
They don't like that.
On the other side of that coin, not being a person who grew
up with means and not having lots of equities, as I often joke
with my constituents, I sold all of mine and got my $6,000 and
reinvested it elsewhere. My tax bill wasn't too high, because
it wasn't much to start with.
I do have a small community swimming pool that we purchased
to save it from being condoed 30 years ago. While I am not on
the board, I am obviously very interested in what goes on
there. I grew up there and about 25 of us bought it.
Do you all have some kind of a de minimus or a small,
closely held exception? Because, obviously, I am going to want
to be involved. I go there almost every day in the summer when
I am not traveling or up here. Obviously, I am involved in
that.
Like I said, there were about 25 of us that got together,
purchased it out of distress, saved it from being condoed, and
it is still there serving the community. Some years we make
money, but most years we don't.
Mr. Roy. I mean, I would defer. I don't think there is a
specific de minimus exception, but there certainly should be or
we certainly should have that conversation. There is always in
this conversation the what ownership do you have in a business
that you created and then who owns that and all that. I just
think we got to look at the whole corpus of that.
Surely, what you are just describing, those are the kinds
of things that the goal is to exempt, because you are not
trading on that.
Ms. Spanberger. Yes. Our bill touches publicly traded
individual stocks. If you cannot take a vote that would move
the value of your community swimming pool--and to my dear
colleague from the Commonwealth, I would argue that you likely
can't--that may be something that would go on your financial
disclosures, because under the STOCK Act----
Mr. Griffith. It is on there, right.
Ms. Spanberger [continuing]. people should know that you
have interest in that, but that is not something that you could
say, ``Oh, the community swimming pool industry is going to go
under, let me get out of that really quickly, because I am
ahead of that loss.''
Because it is not a publicly traded stock, it would not be
part of our legislation, but it would still fall under the
STOCK Act and transparency.
Mr. Griffith. Some of the stock trades from time to time,
but it is not publicly traded. It is usually a discussion
amongst the people who currently own it and the people who are
currently members of the pool.
Mr. Roy. A big, big profit center, is it?
Mr. Griffith. Not large, but--a moment of personal
privilege, Mr. Chairman.
I did that when I didn't have kids, and then years later I
had kids. They have grown up there. They work there. Best
investment I ever made. I didn't make any money, but I got a
lot of memories for myself, but particularly for my children,
who all grew up there, and a big part of their childhood is
that pool.
Mr. Roy. That is fantastic.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back?
Mr. Griffith. I yield back.
Chairman Steil. Mr. Murphy, did you want to be heard?
Mr. Murphy. Yes, sir. Thank you. I will make this brief.
I will tell you, there were at least two individuals in the
last Congress that blatantly sold stocks right before the CHIPS
Act and made millions. Why this wasn't taken up in the last
Congress is beyond me. We know who those individuals are, and
that nonsense doesn't need to happen again.
I will tell you, temptation is real. I read about COVID,
and I still read lots of medical literature about the second
week in February in the journal Nature. It raised just a big
red flag. I made a bunch of phone calls and I thought to
myself, ``Boy, this is going to be something.'' I literally
thought to myself, ``Well, gosh, the market is going to tank, I
need to sell this stuff.''
Then literally, thank God, I took my pulse. I literally did
just the opposite. I called Vanguard--and I had already been
managing mutual funds--and I handed it over to them.
I think that is really, honestly, what we need to do and I
will just give an example for that. Obviously, any fund that
you need.
It it is an absolute blight on Congress that we have
individuals who are taking advantage of our positions of
leadership and knowledge for personal gain.
I applaud you guys. I just ask my chief to get on the bill.
I am going to encourage our leadership as much as possible to
get this bill passed. It should have been passed last session.
Chairman Steil. The gentleman yields back?
Mr. Murphy. Yes, sir.
Chairman Steil. Appreciate all of our panelists, in
particular, I think, on this really important topic. It is
something this Committee is going to review, because I think we
have an opportunity to do the work to get it right, to make it
a nonpartisan event, and to work to continue to restore the
trust and integrity of this institution for the American
people.
I appreciate your testimony today. Thank you very much.
Mr. Roy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you.
Chairman Steil. This Committee, we are going to gavel out,
take a 5-minute break, and gavel back in.
Without objection, each Member, including our witnesses,
have 5 legislative days to insert additional material into the
record or to revise and extend their remarks.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

If there is no further business, I think----
Mr. Morelle. May I just--I just want to thank you, if it is
Okay.
Chairman Steil. Please.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you and the Members and the witnesses.
This was really an important conversation, the first time I
have had the privilege on this Committee of having a Members
conversation.
I thought the comments on both sides were very thoughtful.
These are important issues. Obviously, the work of this
Committee will continue, because Congress is always going to be
meeting new challenges.
I just want to thank you and my colleagues. I thought this
was a very fruitful conversation.
I yield back.
Chairman Steil. I thank the Ranking Member. I think it was
a productive conversation. I think it really sets us up for
some great opportunities to find some nonpartisan solutions
here on Capitol Hill and to advance this institution.
If there is no further business, I thank the Members for
their participation.
Without objection, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:47 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
