- INNOVATION CORPS: A REVIEW OF A NEW NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION PROGRAM TO LEVERAGE RESEARCH INVESTMENTS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INNOVATION CORPS: A REVIEW OF A

NEW NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION PROGRAM

TO LEVERAGE RESEARCH INVESTMENTS
=======================================================================

FIELD HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MONDAY, JULY 16, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-96

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
79-436                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              PAUL D. TONKO, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Tennessee                        VACANCY
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Research and Science Education

HON. MO BROOKS, Alabama, Chair
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
RALPH M. HALL, Texas
C O N T E N T S

Monday, July 16, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Mo Brooks, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Research and Science Education, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Daniel Lipinski, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Research and Science Education,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................     7
Written Statement............................................     9

Witnesses:

Dr. Thomas Peterson, Assistant Director, Directorate for
Engineering, National Science Foundation.......................
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15

Mr. Steve Blank, Lecturer, Stanford University and the University
of California at Berkeley......................................
Oral Statement...............................................    21
Written Statement............................................    23

Mr. Neil Kane, President, Illinois Partners Executive Services,
LLC............................................................
Oral Statement...............................................    46
Written Statement............................................    48

Dr. Gabriel Popescu, Assistant Professor, Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign...............................................
Oral Statement...............................................    53
Written Statement............................................    56

Dr. Andrew Mazar, Director, Program for Developmental
Therapeutics and Entrepreneur-in-Residence Innovation and New
Ventures Office, Northwestern University.......................
Oral Statement...............................................    65
Written Statement............................................    68

INNOVATION CORPS: A REVIEW OF A NEW

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION PROGRAM

TO LEVERAGE RESEARCH INVESTMENTS

----------

Monday, July 16, 2012

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Science Education,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Northwestern University School of Law, Chicago, Illinois

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., at
Lincoln Hall, Levy Mayer 104, 375 East Chicago Avenue, Chicago,
Illinois, Hon. Mo Brooks [Chairman of the Subcommittee]
presiding.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.005

Chairman Brooks. The Subcommittee on Research and Science
Education will come to order.
Good morning; welcome to today's hearing, Innovation Corps
and review of a new National Science Foundation Program to
Leverage Research Investments. The purpose of today's hearing
is to examine the new National Science Foundation Innovation
Corps program and assess its value to the American taxpayer and
potential contribution to the Nation's future prosperity. In
front of you are packets containing the written testimony,
biographies and truth-in-testimony disclosures for today's
witnesses.
Chairman Brooks. Ranking Member Lipinski, first and
foremost, it is a pleasure to join you here in Chicago this
morning for what will be the first, minority field hearing held
by the Science, Space and Technology Committee in this
Congress.
This is your hearing, on your turf. The Chair recognizes
you first, Mr. Lipinski, for an opening statement.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
waking us up with the gavel this morning. I thank you for
coming here and, well, first of all, scheduling this hearing in
Chicago, traveling here to hold it. I didn't even realize it
was the first one that--field hearing for the, uh,--for the
Democrats. I especially appreciate that. I know your time here
in Chicago is short, but I hope you enjoy your visit as much as
I enjoyed my time down in Huntsville when I traveled there for
our STEM education hearing a couple months ago. I'd also like
to thank Northwestern for hosting us. I'm a proud graduate of
Northwestern, and received my Bachelor's Degree of Mechanical
Engineering at Northwestern. Although, it was up in Evanston. I
actually did get into Northwestern Law School and decided not
to become an attorney, for whatever that means. I know
Chairman--Chairman won't think anything bad about me. And,
finally, I want to thank our witnesses----
Chairman Brooks. You know, we are in a law school.
Mr. Lipinski. Yeah. I'd like to thank our witnesses for
taking the time to share your insights and experience with
National Science Foundation Innovation Corps Program.
And I would like to thank everyone else who has joined us
for the hearing.
Very briefly, I-Corps is an NSF education program which
helps federally funded research innovations transition from the
university lab into a profitable company. It is based on the
Lean LaunchPad course developed by successful Silicon Valley
serial entrepreneur Steve Blank, and essentially applies the
scientific method, which is well-known by researchers, to
developing a startup.
I strongly believe that the I-Corps program embodies NSF's
original mission of both promoting the progress of science and
advancing the national prosperity. Let's not forget that second
part, especially when we are looking to maximize the efficiency
of our federal government. When Vannevar Bush talked about the
need for a National Science Foundation in 1945, he was
concerned about getting the U.S. back to full employment. Back
then he wrote, ``We do not know yet how we shall reach that
goal, but it is certain that it can be achieved only by
releasing the full creative and productive energies of the
American people.''
More recently, the America COMPETES Act Reauthorization
that passed last Congress stipulates that the Broader Impacts
criterion used in evaluating NSF grant proposals must include
the, ``Increased economic competitiveness of the United
States,''; and, ``Increased partnerships between academia and
industry.'' Now, as Chairman of this Subcommittee at that time,
I included those two additional components in the bill in order
to reinforce the original mission of the NSF as we see
innovation and the role of our research institutions becoming
increasingly critical to job creation. We will hear today from
our witnesses how educational programs like I-Corps fit
perfectly into the mission of the NSF.
Although it's only about one-quarter of one percent of
NSF's budget, I think this program will yield disproportionate
benefits. By giving scientists who have already been awarded
NSF research grants the education needed to push their work
outside of the ivory tower into the marketplace, we are helping
turn NSF's research investments into jobs. I'm encouraged by
the many stories I've heard from awardees in the first and
second cohorts, including two of the witnesses here today. In
May I had the opportunity to sit in on the final presentations
of the second I-Corps cohort at Stanford. I was very impressed,
not only by the innovations presented, but also by the stories
about what the participants learned through the program.
For anyone who hasn't looked at this program in depth, it
is important to note that we are talking about a stage of
commercialization before private sector financing gets
involved. The goal of I-Corps is to educate scientists, to help
them establish the viability of an idea before forming a
startup. What I am especially excited about is not just the
promise of the new technologies being explored by the teams
fortunate enough to participate in I-Corps, it is also the
exponential leveraging effect that is already happening. I-
Corps participants are taking what they have learned and are
working with their new private sector connections and their
university administrators to create opportunities on their own
campuses to educate students and faculty on the basics of
entrepreneurship. Many are from institutions in communities and
regions without a significant record of entrepreneurship. So,
they are becoming, in a sense, missionaries carrying the best
practices of Silicon Valley back to their own communities and
figuring out how to localize these best practices.
Despite the tremendous promise of the I-Corps program, some
of my colleagues may be skeptical that this is an appropriate
use of funds for the National Science Foundation. I explained
briefly how I see I-Corps fitting into NSF's core mission, but
I welcome all of our witnesses today to help us understand how
NSF is filling an unmet need, and why you believe it's
appropriate for the NSF. I also welcome your thoughts on how
the I-Corps program can be improved. And, finally, I challenge
you to share your thoughts on what more the private sector and
universities themselves can be doing in this space. I invited
Dr. Mazar to testify about his role as an Entrepreneur-in-
Residence at Northwestern University. Northwestern is just one
of many universities around the country who have taken their
own initiative and either their own funds or private sector
donations to bolster entrepreneurial activity on their
campuses.
The way I see it, this is not a situation where either
universities do this on their own, or the private sector does
it, or the federal government steps in. This is a partnership
among all three, and all three have a role to play, resources
to contribute, and benefits to reap. We have good
representation here from all of the partners, and I look
forward to an interesting and thoughtful discussion about the
new NSF I-Corps program and where we take it from here. Once
again, I thank all of the witnesses for being here this morning
and I look forward to your testimony.

Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski
Thank you Chairman Brooks for scheduling this hearing in Chicago
and traveling here to hold it. I know your time here is short, but I
hope you enjoy your visit as much as I enjoyed my time in Huntsville
when I traveled there for our STEM Education hearing. I would also like
to thank Northwestern University for hosting us here today; I am a
proud graduate of Northwestern having received my bachelors degree in
mechanical engineering. And finally I want to thank our witnesses for
taking the time to share with us your insights and experiences with the
National Science Foundation's Innovation Corps Program and everyone
else who has joined us for this hearing.
Very briefly, I-Corps is an NSF education program which helps
federally funded research innovations transition from the university
lab into a profitable company. It is based on the Lean LaunchPad course
developed by successful Silicon Valley serial entrepreneur Steve Blank
and essentially applies the scientific method--which is well-known by
researchers--to developing a start-up.
I strongly believe that the I-Corps program embodies NSF's original
mission of both promoting the progress of science and advancing the
national prosperity. Let's not forget that second part, especially when
we are looking to maximize the efficiency of our federal investments.
When Vannevar Bush talked about the need for a National Science
Foundation in 1945, he was concerned about getting the U.S. back to
full employment. Back then he wrote, ``[w]e do not know yet how we
shall reach that goal, but it is certain that it can be achieved only
by releasing the full creative and productive energies of the American
people.'' More recently, the America COMPETES Act Reauthorization that
passed last Congress stipulates that the Broader Impacts criterion used
in evaluating NSF grant proposals must include the ``Increased economic
competitiveness of the United States'' and ``Increased partnerships
between academia and industry.'' As chairman of this subcommittee at
that time, I included those two additional components in the bill in
order to reinforce the original mission of the NSF as we see innovation
and the role of our research universities becoming increasingly
critical to job creation. We will hear today from our witnesses how
educational programs like I-Corps fit perfectly into the mission of the
NSF.
Although it's only about one quarter of 1 percent of NSF's budget,
I think this program will yield disproportionate benefits. By giving
scientists who have already been awarded NSF research grants the
education needed to push their work outside of the ivory tower into the
marketplace, we are helping turn NSF's research investments into jobs.
I'm encouraged by the many stories I've heard from awardees in the
first and second cohorts, including two of the witnesses here today. In
May I had the opportunity to sit in on the final presentations of the
second I-Corps cohort at Stanford, and I was very impressed not only by
the innovations presented, but also by the stories about what the
participants learned through the program.
For anyone who hasn't looked at this program in depth, it is
important to note that we are talking about a stage of
commercialization before private sector financing gets involved. The
goal of I-Corps is to educate scientists to help them establish the
viability of an idea before forming a start-up. What I am especially
excited about is not just the promise of the technologies being
explored by the teams fortunate enough to participate in I-Corps. It's
the exponential leveraging effect that is already happening. I-Corps
participants are taking what they have learned and are working with
their new private sector connections and their university
administrators to create opportunities on their own campuses to educate
students and faculty on the basics of entrepreneurship. Many are from
institutions in communities and regions without a significant record of
entrepreneurship. So they are becoming, in a sense, missionaries
carrying the best practices of Silicon Valley back to their own
communities and figuring out how to localize these best practices.
Despite the tremendous promise of the I-Corps program, some of my
colleagues may be skeptical that this is an appropriate use of funds
for the National Science Foundation. I explained briefly how I see I-
Corps fitting into NSF's core mission, but I welcome all of the
witnesses today to help us understand how NSF is filling an unmet need,
and why you believe it is appropriate for NSF. I also welcome your
thoughts on how the I-Corps program can be improved. And finally, I
challenge you to share your thoughts on what more the private sector
and universities themselves can be doing in this space. I invited Dr.
Mazar to testify about his role as an Entrepreneur-in-Residence at
Northwestern University. Northwestern is just one of many universities
around the country who have taken their own initiative and either their
own funds or private sector donations to bolster entrepreneurial
activity on their campuses.
The way I see it, this is not a situation where either universities
do this on their own, or the private sector does it, or the federal
government steps in. This is a partnership among all three, and all
three have a role to play, resources to contribute, and benefits to
reap. We have good representation here from all of the partners, and I
look forward to an interesting and thoughtful discussion about the new
NSF I-Corps program and where we take it from here. Once again I thank
all of the witnesses for being here this morning and I look forward to
your testimony.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski. I now recognize
myself for five minutes for an opening statement.
The National Science Foundation funds basic research, which
is oftentimes too costly and too risky for industry alone to
undertake, but has many times proven to be groundbreaking and
economic successes in the end. For example, current
nanotechnology initiatives marked by a transformative
technology which allows scientists to manipulate matter at the
atomic and molecular levels, was preceded by scientists funded
by NSF who were learning how to detect activity at the scale of
individual atoms. Now, companies are making plans to utilize
this pioneering technology to produce nanoscale products which
will enter the marketplace.
I could list other examples, but I think my point is clear;
that NSF has contributed to America's economy and
competitiveness in invaluable ways. Unfortunately, today the
United States faces unsustainable budget deficits which limit
the spending in Congress, and what it is able to appropriate.
While I am thankful to chair a Subcommittee which oversees such
important research and development activities, it is the role
and responsibility of Congress to work to prevent overspending,
ensure that federally funded programs do not impede the work of
the private sector, and provide the best return on the taxpayer
dollar. The question we must address is which activities fall
under this purview.
NSF created a new Innovation Corps program, I-Corps, to
assess the readiness of emerging technological concepts for
transitioning into new products through a public-private
partnership. According to NSF, the program will, ``bring
together the technological, entrepreneurial, and business know-
how to bring discoveries ripe for innovation out of the
university lab,''; and, ''increase the number of entrepreneurs
emerging from university laboratories.''
While this certainly sounds like a worthwhile endeavor, I
have a number of questions, including the degree to which the
federal government should determine which companies succeed and
which fail, which are entitled to I-Corps assistance and which
are not, but, if so, whether it is appropriate for this kind of
decision-making to be made by an agency whose primary mission
is basic research, at a time when businesses are struggling to
compete with big government, and funding is already scarce, and
at a time when there are already a number of questions arising
over the federal government picking commercial winners and
losers.
And rather badly, I might add, in the case of Solyndra,
roughly a 535-million-dollar cost to the United States
taxpayer; Abound Solar, potentially a 400-million-dollar loss
to U.S. taxpayers, who went bankrupt after receiving 70 million
dollars from U.S. taxpayers; and Beacon Power, nearly a 70-
million-dollar cost to U.S. taxpayers, 43 million in Department
of Energy loan guarantees, and more than 25 million in other
Department of Energy grants. I need to better understand how
and why NSF is best equipped to make these similar types of
decisions for university research.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today, to
working with my colleagues, to further explore I-Corps and
determine its viability as a program funded by taxpayer
dollars.

Prepared Statement of Chairman Mo Brooks
The National Science Foundation funds basic research which is
oftentimes too costly and too risky for industry alone to undertake,
but has many times proven to be groundbreaking and economic successes
in the end. For example, current nanotechnology initiatives, marked by
a transformative technology which allows scientists to manipulate
matter at the atomic and molecular levels, was preceded by scientists
funded by NSF who were learning how to detect activity at the scale of
individual atoms. Now, companies are making plans to utilize this
pioneering technology to produce nanoscale products which will enter
the marketplace.
I could list more examples, but I think my point is clear--that NSF
has contributed to America's economy and competitiveness in invaluable
ways. Unfortunately, today the United States faces unsustainable budget
deficits which limit the spending Congress is able to appropriate.
While I am proud to Chair a Subcommittee which oversees such important
research and development activities, it is the role and responsibility
of Congress to work to prevent overspending, ensure that federally
funded programs do not impede the work of the private sector and
provide the best return on the taxpayer dollar. The question that we
must address is which activities fall under this purview.
NSF created a new Innovation Corps program (I-Corps) to assess the
readiness of emerging technology concepts for transitioning into new
products through a public-private partnership. According to NSF, the
program will ``bring together the technological, entrepreneurial, and
business know-how to bring discoveries ripe for innovation out of the
university lab'' and ``increase the number of entrepreneurs emerging
from university laboratories.'' While this certainly sounds like a
worthwhile endeavor, I have a number of questions, including the degree
to which the federal government should determine which companies
succeed and which fail, but, if so, whether it is appropriate for this
kind of decision-making to be made by an agency whose primary mission
is basic research. At a time when businesses are struggling to compete
with big government and funding is already scarce, and at a time when
there are already a number of questions arising over the federal
government picking commercial winners and losers--and rather badly I
might add in the case of Solyndra, Abound Solar, and Beacon Power--I
need to better understand how and why NSF is best equipped to make
these similar types of decisions for university research.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today and to working
with my colleagues to further explore I-Corps and determine its
viability as a program funded by valuable taxpayer dollars.

If there are other Members who wish to submit additional
opening statements, your statements will be added to the record
at this point. I know we have an audience here, Congressman
Lipinski and I are the only two Members who are here today. We
have a good number of others who are Members of the
Subcommittee, and at this point, that is when they would be
permitted to offer statements.
At this point, I yield to Mr. Lipinski to introduce our
witnesses.
Mr. Lipinski. I thank the Chairman, especially thank you
for the opportunity to do this, to let me go first in opening
statement and to introduce our witnesses. I'm not used to that,
after, you know, being the minority. So, thank you, I
appreciate that.
Dr. Tom Peterson is Assistant Director of the National
Science Foundation Directorate for Engineering. Prior to
joining the NSF, he served on a faculty at the University of
Arizona, beginning in 1977, serving as head of the Chemical and
Environmental Engineering Department from 1990 to 1998, and as
dean from 1998 until 2009. Good to have you, Dr. Peterson.
Next we have Steve Blank. Steve Blank is currently a
Consulting Associate Professor at Stanford University, and
adjunct at U.C. Berkeley Haas Business School. In 21 years as a
Silicon Valley entrepreneur he created eight companies in
various computer-related fields. So, a serial entrepreneur for
those familiar with the term. Although he formally retired in
1999, he became very busy as an educator, teaching courses at
Stanford, U.C. Berkeley and Columbia. During this time he
developed the Lean LaunchPad course NSF uses for the Innovation
Corps Program. And I want to add that Steve waited, he had his
plane delayed for three, four hours last night; they cancelled
it; he drove all the way from Richmond, Virginia, to Dulles
last night to take a six a.m. flight, which was then cancelled.
From there he went to Washington Reagan National to get out
here. So, I especially appreciate all the effort that he's gone
through to be here today.
Next we have Neil Kane. Neil Kane is the President and
founder of Illinois Partners Executive Services. Most recently
he was the CEO with Advanced Diamond Technologies, a company he
co-founded in 2003, by licensed technology at Argonne National
Lab. Mr. Kane is a former co-Executive Director of the Illinois
Technology Enterprise Center at Argonne. He was Entrepreneur-
in-Residence at the Research Park at the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign. Good to have you.
Next we have Gabriel Popescu. Dr. Gabriel Popescu is an
Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, and holds a full-faculty appointment with the
Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology. Before
joining the UIUC faculty in 2007, Dr. Popescu received a Ph.D.
in optics in 2002, from the University of Central Florida. Dr.
Popescu received an I-Corps grant earlier this year for
quantitative phase imaging solutions, for materials in life
sciences. Good to have you, Dr. Popescu. And I have to say that
as it came down to going--between Northwestern and Illinois to
go to undergraduate engineering, and I chose Northwestern, but
mainly, probably that it's closer to home. No, it's a great
university, University of Illinois.
And, finally, we have Dr. Andrew Mazar, who serves as the
Entrepreneur-in-Residence and the Managing Director for the
Center for Developmental Therapeutics in the Chemistry of Life
Processes Institute at Northwestern University. He has spent 23
years working on drug discovery, development and
commercialization at the interface of academia and industry.
Dr. Mazar is a member of several cancer journal editorial
boards and has published over 90 papers in peer-reviewed
journals. Good to have you, Dr. Mazar.
Now, this next line, I think the Chairman--did you tell
them how much time they have.
Chairman Brooks. Ah, there it is.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes, after which the Members of the Subcommittee
will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Peterson, for five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. THOMAS PETERSON,

ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR ENGINEERING,

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION

Dr. Peterson. Chairman Brooks. Ranking Member Lipinski.
Thank you for inviting me to participate in this field hearing
focusing on NSF's Innovation Corps, or I-Corps. I'm very
pleased to have the opportunity to discuss this very exciting
program with you.
NSF is recognized and respected worldwide for identifying
and supporting fundamental research and education in science
and engineering, through a peer-review evaluation of the merits
of the ideas that are proposed. That process, both by
definition and by construction, selects the best and most
creative ideas, those that offer the greatest promise for
success. We invest more than seven billion dollars annually in
these efforts. Our grantees are the winners in this process,
but so, too, are the taxpayers who have invested in this
research through the NSF.
I-Corps has as its genesis many of the foundation's long-
standing innovation ecosystem programs. Those existing NSF
innovation research alliances include consortia, such as the
Engineering Research Centers, the Industry University
Cooperative Research Centers, and the Science and Technology
Centers, as well as the Academic Liaison with Industry program,
and of course the Small Business Innovation Research program.
These programs complement our other significant investments in
fundamental science and engineering research by offering
multiple pathways to moving discovery to innovative
technologies.
Many of these programs have been in the NSF portfolio for
decades. For example, the SBIR program is a government-wide
program that was initiated at NSF in the early '80s. The
Centers programs that I mentioned all began at NSF in the late
1980s.
To build a national culture of innovation we need not only
sustained research investment, but also skillful and deliberate
catalysts to hasten the application of scientific discoveries.
A robust innovation ecosystem also helps conceive novel
research questions, and it shifts the science and engineering
knowledge paradigms altogether. That, in effect, is what we
seek to accomplish through the Innovation Corps program.
The goals of I-Corps are as follows: First, to build on
NSF's investment in fundamental research; second, to offer
academic researchers and students an opportunity to learn
firsthand about technological innovation and entrepreneurship,
and thereby fulfill the promise of their discoveries; and
third, to prepare students for real-world experience through
curricular enhancements, and provide them with opportunities to
learn about and participate in the process of transforming
scientific and engineering discoveries to meet societal needs.
We accomplish these goals in I-Corps by providing three
elements. Namely, financial support to the teams to assist the
development of a prototype or a proof of concept; a specific
structure for the I-Corps team, comprised of a principal
investigator, an entrepreneurial lead, and an innovation/
entrepreneurial mentor; and finally, a strong education
component focusing on a hypothesis-driven approach to
developing a methodology for evaluating both the technical
merits, as well as the marketability of the concept that's
being proposed.
Every directorate in NSF participates in I-Corps. The
structure of I-Corps mirrors the NSF Director's vision of
OneNSF, working together seamlessly in well-integrated and
efficient ways across organizational and disciplinary
boundaries.
Teams that advanced their efforts towards commercializing
technologies were facilitated by inclusion of public and
private sector experts to provide guidance by participation in
tailored curriculum and by funds to evaluate the commercial
readiness of technology ideas. Some exciting new technologies
that have emerged from the first I-Corps cohorts include
photocatalysis to help clean up contaminated water, a new
technology for semiconductor-based hydrogen and hydrocarbon
sensors, and production of graphene film.
I-Corps presents a new model for public-private
partnerships that leverages our significant investment in basic
research with relatively smaller I-Corps funding, thus offering
a bigger bang for the buck.
In the first two cohorts over 4,000 discussions took place
between I-Corps teams and potential partners, customers and
stakeholders. As of today there a total of 100 teams, and there
are 100 mentors that joined these teams, plus over 70
additional mentors who have been identified as already willing
to join other teams.
In summary, the I-Corps program has been a significant,
positive addition to the NSF investment portfolio, even though
it constitutes less than one-third of one percent of the NSF
budget. For those teams who have participated, it has been
truly transformational to thinking in a more entrepreneurial
way. An enormous and significantly underutilized storehouse of
creative ideas with potential economic benefit exists in our
nation's colleges and universities, and I-Corps is simply a way
to help unlock and unleash some of those ideas generated by
current and previous NSF investments.
I thank the Committee for their interest in this exciting
program, and for giving me the opportunity and the privilege to
come here today to tell you about it. I'd be happy to answer
any questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Peterson follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.011

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Peterson.
I now recognize our second witness, Mr. Blank, for five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. STEVE BLANK, LECTURER,

STANFORD UNIVERSITY AND

THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA AT BERKELEY

Mr. Blank. Thank you, Chairman Brooks and Ranking Member
Lipinski; and thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
National Science Foundation Innovation Corps. And I hope to
address Chairman Brooks' questions directly, because I think
they're appropriate questions for the country, given the set
economic climate.
I just have to note that, in volunteering my services to
the National Science Foundation, my career has gone full
circle. I started my government service volunteering for my
country during Vietnam for four years in the air force, with a
year and a half in Southeast Asia. So, I'm glad to be doing
this type of government service again.
I think Dr. Peterson described the role of the Innovation
Corps and the SBIR and STTR program. But it's just important to
note that what we have here is an education program that
bridges the basic research that this Committee authorizes the
NSF to do, and commercialization that we fund through the SBIR
and STTR program. For 30 years we've been writing checks, but
not having any educational process to assure that the
recipients of those checks actually understood how to take best
advantage of those scholars.
The Innovation Corps is the first successful STEM education
program to bridge this gap between NSF-funded researchers who
want to commercialize their technology and the needs of private
capital. The data from the first 50 teams show the
effectiveness of this program.
By the way, there's been two other key consequences,
completely unexpected, that we had no idea would happen. The
first has been the leveraging effect, as these Principal
Investigators went back to their own universities and took this
methodology and actually started teaching it to their own
students in their own universities. And the second, I think
important for this Committee and this Congress, is the effect
and the applicability of this program to small business
innovation and job creation on ``Main Street'', as well as in
technology startups. That is, the same process can be used for
the other 99 percent of businesses in the United States, not
just for technology startups.
So, what's new about the Innovation Corps? We now know that
startups are not smaller versions of large companies.
In fact, we now know that researchers who used to believe
that the entire company was about their idea, is now learning
that their idea and their technology is just one small piece of
all the things they need to know about how to build a
successful venture. They need to know--to understand customers,
they need to understand pricings, they need to understand
distribution channels. None of those things are visible inside
the laboratory.
And so, what the class is about, this education program, is
getting these scientists and engineers out of their labs, for
some of them the first time in 20 years since they've seen
daylight. And, actually, having them talk to people they've
never talked to in their entire lives. An average team talks to
a hundred customers in eight weeks. A hundred. Let me tell you,
if Solyndra was doing that, we wouldn't have been writing these
checks.
Now, in fact, if we were looking for a program to avoid
waste in the United States, this is the program to do that. And
it's a uniquely American program. Because we've talked about
hypothesis testing, we've talked about how scientists
understand how to test hypothesis, but we sometimes forget that
in America we don't punish failure, we actually understand that
failure is part of the scientific method.
But we actually now teach the same in getting out of the
building and talking to customers, and we now understand that
when this wasn't the right customer, it's okay to now
inexpensively look over here. If this wasn't the right pricing,
look over here. If these aren't the right features, look over
here. And it's only in the United States that we actually are
able to take these risks and integrate quickly.
The last thing I want to mention is why is this program
necessary. And I think a lot of this discussion is about a
fallacy of the role of private capital. I think you know I
taught this class from day one with venture capitalists sitting
in the class as instruction. We brought private capital in on
day one. And their take was the same as mine, none of these
guys were fundable at all. They weren't. It was great science,
great technology, great whatever, but they didn't have a clue
about the business. It's not the role of private capital to
actually go identify where the technology fits. It's actually
the role of the technologist to get out of the building, have
some discussions, and take the business to the next step so
they can present it to private capital. And that's what this
class has been doing.
I-Corps is an educational program that's a bridge to
private capital, not as a replacement. And I think, I'm proud
to say, that a lot of these teams will get funded by private
capital, only because they've been through this class.
The other comment that I just want to make is picking
winners and losers. As I said, this doesn't replace private
capital with government's funds. Its goal is to get research in
the country that we've already paid for, to a point where a
team can attract private capital in the shortest period of
time.
Now, I'm happy to take questions. And I just should, would
like to close, that I think the results were pretty
spectacular, and I'm just proud to have been part of it.
What we've seen is a government program designed, built,
and tested and scaled within a year. Amazing. This is like the
early days of NASA. With just one-quarter of one percent we've
leveraged the country's entrepreneur commitment to research,
its partnership of private capital, and its tolerance for
failure in a uniquely American way. It's an extraordinarily
efficient use of taxpayer money, and it will pay us back with
jobs and a competitive edge on a global scale. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Blank follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.034

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Blank. And thank you for
your extraordinary efforts to get here.
The Chair next recognizes our third witness, Mr. Kane, for
five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. NEIL KANE, PRESIDENT,

ILLINOIS PARTNERS EXECUTIVE SERVICES, LLC

Mr. Kane. Chairman Brooks, thank you; I'd also like to
thank Ranking Member Lipinski and the other Members of the
Committee for the opportunity to speak here today. I'm the
token mentor on the panel, and the team that I mentored was in
the first I-Corps cohort, and we attended Steve's class at
Stanford in the fall of 2011.
I'm a serial entrepreneur, and I've spent the last 12 years
helping professors and researchers commercialize their
research. I've been involved in eight university spinoffs, and
in five of them I was the CEO. Along the way I've encountered
every small business and tech transfer issue there is. I've
also developed a deep appreciation for the role that NSF can
play in helping to get these companies down the runway and
airborne.
Shortly after the I-Corps program was announced last
summer, Professor Yi Lu from the University of Illinois asked
me to be a mentor to his team. He had just published a paper on
an innovative method for turning a personal glucose meter, the
kind that diabetics use, like this, into a general purpose
point of care medical diagnostic device that could be used to
detect viruses, toxins and infectious diseases. And for any of
you who'd like to have your blood glucose checked today, I'd be
happy to oblige. While the science is exceptionally innovative
and creative, the I-Corps program would allow us to deal with
the challenge of figuring out how to bring it to market.
The goal of I-Corps is not to make entrepreneurs out of
professors. The curriculum allows academics to develop an
awareness and appreciation for what elements need to be present
for innovation to have a chance to succeed in the market. It is
more often poor market fit, in my opinion, rather than poor
technology, which causes startups to fail. People who have
never commercialized technology always underestimate the time
and effort required. A startup is a perpetual open-book test
where you're not graded on a curve. Its challenge is academics,
because for the first time in many of their careers being the
smartest person in the room does not guarantee success.
When technology has an obvious need, like a cure for
cancer, arguably I-Corps is not needed. This falls into the
category of, ``If I build it, they will come.'' Instead, the
purpose of I-Corps is to answer the question, ``If I build it,
will they come?'' NSF's other traditional programs address the
question, ``Can I do it.''
I-Corps is a teaching program with a considerable amount of
skills transfer that will increase the effectiveness of
research programs when measured on commercial impact.
I am currently also working on another startup, this one at
Northwestern University, and even though that project did not
go through I-Corps, like any good disciple, I have brought
teachings to that project. There's a lot of leverage now that
you have a wave of mentors who have been trained in this
methodology. And I have passed the torch to several Kellogg MBA
students, one of whom has his own startup.
Based on our experience with I-Corps, we formed a company
in Champaign called GlucoSentient, and I became the founding
CEO. We got a Phase I SBIR from NSF, which is critical toward
our ability to translate the technology from the university
setting into the commercial world. A few months ago our company
was not venture ready. We hope it will be after the SBIR is
done. Several of the graduate students who worked on the
technology in their research programs at the university will
have full-time jobs in the company to continue its development.
Entrepreneurship is the link between scientific innovation
and economic development. I'm going to repeat that.
Entrepreneurship is the link between scientific innovation and
economic development. Instead of discouraging I-Corps, Congress
should encourage it. It's a low-cost program that adds fuel to
NSF's research mission. I-Corps will pay a handsome return some
day for taxpayers with job creation and wealth building, not to
mention enhancing the global competitiveness in the United
States.
When I was an undergraduate engineering student at the
University of Illinois in Champaign, there was no
entrepreneurship curriculum. Basic business courses, like
marketing and finance were taught in the business school so far
across campus from the engineering quad that we couldn't have
taken courses there even if we had wanted to. Today it's cool
for engineers, scientists and programmers to become
entrepreneurs and learn business skills.
The dislocations in the economy over the past few years
have taught us that even STEM students need business skills to
succeed professionally. I-Corps helps prepare a new generation
of researchers for the realities of today's economy, regardless
of whether they become entrepreneurs or not. The professors who
go through the program develop a deeper appreciation for the
relevance of their research, which improves their ongoing
effectiveness. And NSF is investing in a network of mentors who
can help to materially move the needle in improving the
outcomes of the commercial entities that become the stewards of
the NSF-funded research.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kane follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.039

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Kane.
The Chair now recognizes our fourth witness, and I hope I
pronounce this correctly, if I don't please correct me.
Mr. Popescu, for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. GABRIEL POPESCU,

ASSISTANT PROFESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL

AND COMPUTER ENGINEERING,

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN

Dr. Popescu. I'd like to thank Chairman Brooks and Ranking
Member Lipinski for inviting me to share my views on the NSF I-
Corps program.
I am an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical
Engineering at University of Illinois. Since an undergrad, I
have been studying optics and lasers and their applications in
biomedicine. I'm a believer in the fact that technology can not
only generate high-quality health care, but can also help
reduce its cost and, you know, help access to health care.
Engineering the tools for scientific discovery has been
named by National Journal of Engineering as one of the 14 grand
engineering challenges for the 21st Century. My laboratory
develops the next generation of light microscope, that will
help understand how cells and tissue function in both health
and disease. Therefore, my research has three components:
Technology development, basic science studies, and clinical
application. Our technology has the potential to generate early
and accurate diagnosis, new cures for devastating diseases,
inexpensive blood testing for global care, and can generate
billions of dollars in wealth across several different markets.
Like in vitro diagnosis, biotech energy in my department.
Our research community, many of my peers asking whether
they can purchase an instrument from some company. This made me
realize a tremendous challenge, one that I was not well
prepared to overcome. And that was, how do we go like this to a
successful product that can be made available to all.
I participated in the I-Corps program as the PI for our
team Phi Optics. Our participation in the I-Corps program has
made a serious impact in our understanding of the
commercialization process and the potential for success of our
company. With the knowledge gathered during the program, and
the adjustments we brought to the business model, we're now
rounding up $400,000 in seed investment. We have commitments
from a local venture firm and a major investor, which they both
come up with a hundred thousand, each.
Recently, Phi Optics received the first order for the
alpha-prototype of our microscope from a major life sciences
company. The prototype will help gather internal interest for
potentially investing more money in our company. This fall we
will be visited by a world leading microscopy company,
interested to partner and co-develop our technology into
commercial products. Therefore, we are very confident about the
outcome of our efforts. And much of this confidence can be
traced back to the intense work during the I-Corps program.
Let me just tell you a few specific things about my
experience as a I-Corps awardee. As a PI I've learned a great
deal during the program. For example, I learned that features
of our technology are not synonymous with value proposition.
And thank you for that. Our team learned that we must develop a
clear and compelling value proposition in order to gain
traction from customers.
Business models need to be flexible and allow for pivoting.
Invariably, information will be gathered along the way that
directs a startup to change strategy and business approach. For
example, our team ended up with two different business models
depending on whether we team up with a strategic partner, like
a large corporation, or not.
Interacting with a hundred potential customers is an
incredibly valuable experience, the results of which cannot be
replicated in any other way. Prior to attending the program, I
did not have a good appreciation of the two fundamental tasks
in starting a business. Which is business model development and
customer development.
The striking feature, to me, of this program, is that it
offers a scientific approach to commercialization. Through
interactions with potential customers, we have the opportunity
to test certain hypothesis. For example, what is the proper set
of features that our instrument should have, first; and what is
the cost. This is precisely our research approach in the
laboratory, where, in order to understand a certain phenomenon,
we perform experimental validation of our various hypotheses.
Personally, I would like to see the I-Corps program
expanded locally, if possible, on campuses throughout the
country. As an alumnus, I will be very happy to help train new
teams at University of Illinois.
In terms of the objectives and achievements of the I-Corps
program my opinion is that it will be a very effective use of
federal dollars. It combines several key elements to produce a
highly catalytic environment for the launch of technology
startups. Number one, top-notch entrepreneurial education from
experienced, world leading instructors.
Two, significant interaction with potential users and
customers of technology. We--particularly, we talked to 105
different people.
Maximum accountability to the teaching team and program
peers. This combination of elements makes the I-Corps quite
unique among federal programs, and should increase the odds of
commercial success of the program participants.
Speaking on behalf of the Phi Optics team, I believe the
program objectives were achieved.
Seems like I have run out of time, but I would like to say
one thing about the benefits to the taxpayer. And that is, for
decades NSF has been investing large amounts of funding in
basic science, which continuously pushed the frontiers of our
knowledge. The SBIR/STTR has helped commercializing some of the
technology developed through this research. I do believe that
the I-Corps program is an extremely useful pre-SBIR tool for
training the startup teams and helping them validate the true
potential for their commercialization. As large industry looks
to academia and small businesses, including spin-out companies,
to fill product portfolios and identify new tools for
efficiency, the I-Corps program can act as a catalyzer and
enhance the probability of commercial success.
The taxpayers receive a huge return from their investment.
These programs provide an opportunity to validate the
commercial potential before significant investments from
federal and private sources are committed.
In essence, the probability of success for the projects
going forward is maximized, while the losses due to the
projects unlikely to succeed are minimized.
With that, I will close. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Popescu follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.048

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Popescu.
I now recognize our final witness, Dr. Mazar, for five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. ANDREW MAZAR, DIRECTOR,

PROGRAM FOR DEVELOPMENTAL THERAPEUTICS AND

ENTREPRENEUR-IN-RESIDENCE INNOVATION AND

NEW VENTURES OFFICE, NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY

Dr. Mazar. Thank you, Chairman Brooks and Ranking Member
Lipinski, for the opportunity to testify today. Northwestern
University and I appreciate your interest and support for
science and technology issues. My name is Andrew Mazar, I'm the
Director of the Center for Developmental Therapeutics at
Northwestern, and also the Entrepreneur-in-Residence. My
perspective that will be a little bit different today, it's not
from the NSF perspective, I'm coming from the perspective of
therapeutics development.
But I think a lot of the challenges that I'm discussing are
applicable, also, to the I-Corps program, and we all face a
similar challenge with trying to commercialize bipartisan into
technology.
So, today, as I said, I'm representing the perspective of
the Entrepreneur-in-Residence, or EIR. Northwestern created
this position within the Chemistry of Life Processes Institute,
also referred to as CLP, to address the unique challenges
encountered when advancing novel therapeutic projects through
development in an academic setting.
A critical component of this mission is the capacity to
move discoveries from the laboratory bench into the hands of
society, which is facilitated by the EIR position, which works
in tandem with Northwestern's Innovation and New Venture
Office, also referred to as INVO. So, this is our next
generation of transfer, but it's much more than that, and
really focused on commercialization aspects of our
technologies.
As the EIR, I partner and collaborate on many different
projects with faculty members across all the different
Northwestern schools. In this role I have now helped found
seven companies over the past couple years, and also founded
the Center for Developmental Therapeutics, which provides
actual hands-on assistance with the development of new
therapeutic projects, both of them in the scientific
development side, as well as the commercialization and
fundraising side.
So, my EIR position was the first of its kind created at
Northwestern, although there have been additional EIR positions
created across the university since then.
I believe that the collaborative interaction that I enjoy
with INVO has also been spurred on by the success of Lyrica,
which is a drug marketed by Pfizer that was invented at
Northwestern, and really a tremendous success story with the
University. Lyrica is a tremendous example of leveraging the
federal investment in basic research to develop a new drug that
is benefiting millions of people, as well as generating a
revenue stream for Northwestern that is being re-invested to
create new programs. This type of royalty stream and re-
investment by the university is especially important in today's
challenging funding environment as it provides a complementary
source of capital that can be used to build transformative and
constructive programs in the academic setting, such as CLP and
the EIR, something that is not always possible through
traditional grant mechanisms.
Further, I believe that the success of Lyrica has bolstered
what was already a very entrepreneurial culture for
Northwestern, and taken it mainstream across the entire campus.
The number of people thinking about their research in terms of
translation and commercialization has grown exponentially since
the EIR was put in place.
Let me now speak to the challenges. One of my major
challenges has been overcoming the perception that discovering
and developing new drugs is somehow inferior to more basic
knowledge-generating research. I believe that academic drug
discovery and development is one of academia's most important
missions. Drug development creates new knowledge and technology
for every new product that is developed, and new models for
collaborative research across departments and schools involving
multiple investigators. Further, drug discovery and development
is highly entrepreneurial, and is, therefore, consistent with
the entrepreneurial nature to which most universities aspire.
Finally, commercialization of new therapeutics helps the
U.S. grow its economy and maintains its global competitiveness.
Another major challenge is funding. I believe that it is
possible to discover and develop new drugs in the academic
setting, and that large research-driven institutions with
medical schools, such as Northwestern, could become quite good
at this if funding was available. Today we do not have a fund
that can provide the capital required for these types of
activities.
A few academic institutions have been able to raise small
gap funds, usually through philanthropy, but in most cases
these have not provided adequate resources to really move
projects forward. However, several examples of gap funds,
Michigan and Harvard, that were allowed to invest sufficient
capital in promising projects do exist, where returns on
investment have already been observed within a few years after
the initial investment was made. Thus, I believe the gap-
funding model to support commercialization will work if
utilized properly.
I believe that the I-Corps program, from what I understand,
is trying to do exactly this, and it should be expanded.
Without programs like I-Corps the basic research investment
will be wasted. If gap funding is not available and if venture
capital is no longer investing in early-stage projects, which
it is not, then basic research ends up sitting on a shelf in
the tech transfer office.
The most important thing I'd like to see from the I-Corps
program is to make more funds available for each project. Each
project should be evaluated for what milestone or inflection
needs to be met next, and sufficient capital should be provided
to support this. The milestones may be scientific, commercial,
or a combination of the two, but providing insufficient funds
is as bad as providing no funds at all.
Given that there are limits on how much money is available
for this program, I would favor making a larger meaningful bet,
rather than trying to fund as many projects as possible and
none of them moving forward. And it's not to say that the
federal government should bear the costs of these types of
programs alone. It is possible to leverage the federal
investment with private funding, and, in fact, the federal
investment can be viewed as a de-risking strategy that attracts
private funding that would not otherwise be available. The I-
Corps program is already doing something like this by requiring
identification of potential customers for each technology
funded, and I believe that if I-Corps funding is increased,
this approach can be expanded to seek out actual commitments of
funds that can match or exceed the government investment. This
drastically lowers the barriers for entry into
commercialization, and in my opinion, spurs entrepreneurship
and economic growth.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for providing me an opportunity to
provide testimony at this field hearing on the Innovation
Corps. This concludes my remarks. I would be happy to answer
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Mazar follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5392.055

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Mazar.
Just that everyone will understand, we have your submitted
testimonies; they're much more extensive than, of course, what
you were able to deliver in a five-minute span, so we
appreciate you abiding by our time limitation, but know that
the full remarks will be a part of the hearing record.
At this point, we go into the questioning segment by
Members of the Committee. Normally, we have a five-minute
limitation, too. But under the circumstances, the time that's
been allotted for the hearing, I'm going to be somewhat liberal
in the amount of time that's allowed for myself and Mr.
Lipinski. And, again, since this is Mr. Lipinski's home court,
I recognize Mr. Lipinski first.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I'll try to keep
it close to five minutes, then you can go, we can have a--each
have second round, maybe the best way to go through this.
Probably the first thing I need to do is hold up my I-Corps
cup, that maybe the camera is not on me, promoting I-Corps and
now that the camera is coming around.
But not paid for with taxpayer dollars, I was assured.
I just want to say, I was at the--this morning I spoke to
a--the local chamber of commerce. West Suburban Chamber of
Commerce. And they had one question. And I think most
American's question right now, even if they're not directed at
anything, is, What's the future of our country? Where are the
jobs going to come from? We're in this--we're in a deep hole
that we're slowly getting out of, but too slowly getting.
What's the future of employment going to be? And I think the
future is largely going to come from American innovation. And
that's why I think programs such as I-Corps are critically
important. We have here in the Chicago area great research
universities, we have National Labs. They're doing great work.
And we need to do a better job of taking that research, those
discoveries--and not everything can be turned into a product,
I'm not claiming that, but those that can, getting that into
the market and providing jobs here in America. So, that's--I
think that's the number one thing, the number-one question that
really is on everyone's mind. We've heard--we're hearing--I
wish we were hearing more about innovation and the role
innovation plays in that--and needs to play for our country.
I want to--first I have a question that I think Dr.
Peterson and Mr. Blank would be best to address but some of the
other witnesses may want to jump in. Some of the witnesses
offered thoughts on how the program can continue to be improved
and/or expanded in their testimony. Mr. Kane suggested an
additional educational module on what the startup process looks
like.
Dr. Popescu suggested some one-on-one time with teams and
instructors to address challenges unique to each team. Mr.
Blank recommended trying I-Corps training--tying I-Corps
training SBIR grants. Dr. Mazar talked about the need of a
larger grants to support proof of concept activities. So, Dr.
Peterson, Mr. Blank I'd like to get your thoughts on some of
these suggestions. I'll start with Dr. Peterson.
Dr. Peterson. Thank you, Congressman Lipinski. Let me first
of all begin by reminding everyone that the I-Corps is just
barely one year old. I think, as with any program, it's very
important to carefully analyze how the program is going, not
make drastic changes in a short period of time.
Very carefully we learn the lessons that we can on the
investments that we're making. I think one of the key lessons
that we have learned, as has been pointed out, both from your
comments and the comments from others around this table, that
the key element of the Innovation Corps program is education.
It is the entrepreneurial education, innovation education, that
is to be provided to students and the faculty to help them in
this process and innovation. And what we found, really, is that
in this first year the education component has in effect become
the great learning step. We have outstanding ideas that are
available from NSF grantees, both current and former. Providing
the education components, components that Steve Blank has
talked about, has been the great learning step.
So, the first thing that we are going to focus on is
expanding our ability to provide those education components in
other geographical locations. NSF just recently made awards to
both the University of Michigan and Georgia Tech to do so. In
this next year we will try to expand to other universities. So,
I would say, if there are other changes that may take place
within the I-Corps next year, the primary focus at this point,
is to expand the education component.
Chairman Brooks. I'm going to interject just for a moment.
I've been requested to ask everyone, including the Members, to
make sure that their microphone is on and that it is close to
their mouths, because it is being recorded, and it will assist
with that sound recording.
Mr. Blank. Thank you, Congressman Lipinski. You know, I
think that's a great question, what can we do with more, and
what we will do more with less. I think that's the role of
government in the coming years in this budget. And I think,
again, if you think about where the I-Corps sits, it's basic
research, research that's looking to be commercialized. And on
the other side, SBIR, SDAT, our funds and private capital.
And what the I-Corps is for me, is we now know something we
didn't know ten years ago, didn't even know five years ago. And
what we now know, and combined and embedded in this program, is
how to make these startups sufficient. That is, how do we not
give them tens, or hundreds of millions of dollars before they
even know what is it they're doing. And that's the core of the
program. I believe that every basic research organization in
the United States, not just the NSF; ARPA-E, DOE, NIH, all of
them have an I-Corps program, and that would be the best use of
taxpayer money, instead of just writing blank checks. I think
having an efficient education program, because, for me, this
isn't a funding program, this is an education program that
actually helps scientists themselves discover whether this is a
viable business. So, instead of coming to Congress or private
capital with their hand out, they're now coming with customers.
And that's the first time we actually know how to do this.
And so, my first request to Congress, if I had a wish list,
would be, we've got to think about expanding this past NSF, in
front of every resource or organization that's running SBIR and
STTR programs. We'd make them incredibly efficient for just a
ridiculously small amount of money, because it's an education
program, not a funding program.
Mr. Lipinski. Anything else anyone wants to add on that?
Okay. I think I'll--with that, I'll yield back, and I--we'll
come back with more questions. Thank you.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski. I want to cover
some of the background that Congress is dealing with right now,
financial climate of the United States of America. You all
probably have a feel for this, but I'm going to give you some
specifics. We're looking at a 1.4-trillion-dollar deficit,
followed by a 1.3-trillion-dollar deficit, followed by a 1.3-
trillion-dollar deficit. This fiscal year we blew through the
one trillion dollar mark in the last week or so, and we still
have two and a half months to go. Last November we blew through
the 15-trillion-dollar debt mark; sometime this year we're
going to blow through the 16-trillion-dollar debt mark. The
cost to service America's debt from FY 2010, to FY 2011, went
up 25 billion dollars a year. From 196 billion to 221 billion.
Now, what's 25 billion dollars?
That is more than the entire NASA budget. Okay? So, that
amount of money is in perpetuity now is being spent on
servicing our creditors, instead of giving some kind of return
for taxpayers who are losing that money to the federal
government, in hopes of getting some kind of service back in
return.
You've seen what's happened in Spain, Italy and Greece,
where their interest rates are significantly higher. They're on
a downward spiral, trying desperately to avoid an insolvency
and bankruptcy of their nations. But for the bailouts by other
nations in the European community, they would have gone into
insolvency and bankruptcy. What does that mean? Well, their
unemployment rates generally are in the neighborhood of 20
percent, those three nations on average. Two of them are
higher, one of them is lower.
Now, think about that, the impact on the Unites States of
America, if we follow that same path. So, Congress is working
hard to try to determine ways to avoid a federal government
insolvency and bankruptcy. For emphasis, if we have a federal
government insolvency and bankruptcy, you might see zero money
for National Defense; you might see zero money for the NSF; you
might see zero money for Social Security; you might see zero
money for Medicaid and Medicare. Think of the federal
government program, there might be zero for it.
Right now, thirty-six cents on every dollar that the
federal government spends is borrowed. No business, as I'm sure
Mr. Kane. Since he's in that field, knows, no business can last
very long when their operational cost, 36 cents on the dollar
is borrowed. Okay? And while I wish I could say that things are
getting better, they're not. The hole just keeps getting deeper
and deeper as evidenced by our, again, having another trillion-
dollar deficit for this fiscal year.
And, surprisingly, in the atmosphere in Washington, about
how, you know, there are cuts, I'm sure you've seen about it in
the media, in the context of those cuts, yes, there have been
some cuts to some programs. But in the fiscal year that ended
September 30th of last year, actual federal government spending
went up well over 100 billion dollars. So, when Washington
talks about cuts, it's not like we understand the words, net;
Washington is talking about picking a little cut there, picking
a little cut there, but nonetheless, the overall spending is
still ballooning.
So, what we have to do, what I desire from you all as much
as possible, is information that will help me determine why
spending has to be cut in order to save our federal government
from an insolvency and bankruptcy. Now, I have a background in
economics, and, to me, the insolvency and bankruptcy, if we
continue on the path that we're on, is inevitable. It is an
absolute certainty. The only question is when. Now, if we get
off that path and we get off quick enough, then maybe we can
save our country from insolvency and bankruptcy.
And to kind of put it into perspective, and I know when I
talk these big numbers sometimes people kind of get their eyes
glazed over, but think the Great Depression. Think 15 and 20
percent unemployment. Then think about having a federal
government that is not solvent and can't pay any bills. In the
Great Depression we had a government that was solvent. Albeit
it was difficult times, they at least could pay their bills.
And when World War II broke out, the federal government was in
a position to help defend our country, not on one front, but
two fronts.
So, that having been said, I'm going to start asking some
questions about the I-Corps program. For those of you who are
not aware, each team picked to participate in the I-Corps
program gets $50,000. In 2011 there were 46 teams, only 2.3
million dollars out of all the trillions of dollars being spent
by the federal government. In 2012, the year we're now in, a
hundred teams will be picked, at a cost of five million. The
projection for 2013, according to some of the testimony I
received, is 250. So, over a two-year period, you're talking
about, roughly, a five-fold increase in spending, and the
number of teams that will be selected to participate in the I-
Corps program.
Very basic question. Where does the $50,000 go? Anyone who
wants to answer feel free.
And just as an aside, these mikes seem to be the opposite
of those mikes. Those mikes you push down, and it's on. This
one, if you push down, you've turned it off. Okay. So, when the
button is up, that's when it's on. So, who would like to make a
stab now on the fifty thousands.
Dr. Peterson. Chairman Brooks. Let me begin--is this----
Chairman Brooks. You just turned your mic off. There you
go, now it's on.
Dr. Peterson. All right.
Chairman Brooks. There you go, now you can answer.
Dr. Peterson. I will just give a very simple answer and let
my colleagues elaborate, perhaps with very specific examples.
The $50,000 is to provide the additional support for the
already funded NSF researchers, or previously funded NSF
researchers, to either develop a proof of concept or a
prototype for their particular idea. It's not meant to replace
venture capital or anything like that, but to provide a modest
amount of support where they can develop their proof of concept
or prototype.
Chairman Brooks. Well, more specifically, as I understand,
6,000 goes to education; right?
Dr. Peterson. There is a component that's associated with
the indirects from the university and the components associated
with providing the educational part of the I-Corps, yes. So, it
does provide support for those teams who are participating in
the educational component.
Chairman Brooks. And is it roughly $6,000?
Dr. Peterson. I believe that's correct, yes.
Chairman Brooks. Who gets that money; the universities or
somebody else, the 6,000.
Dr. Peterson. That money is used to pay for the educational
component, the curriculum that's provided for the I-Corps
program. There is an intense one-week course, in addition to
the long-term course, that's associated with I-Corps and it's
meant to provide the support for that.
Chairman Brooks. Specifically, who gets the money? Do you
pay the instructors for teaching the I-Corps course, or are you
talking about the $6,000 is being used to print the document,
or whatever constitute the curriculum, where does the 6,000
actually go.
Dr. Peterson. It's to provide the support for the
instructors, yes, sir.
Chairman Brooks. Well, when you say, ``support for the
instructors'', what do you mean.
Dr. Peterson. Well, Congressman, could I provide specific
details for you, for the record? I don't have the exact numbers
for exactly how every dollar in that educational investment
goes, so I'd be happy to provide that for you.
Chairman Brooks. Okay. Can anyone help illuminate on where
the 6,000--who actually receives the six grand.
Mr. Blank. So, Congressman, I absolutely could tell you
it's not me. The good news is for the first two cohorts, every
one of the instructors volunteer for their time. And I mean
every one of them. Not only me. We're talking about venture
capitalists who have full-time jobs, who I convinced to teach
in this program by themselves. And in addition, at least, if I
understood correctly, National Science Foundation raised over a
million dollars in private capital, not from the Kaplan
Foundation----
Chairman Brooks. Okay. I appreciate you going off on the
private capital part, Mr. Blank. But right now I'm just trying
to figure out where the $50,000 goes, that the federal
government provides.
Mr. Blank. Right. I think we----
Chairman Brooks. I mean, it's a basic question.
Mr. Blank. Since I'm not part of the NSF, I think we should
have some of the staffers here, who could probably answer that
one.
Chairman Brooks. Well, we've got 44,000 that roughly goes
to things that are not educational. From what I understand,
travel expense would be one; is that correct.
Dr. Popescu. Yes.
Chairman Brooks. Building and prototype would be another.
Dr. Popescu. Yes. For probably us, as a PI----
Chairman Brooks. You got the money.
Dr. Popescu. Yes.
Chairman Brooks. What did you do with that.
Dr. Popescu. So, we have to--the three members of our team
have to pay the tuition educational component, and then we have
to pay for the entrepreneurial's efforts, and for the business
mentor's consulting efforts. And in terms of, as it was
mentioned, we wanted to design the first viable product that
would come out of the lab.
Chairman Brooks. So, Mr. Blank perhaps you could help.
Well, if any of you all could help. It sounds like the 50,000
goes to things that would normally be, if you're starting a
business, the startup cost of that business, and the people who
are owning that business would be the ones that would front
that money; is that a fair statement? With the exception of the
6,000 for education.
Dr. Popescu. Let me offer this. I don't think that's
accurate, we haven't started receiving the private funds yet,
but--so, in addition to the condition that they're--the cost of
the trips, everything is about, to us, it is about $8,000 per
person for the trips and in our capacity.
And the rest is just, as I mentioned, the effort of my
team. And, you know, I don't think this qualifies as a good
placement for it.
Chairman Brooks. Well, I'll take Dr. Peterson up on the
offer, and Mr. Blank up on the offer, the offer to submit to me
an itemization of how the money normally is spent, who actually
receives it, that would be beneficial. At this time, I'm going
to send the microphone back to Mr. Lipinski for additional Q
and A.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Chairman Brooks. And I agree,
certainly, with all the issues with the federal budget deficit
and our debt. I recently attended a meeting with a bipartisan
group of members of the Committee for Responsible Federal
Budget, and the CEO of Honeywell talked about we have somewhere
between six and three years--no one knows exactly how long--
before we do something serious to show that we're serious about
reducing the deficit. So, I am very hopeful. And I think it is
an important question, about where exactly the money goes to
for I-Corps. But I also think we have to look at the rewards we
get for this, we have to go through everything in the federal
budget and figure out, what do we get for the money that we're
spending here.
I want to talk a little bit; hear from the witnesses more
about the entrepreneurial education and the leveraging of this
from I-Corps. But just in general, especially Mr. Mazar. What
can be done in terms of teaching those who are in the lab? I
mean, I was a political science professor, assistant professor,
but I also have a background in engineering. And I'd be one of
the first people to say that this is not something,
entrepreneurship turning research into a product, is something
with some of the hard sciences that engineers--not something
that they necessarily have an idea of how to do. Also, I know
social science also has some recipients of I-Corps funding--
they also had some very good idea.
But, how have you seen--anyone on the panel-- the kind of
the leveraging of the information coming from the I-Corps
program, how have you seen that have an impact, especially Dr.
Popescu, but anyone else, how is it that that helped sort of to
bring a new sort of information and entrepreneurial spirit and
knowledge to beyond what you have learned with I-Corps.
Dr. Popescu. Okay. Thank you very much for the question.
For me, the main benefit for--I would say the first benefit was
to kind of clarify the message of our technology. If you
remember, still remember our first presentation of the I-Corps
was kind of, we were explaining our technology in terms of what
it could do, very technical terms. It could do 3D imaging and
nanoscale resolutions and all that. And then we were told that,
``Hold on, the customers, they want to hear the value
proposition.'' So, the first benefit was that now in our
business proposal we have this very clearly stated. And we
started to have--we have recently given the local investors,
where this message was very sharp and very well received. And
we're very confident that we will raise our $400,000 in a
couple of months. We're very confident about that. So, I would
say that's one thing, but we learned, basically, a whole lot
from the startup program.
Mr. Lipinski. Mr. Kane?
Mr. Kane. Thank you. Let me state for the record that at
the time the decision was made to apply for I-Corps, it was a
university project and there was no presumption or commitment
to start a new company. So, all of the efforts that you would
typically expect one to make, in the investment of time and
resources that people would make into getting a startup off the
ground, really wasn't a consideration at the time that we
decided to apply for I-Corps. It was only after going through
I-Corps that we got the confirmation to suggest that we should
start a company.
But, Congressman Lipinski, to address your question
specifically about the leverage, I'll talk briefly about my own
personal experience. As you know, I do a lot of advisory work,
consulting, and even though I'm the CEO of GlucoSentient, I
also am involved in several other startups.
And since the time that I went through I-Corps and first
got exposed to Steve's curriculum in the lectures at Stanford
last October, since then I have spoken at the University of
Illinois, at Northwestern, at Notre Dame. We had a group of MBA
students from Kellogg who were assigned, as a semester-long
project, to assist the Northwestern startup that I'm working
on, to do some market development and characterization of the
opportunity. And I actually encouraged them and brought the
business model generation techniques that I learned in Steve's
class at Stanford to this project at Kellogg. They went out and
bought the textbook and read it, and now some of that
methodology is being infused there.
So, over time, I mean, I'm just the data point of one, but
now that I've been exposed to the curriculum, and then you
multiply my efforts by the dozens and soon hundreds of other
mentors who have gone through the program, we're out in the
community, at the business schools, at the engineering schools,
helping to diffuse that knowledge. And I think over time you're
going to see an exponential gain as that starts to accure.
Mr. Blank. And if I can, Congressman Lipinski, since I
designed the course to do this on purpose, let me assure you
and Chairman Brooks that the goal was shock and awe for the
students who went through it. And I think they could all tell
you that they were certainly changed from the first day of that
class. And given their experience and their stature, I don't
think anybody spoke to them like that in the last 20 years. And
they certainly learned about what was important in the shortest
period of time. And more importantly, for the country, I think
we changed them forever. I think we made them incredibly
efficient.
Now, I think Chairman Brooks' issue about the $50,000,
while, relevant, this is not funding for the startup. I think,
as Mr. Kane said, they don't come in thinking they're going to
build a company, they come in thinking, How can I commercialize
this? And all of a sudden when they leave, they now understand
what it takes to build a company, with no doubt. I think this
was the--probably the shortest period of emersion we could get
a team with the biggest bang for the buck. And I think we did a
pretty good job of it, and I'm pretty proud that we're going to
continue to do this.
The other comment I should make for the Committee, is you
should understand that this process is being adopted in Silicon
Valley, literally, by qualifier. And the thing that concerns
me, it's not just Silicon Valley, this process has been being
conducted for a while. You know, commercialization and research
is going to go ahead, whether we decide to join it or not. It's
one of those great adventures of our time. And I just kind of
believe that this country wants to be the leader of other
nations. We can't be left behind here. Because I hope the
fruits of all these investments, and all this research that
this Committee has been helping fund for these decades, I hope
we see those products printed in English and not in Chinese.
Because this technology and this course, this educational
process, can be adopted elsewhere. It's the one thing we know
how to do in the United States, which is fail fast, and fail
quickly, and test our hypothesis, that make this unique here.
We fail to capitalize on that, how we literally will be seeing
these products not made in Shanghai and Beijing. And that just
bothers me as an American.
Mr. Lipinski. Before I let Dr. Mazar address this, I want
to say, having spent some time in the ivory towers, at the
universities, I know in my own, in just looking at my
experiences in political science, I saw some great research
being done. And my question always was, ``So what?'' I come
from a very practical midwestern background, and that was
always my question, ``So what?'' I want to know what the
application is here?
And I think this has relevance in that there's a lot of
great work that's being done and getting--Dr. Popescu said,
``What's the value proposition?'' I think if you spend your
time doing a lot of research, you can come up with all kinds of
great discoveries, great findings. But, you cannot--it might
be, at some point, applicable to starting, to creating a new
product. Starting a new company.
But you're not challenged as a researcher to think about
that, really, in the normal process of what goes on at
universities. And trying to get tenure, working on research,
and publishing, and I think that is something that we need to
do more of here in this country.
And I want to ask Dr. Mazar how Northwestern is doing that,
and how you may see others doing that. We have a lot of--now it
seems like it has become very popular in the last decade or
two, to have some kind of center or institute, some kind of
program at universities to focus on technology transfer. And I
think this is something very new and something that's really
critically important for, as I said, innovation and jobs in
this country. So, how do you see that? How do you see the whole
mindset is changing?
I'll tell you, I sat in on a class that Mr. Blank had for
graduate students. Not the I-Corps class, but teaching Lean
LaunchPad to graduate students. I was a Stanford graduate
student 20 years ago. I didn't know graduate students who were
thinking like this. There is a whole different mindset there,
at least at Stanford, hopefully at other schools, of
entrepreneurship and coming up with these ideas. It was almost
shocking to me, in a very good way, that I saw these graduate
students--like my colleagues, I was not thinking like that when
I was at Stanford 20 something years ago. I didn't know anyone
who was thinking like that. So, it's a whole different change
of mindset among people who are doing research.
So, with that, Dr. Mazar, what are you doing at
Northwestern, and how do you see the--sort of the mindset
changing of people who are doing the research, in terms of the
possibilities when they do have something that could possibly
become an innovation?
Dr. Mazar. So, thank you, Congressman. I'll try and keep my
comments brief since that's blinking a lot right now. Seems to
be angrier everysecond for some reason.
Mr. Lipinski. Don't worry.
Dr. Mazar. So, Northwestern, I think, in observing over the
past several years just the culturalship, the way everybody
started, the students all way through faculty, through
administration and senior leadership, is viewing
entrepreneurship as well in the university. And I think
Northwestern has been forward-looking in that way, by allowing
to have it organic. There's a lot of programs for students and
faculty that are adaptive programs. There's, for example, the
Fawn Center For Entrepreneurship, where, in this case, actually
bred into the neotype of the students, graduate students and
even undergraduates, very early on in their approach to pursue
their ideas and think about how to commercialize and go out in
the competition, write business plans. There's lot of support
for that. And a lot of that is coming from, I'd say, two big
sources; one being the Innovation New Venture Office, which is
sort of the next generation tech transfer, but much, much more
at Northwestern.
The transfer function is just one little part of that. But
they are the ones that are really pushing a lot of these
adaptive programs, but also pushing hands-on training side by
side with mentors and entrepreneurs. And so, that's sort of how
I came to be here, is because I could sit down with faculty,
and we'll just talk about theory, or you should do this, you
should do that. But I actually rolled up my sleeves and I rode
with them side by side and take their therapeutic ideas, and
moved them forward toward the clinical, towards
commercialization. And I think that most faculty have worked in
sort of medically-related research.
If you talk to most people, they say, ``Man, I'd really
like to translate my idea into a drug, but I don't know how to
do it.'' So, as soon as you sit down with them and show them
how to do it, that process just begins to flow and occur
naturally. And so, consequently, a lot of these projects now,
that sort of used to stop at what I call the power one stage.
So, once you write your papers, what do you do next? Well, in
most universities here of late, you send that to a transfer
office. Here we're now trying to take those projects and
advance them further, so we can get them out the door, out into
pharmaceutical companies or partnership, or startups or spin-
offs, so we're immediately commercializing, generating revenues
to the University.
And so, I think, to me, that cultural shift, and also just
having people within the University who have been there, done
that, who have that expertise, that will work side by side with
faculty, has been sort of the biggest change that I've seen
that's helped a lot of these things move forward.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. And I have to thank the Chairman
very much for all the extra time. When I was at Stanford, I was
in the Engineering Economics Systems Program there, which is
now Management of Science of Engineering, to see students who
are in that same program coming to that class, and have these
ideas. It's great to see that and I think we need to have more
of that across this country for the future of our country.
Thank you.
Chairman Brooks. I'm going to try to reduce this to a
general sense again. We basically have three kinds of
expenditures in Washington D.C., one is interest on the debt.
We have no choice but to pay it. If we don't pay it, our
creditors charge us a lot more, or they can cut us off. If they
cut us off, all of a sudden you have to have a 36-cent-on-the-
dollar reduction federal spending across the board. But that's
one place. The second place is the entitlement programs. That's
where the big boom is, over a hundred-billion-dollar increase
in spending for Social Security, Medicaid, Medicare, wealth
transfer programs, a variety of different stewards. And then
we've got the third pot of money, which is where NSF comes
from, which is where National Defense comes from, and that's
discretionary spending. That is the one area of the federal
government where spending has actually been cut. And so, what
I'm looking for is information that would help me protect this
program as opposed to others that are being cut. I use National
Defense as an example. With sequestration, if it comes to
fruition, and it's scheduled to for January 1st of 2013, you're
looking at 700,000 layoffs. Seven hundred thousand layoffs. And
the DOD said that it was court workers, uniform defense
personnel, or private sector support contractors. A reduction
in our National Defense capabilities of approximately 25
percent, according to Committee estimates. House Armed Services
Committee estimates. So, you're seeing great competition for
the dollars that we have. And even with that competition, we're
not reducing spending enough to adequately reduce the risk of
insolvency and bankruptcy.
I note, and I really appreciate Mr. Lipinski reducing it to
fewer words than I could have. He said, ``So what?'' And that's
really the gist of it. For us to be successful in defending
this type of program, we have to be able to show results.
And I'm going to just read a few of the comments of some of
the witnesses from our witness statements. Dr. Peterson said,
``Initial anecdotal indicators suggest that the I-Corps program
has been a significant, positive addition to the NSF investment
portfolio, even though it constitutes less than one-third of
one percent of the NSF budget.''
Now, we have another comment by--this one's Mr. Blank. The
I-Corps program, quote, ``will pay us back with jobs and a
competitive edge on a global scale,'' end quote.
Then we have another quote by Mr. Kane, which is closer to
the ``So what'' comment, but it's pretty much where I am.
Quote, ``As an entrepreneur I see things through a different
lens. In my world view, technologies have limited value unless
they are applied. And for jobs to be created and the tax base
to go up, somebody eventually needs to make a profit,'' end
quote.
I'm looking at the teams, our efforts that we've engaged in
so far, were 46 in 2011, 100 in 2012, and 250 projected for
2013. I know we can't do anything about 2013, because that's
projection. Probably can't do anything about 2012, because
that's also just in an embryonic stage. But with respect to the
46 I-Corps teams that were set up to market products to start
up a business, how many of those 46 are today profitable and
self-sufficient, i.e., they're receiving no federal government
or other taxpayer funds.
Dr. Peterson. Chairman Brooks, if I could begin first of
all, and then I'll ask Steve Blank to comment more
specifically. I think it's very important to be realistic about
what we can expect in a specific amount of time for this
program. Absolutely all the things that we need to develop with
new jobs, new companies, all of these we hope and have every
expectation that this program will do, and if it doesn't do
more things we shouldn't be investing in it. We've never
promised that in one year, that all of a sudden there's going
to be thousands of new jobs, or every single investment in the
I-Corps program turns out to be a successful company. But as
has been pointed out, this is a key investment in development
of innovation, and I think without that step we can't
anticipate the future, future developments,----
Chairman Brooks. And, Mr. Peterson, if I could interject
for a moment. You're answering my next question, I haven't
asked it yet, but it was going to be why. My first question is:
How many of the 46 are stand-alone, profitable, self-
sufficient, without taxpayer subsidy----
Mr. Lipinski. Could anyone----
Chairman Brooks. --or assistance.
Mr. Lipinski. Can anyone talk about any progress,
anything----
Mr. Blank. Yeah. So,----
Mr. Lipinski. --that looks potentially----
Mr. Blank. So, let me ask--try to answer Congressman
Brooks' direct question by saying, I think it's a divide by
zero question. Which I mean is, it implicitly says that the
goal was to set up a series of profitable companies, is the
outcome of the I-Corps program. Which, that wasn't the program
I was teaching.
Chairman Brooks. That's not, the goal is not to establish--
--
Mr. Blank. So,----
Chairman Brooks. --startup companies, that are successful--
--
Mr. Blank. The goal for what I was teaching was to
understand whether these entities were capable of being startup
companies. And, in fact, the viable answer for $50,000, which
is probably the cheapest investment the government will make,
is to find out, no, let's not spend or raise millions of
dollars, that, gee, there is no market for this. So, number one
is, is this a go or no-go decision. Number two is, are these
technically add business viable enough to actually apply for an
SBIR Phase I grant. Or, two is, is it possible that these
entities could go out and become companies and raise private
capital. And the key idea is, Chairman Brooks, I know you're
familiar with NASA's technology readiness level, when they take
a look at technology and say, ``Is it ready?'' We've never had
a business readiness level anywhere in this country. What this
program does is not build companies----
Chairman Brooks. Mr. Blank, I'm going to have to interject
again. Can anyone answer my question as to whether any of the
46 are profitable, stand-alone, don't-need-government
assistance? Any of the 46?
Mr. Blank. I don't know, but I don't think that was the
goal.
Chairman Brooks. Well, that--I'm not asking you what you
thought the goal was.
Mr. Blank. I have no idea.
Chairman Brooks. I'm asking, again, if anyone can answer
the question as to whether any of the 46 of these startups have
been successful?
Dr. Peterson. Okay. I----
Chairman Brooks. And I'll get to Mr. Peterson, he's
answering--asking--he was answering my second question, which I
haven't asked yet. But right now the question stands, does
anyone know of any of the 46 that are making a profit and are
successful in the business environment.
Dr. Peterson. Chairman Brooks, you understand my reticence
just to directly give you a yes-or-no answer, simply because I
don't necessarily agree that if they aren't stand-alone
companies, that they haven't been successful. My guess is, and
we'll look, and again, we'll get exactly these numbers for you,
but very few of the investments are now totally self-
sufficient, stand-alone, profitable companies. That was not an
expectation in one year's investment from the I-Corps program.
We will get you that specific information.
Chairman Brooks. All right. Well, until I get something to
the contrary, I'm going to infer from the silence, or the
answering different questions, that there are no known
profitable businesses so far of the 46.
My second question, which, Mr. Peterson, you were focusing
on in advance of having--of me receiving an answer to the first
one was, why not? And if I can now summarize, the why not is
because it's premature, and also because of Mr. Blank's
comment, that it really wasn't the goal of the I-Corps program.
And, Mr. Kane, you have something to add.
Mr. Kane. I would just add that the earliest time that
anybody could have started a company, if they had gone through
the first I-Corps, would have been January of this year. So,
the question you're asking is whether any companies that got
started from a standing start, in seven months are profitable.
Chairman Brooks. Well, my third question is going to be: At
what point in time should we be in a position where we can
properly evaluate the startup numbers? And I'm looking at a
quote from Dr. Peterson's written testimony, ``Specifically,
the Priority Goal states that by September 30th, 2013, 80
percent of teams participating in the Innovation Corps program
will have tested the commercial viability of their product or
service.'' So, is 2013 when we should, as a Committee, start
being in a position where we can sincerely evaluate at least
the 46 startups from 2011?
Dr. Peterson. I think the answer to that is yes. That is
exactly what we're stating. Then we will be able to test the
viability. That does not say, and I'm going to make it very
clear, we are not saying that 80 percent of all of the I-Corps
investments will end up being profitable companies. But we will
be able answer that question.
Chairman Brooks. And let me move to another part of Mr.
Blank's testimony. And I thought this was an interesting
comment interposed, and the rest of his remarks. Quote, It's
why Silicon Valley investors fund startups when over 90 percent
of startups fail, end quote. Is it your anticipation that with
the I-Corps program, that kind of success rate is what we can
expect, ten percent success, 90 percent failure.
Mr. Blank. You know, Chairman Brooks, I think if anybody
knew that, we'd be venture capitalists. I think the goal for me
in building this course is to change the odds. I think we now
know what makes startups fail. I think we now know how to make
them fail less. I think we now know how to make them spend a
lot less of government and taxpayers' money by finding these
things out up front. I would hope that we actually look at the
data. And the preliminary data, I think tells us a quite a bit,
that we're actually achieving that goal. I think your question
about how should we measure this for the next couple of years
is exactly what we should be doing. And I think, as I said, the
data we see now gives us great comfort that we're actually
using taxpayers' money incredibly efficiently. And so, yeah, I
think we should see better numbers from that. Because of what
we're doing here is an education program, we're teaching them
to be parsimonious with their time, their energy, and more
importantly, our money.
Chairman Brooks. Did anyone else want to add anything to
what Mr. Blank has just stated? Otherwise I'll go to my final
comment, question, before we go back to Mr. Lipinski, on the
chance that he wants to go another round.
Mr. Kane. Chairman, if I could add something, perhaps, on
your opening statement, where you said that as a congressman
you're trying to figure out how we reduce the budget deficit
and where the cuts are going to be made, and as a citizen I
have the same concern, although I haven't been elected to solve
the problem. But, we understand that debt is a difficult
problem. And my suggestion, to be brief, is that entitlements
is what you should look at. Because if I look at my own
personal household, once I made the decision to become self-
employed, I realized that there was certain freedom once I knew
that I had an opportunity to sell my services and could be
assured of making a living on my own. And I think that the only
way to reduce the entitlement's burden over time is to create
wealth. And there's no faster or better or more effective way
to do that in the United States than through entrepreneurship.
So, my closing statement is just a big flag waving need for
the necessity of teaching entrepreneurship. It's not a problem
that's going to get solved in a year, probably not even five
years. We all know there's no silver bullet. But over time,
creating wealth by training people how to be self-sufficient is
the thing, in my humble opinion, that will eventually reduce
the entitlement's burden, which is one of the solutions to
solving the debt problem.
Chairman Brooks. Well, Mr. Kane, I don't know whose
congressional district you live in, but if you're saying focus
only entitlements, the wealth-transfer programs, that we can
invest in things that produce jobs, I would encourage you to
consider an application for Congress. Because we need people to
work on----
Mr. Lipinski. If he doesn't live in my district, that's
fine.
Chairman Brooks. Let me move on. My test for the I-Corps
program is a different test than I would apply for most
National Science Foundation work. When you're doing basic
research, you don't know what you're going to come up with, you
don't know what the end result is going to be, you're trying to
expand the human mind. Okay? And just the expansion of the
human mind, in and of itself, may be worth the taxpayer money
that's being spent on those research projects.
But when you get to something like I-Corps, as I perceive
it, granted this is my first term in office, but I'm more akin
to the ``so what'' comment of Mr. Lipinski. We have to have
results if we're going to be able to justify this program long-
term. And to me, the results are that we're generating the kind
of jobs and wealth that most of you guys have testified to in
your written statements as being the end result of the I-Corps
program.
And so, I'll be anxiously awaiting 2013 and 2014 voters
willing in my district that I return to the United States
Congress, and if we have significant improvement in the
creation of businesses successfully, and the creation of jobs,
then that enables us, or empowers us to be able to explain to
our constituents back home that we're being wise stewards of
the taxpayers' dollars.
I will say that I'm very much concerned by the analogy,
indirectly, not directly, to Silicon Valley, where venture
capitalists are looking at a 90-percent failure rate and ten
percent success rate. Well, we can expect 10-percent success
rate out of them, because that's their decision. Okay? If they
want to do ten percent or five percent, or 10 or 30 or 40, it's
their money. Can't question it. And if that's what they are
comfortable with, that's fine, that's meeting their
expectation. But when you're talking about taxpayer's dollars,
I'm not sure there are going to be very many Americans around
the country that are satisfied with a 90-percent failure rate
and a 10-percent success rate.
Now, again, granted, we're early in the program. Too early,
quite frankly, to be able to make a thumbs up, thumbs down
decision on it. But over the ensuing few years, I hope that you
all's involvement in it, you all will do what you all can to
try to make sure that we have a good success rate, that in turn
will translate into our ability to defend this program as
opposed to defending another program that is able to project a
better return on taxpayers' dollars.
With that having been said, Mr. Lipinski, if you'd like to
make any more remarks, or if you want to follow up with more
questions we still have time.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think that we have
to consider why venture capitalists are willing to go in and
put their money on the line with only 90 percent failure rate.
And that's because what we should be looking at is not success
or failure rate, but what do we wind up getting out of this.
And I don't think we should be looking at what percentage of
these I-Corps grant recipients go on to actually create
successful business. It's what's the end result, what is not
percentage-wise how many succeed, but what do we get out of
this.
And if only one percent, if only one of them succeeds but
succeeds in a big way, for example, then it's worthwhile.
And we can't really measure, it's difficult to measure the
change, as Dr. Mazar was talking about. Just the change in
thinking of the people who participated in this program, even
if this idea that they have brought to I-Corps doesn't work,
doesn't mean something will not work in the future, or maybe
some of their colleagues learned better how to be
entrepreneurial. So, it's hard to measure the success.
And I completely agree with you, Chairman Brooks, that we
have to be careful about how we're spending money. And I think
that we have to be--have to watch and see what does happen with
I-Corps and the money that we are--NSF is putting towards I-
Corps and it's important to have that oversight, as Congress
does, and our Subcommittee is in charge of that oversight of
NSF over on the House side.
And I think that it's crucial to do that, that's why we
wanted to hold this hearing, and I thank you for doing that.
But I think if we are looking at a solution, and we say well we
can't have a 90-percent failure rate with the money that goes
to I-Corps--that's not really what we should be focusing on.
It looks like Mr. Blank wants to jump in here.
Mr. Blank. I just want to maybe make a point for Chairman
Brooks' comment. Chairman Brooks, you're from Huntsville, is
that the district you represent?
Chairman Brooks. Yes, sir, home of the country's second
largest Research Park.
Mr. Blank. Right. And Saturn Five was developed there,
wasn't it, the institute?
Chairman Brooks. It certainly was.
Mr. Blank. And I seem to remember in the early days, in
1960s, when I was a young boy, I think that one had a failure
rate, those things kept falling out all the time. Not only
Saturn Five, but all the rockets.
Chairman Brooks. You must be older than me, my memory is we
had it excellent----
Mr. Blank. Not at the Center, but I remember the early red
stones and the Jupiters, and the first grandparents all kind of
blew up in the pan for the country. Understood.
But, the cost of science and experimentation was failure,
not--and that's--again, we didn't shoot our scientists when
they failed. We don't shoot our entrepreneurs, we embrace the
fact, that this is what we do.
And I understand you have to explain that to taxpayers.
But, in fact, if we actually look at some of the labs that we
fund, we don't have a hundred percent success rate in these
experiments. We don't expect that. We understand that's the
nature of science. And I know you understand that. And I want
you to know that I understand. My personal goal is to increase
this hit rate, but I just want it you to understand that, for
me, entrepreneurship, on day one is a faith based. Faith based,
call 'em. And very quickly we turn these into facts. And that's
what we use this process to do. And hopefully we can increase
that rate to where we're all proud of what it is. I just wanted
to share those comments.
Chairman Brooks. Well, thank you for your comments.
And I will make this distinction philosophically. It is one
thing to be involved in basic science, which to some degree
Saturn Five was with our effort to explore space, as it has
been with nanotechnology and all of these other things that the
National Science Foundation has been excellent at doing. And we
understand that with basic science, there's going to be a
significant failure rate. It is another thing, though, for the
federal government to go past the basic science and to start
getting into the free enterprise system. As you probably are
aware, in Washington we had a serious philosophical battle
between socialism on the one hand, which gives an economic
model that does not work. Korea would be the best example. And
free enterprise on the other end. And to what degree does the
federal government's involvement help determine which of our
entrepreneurs are going to be successful and which are going to
fail, and to the extent the federal government is the
determiner of who is successful and who fails, then you have
politicians that are making those decisions, often for
political allies as opposed to what should be a fair and
impartial system, which is what you have with free enterprise.
And so, I see a difference between basic research and the
government, any government's, involvement in free enterprise.
Not withstanding that difference, I understand that government
has a role in education, and to the extent this is an education
program that does produce results, that is something that we
certainly need to consider perhaps in a favorable light. But to
me, what I want to try to get more than anything else, is an
idea of the timetable we should look at before we seriously
evaluate this program. Because we have that in 2013, 2014, we
should be expecting some results that justify the federal
government expenditures of funds. And I think Mr. Lipinski hit
the nail on the head when he also talked about, it's not just a
success rate. You give us one Microsoft, with the thousands
upon thousands of jobs that they create, we can overlook a
whole lot of other efforts that were unsuccessful.
And my staff is reminding me that you are on Mr. Lipinski's
time. For that, Mr. Lipinski, I hand it back to you. Thank you.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, well, if the
voters return both of us to Congress, I look forward to taking
a further look at this topic in the next Congress. I think that
gets back to, and I think we agree for the most part, on what
we're talking about here. We want to be good stewards of the
taxpayers' dollars, and know that it's their money that we're
talking about here. But I think that this program, we have to
be looking at--I think one last thing I want to mention is, is
that Mr. Blank continued to talk about SBIR. We spent how
much--let me ask Dr. Peterson. How much of NSF money goes to
SBIR?
Dr. Peterson. As you know, Congressman, it's a specific
fraction of the research and related expenses. And with NSF,
it's about $140 million a year, that is what our SBIR budget is
at this time.
Mr. Lipinski. And, I think that this is a way of hopefully
having better results coming out of SBIR--also across the
federal government. Not just at the NSF, we could have this
kind of program like I-Corps at other places. It could be a
great feeder to SBIR, and then that money, which is more money
than what's being spent on I-Corps, that taxpayer money can be
better spent and have a better likelihood of having good
results, and really having successful companies come out of it.
But, I want to conclude by thanking the witnesses for their
testimony. I really think that this this program has great
potential, and we need to keep watching what is happening in
terms of results. Results are not always easy to see, but the
potential for a great payoff, and I appreciate what Chairman
Brooks said, if we have one Microsoft-type come out of this,
then we can say that it's been a success. Like every other
program we need to keep looking at it. And I thank the Chairman
for coming out here to Chicago and taking a look at the I-Corps
program during this hearing, and where the program is going.
But I think we have to keep on focusing on innovation, it is
the way that our country is going to succeed. A way American
people are going to be successful is through innovation. We
already spent a lot amount of money on the research, and I'm
very happy to hear Chairman Brooks talk about understanding
what we receive out of spending on this basic research. I want
to thank our witnesses and thank Chairman Brooks.
Chairman Brooks. I, too, would like to thank--well, first
I'd like to thank the witnesses--oops, I did it, sorry. That's
what Dr. Peterson did, pushed it in, turns it off. Now it's
off, now it's on.
I want to thank the witnesses for participating in this
hearing, particularly Mr. Blank for the extraordinary efforts
you made to come here. I look forward to additional interaction
with each of you as this program, process, works its way
through the system as we continue to battle over funding in
Washington. I can assure you of one thing, the intensity of the
debate over what's going to get funded and what is not is only
going to get worse over the coming years because of the
financial limitations of our country. I want to thank Mr.
Lipinski for calling this hearing in Chicago, his hometown
neighborhood. It also happens to be my wife's neck of the
woods, she was born in Evanston, just a little bit to the north
of Northwestern. So, she's enjoying herself while I'm in this
hearing. The Members of the Subcommittee may have additional
questions for any one of you. I would ask you to respond to
those in writing. Of course, that includes any questions from
the Committee staff. The record will remain open for two weeks
for additional comments from Members. And with that, this--the
witnesses are excused and this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:44 a.m. CST, the subcommittee was
adjourned.]


