- AN OVERVIEW OF THE FISCAL YEAR 2012 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BUDGET PROPOSALS AT THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION AND THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN OVERVIEW OF THE FISCAL YEAR 2012 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BUDGET
PROPOSALS AT THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION AND
THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 10, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-5

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

65-050 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DAVID WU, Oregon
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 PAUL D. TONKO, New York
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JERRY McNERNEY, California
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
Tennessee                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY

C O N T E N T S

Thursday, March 10, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Ralph M. Hall, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking
Minority Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
U.S. House of Representatives..................................    12
Written Statement............................................    14

Witnesses:

Dr. Jane Lubchenco, Administrator, National Atmospheric and
Oceanic Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    17

Dr. Paul Anastas, Assistant Administrator, Office of Research and
Development (ORD), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Oral Statement...............................................    41
Written Statement............................................    43

Discussion.......................................................    44

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Jane Lubchenco, Administrator, National Atmospheric and
Oceanic Administration.........................................    68

Dr. Paul Anastas, Assistant Administrator, Office of Research and
Development (ORD), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency........    84

AN OVERVIEW OF THE FISCAL YEAR 2012 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BUDGET
PROPOSALS AT THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION AND
THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 10, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in Room
2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ralph M. Hall
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

An Overview of the Fiscal Year 2012 Research and Development Budget
Proposals at the National

Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Environmental Protection
Agency

thursday, march 10, 2011
10:00-12:00
2318 rayburn house office building

PURPOSE

On Thursday, March 10, 2010 at 10:00 a.m. the House Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology will hold a hearing to examine the
Administration's Fiscal Year 2012 budget requests for the Environmental
Protection Agency's (EPA) Science and Technology (S&T) Programs and the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

WITNESSES

Panel I

Dr. Jane Lubchenco, Administrator, National
Atmospheric and Oceanic Administration

Panel II

Dr. Paul Anastas, Assistant Administrator, Office of
Research and Development (ORD), U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency

BACKGROUND

OVERALL FY 2011 BUDGET REQUEST FOR NOAA

The President's FY 2012 budget request for the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) is $5.49 billion, a 15.8 percent
increase above the fiscal year (FY) 2010 levels.
NOAA's core mission and activities include weather forecasting,
climate prediction, and management of fisheries, coastal and ocean
resources, as well as cross-cutting research to support and advance
these operational areas. NOAA carries out this mission through five
major line offices:

National Ocean Service (NOS), responsible for mapping
and charting coastal areas and providing other navigation
support services.

National Weather Service (NWS), responsible for
weather forecasts and warnings.

National Environmental Satellite Service (NESS \1\),
responsible for development and operation of satellites that
monitor and transmit data for weather forecasting, climate
prediction, space weather forecasting, and earth and ocean
science research.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The NESS line office was formerly known as the National
Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service, NESDIS.

Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR),
responsible for research in support of most NOAA missions
including atmospheric, coastal, and oceanic sciences, climate
and air quality research, ecosystem research, and fisheries and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
marine mammal research.

National Marine Fisheries Service, responsible for
stewardship of living marine resources through the
conservation, management, and promotion of healthy ecosystems.

As part of the FY 2012 budget request, the Administration is
proposing a major reorganization of NOAA that would include the
establishment of a seventh line office. Assets from the Office of
Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR), the National Weather Service
(NWS), and the National Environmental Satellite Service (NESS) would be
transferred into a new Climate Service (CS) line office.
Table 1 shows the primary accounts or line offices of the agency's
budget. The FY 2012 budget request includes increases above the FY 2010
enacted levels for Program Support, the National Environmental
Satellite Service (NESS), and the Climate Service (CS). The
Administration's budget proposes to decrease funding for National Ocean
Service (NOS), the Office of Atmospheric and Oceanic Research (OAR),
the National Weather Service (NWS) and the National Marine Fisheries
Service (NMFS).

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Climate Service (CS)

In February 2010, NOAA announced its intention to create a new
Climate Service (CS) to provide public and private sector decision-
makers with improved and expanded climate-related information. The FY
2012 budget request formalizes this intention, requesting $346.2
million for the CS, which would include assets consolidated from OAR,
NWS, and NESS. This proposal represents the largest reorganization of
NOAA since its creation in 1970. Specifically, the proposal would move
more than half of OAR assets into the new CS, including the Climate
Program Office, the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (climate
modeling), and most of the Earth Systems Research Laboratory. From the
NWS, CS would gain the Climate Prediction Center, the Regional U.S.
Historical Climate Network, and the TAO array (monitoring). Finally,
from NESS, the CS would gain the data and information centers that
house the observational data from satellites, land and sea monitors.
The proposed CS was subject to a National Academy of Public
Administration (NAPA) review at the behest of the FY 10 Appropriations.
The scope of the study included an assessment of:

how best to provide information at the global,
regional, and state levels over varying timescales;

the interaction among the government and various
users, stakeholders, researchers, and information providers of
climate information in both the private and public sectors;

the development and distribution of products and
information that will support decision-making;

the coordination and alignment of existing programs
and resources internal and external to NOAA; and,

provide estimates on projected funding
levels.Although the NAPA study endorsed the concept of a
Climate Service, it was quite clear that it did not evaluate
the impacts that the creation of a Climate Service would have
on the rest of the NOAA research enterprise, and on OAR in
particular. The Committee has not yet had the opportunity to
hold hearings on the proposed climate service.

National Weather Service (NWS)

NWS provides weather, hydrologic, and climate forecasts and
warnings for the United States, adjacent waters, and ocean areas, and
maintains a national infrastructure of observing systems that gather
and process data worldwide from the land, sea, and air.
The FY 2012 request for NWS is $988 million, a decrease of $11.8
million, or one percent, below FY 2010 levels. The Administration is
requesting a $4.7 million increase for the NWS Operations, Research and
Facilities (ORF) accounts and $16.5 million decrease for the NWS
Procurement, Acquisitions and Construction (PAC) accounts. A
substantial amount of the decrease is attributed to the movement of
assets to the newly formed CS and the elimination of congressionally
directed projects.
As part of the proposed reorganization, NWS would transfer to CS
the following assets: the Climate Prediction Center (CPC), the Tropical
Atmosphere Ocean (TAO) observation array, and the Historical Climate
Network (HCN). The CPC produces operational predictions of climate
variability from one-week forecasts to seasonal forecasts. The TAO
array is a series of bouys in the Pacific Ocean that transmit
oceanographic and meterological data instrumental in NOAA's prediction
of El Nino events. The HCN is a network of more than 1200 weather
stations across the contiguous United States.
The Administration requested increase in the ORF accounts is within
the Local Warning and Forecasts Program for: (1) National Data Buoy
Center for operations and maintenance of damaged buoys, (2) Next
Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) development activities,
and (3) supercomputing capabilities for more timely and accurate
weather forecasts.
The requested increases in the ORF accounts are partially offset by
decreases in funding. There are several programs proposed for
elimination that are designated by Congress for funding and are
routinely eliminated by the Administration as ``Congressional
earmarks.'' This includes the National Mesonet Network, a
Congressionally mandated program to explore the use of using integrated
commercial and government meteorological data to improve forecasting.
NOAA maintains that it will still be able to use data collected from
existing observational systems and obtain additional observational data
from networks that provide data free of charge ($19 million). Another
program proposed for elimination includes the Weather Radio Improvement
Project (WRIP). NOAA has completed the WRIP program, and has finished
replacing weather radios ($5.4 million).
The President's FY 2012 request proposes to continue support in the
following areas: complete the acquisition of global positioning system
(GPS) radiosondes (i.e. weather balloon instruments) for 102 Upper Air
observing stations ($9.0 million); support the initial operational
deployment of a 4-dimensional (4-D) Weather Data Cube used for aviation
weather ($26.9 million); improve IT security for the national critical
space weather system ($11.6 million); and operation and maintenance of
the Advanced Weather Interactive Processing System (AWIPS) ($24.4
million), the Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS) ($11.3
million), and the Next Generation Weather Radar (NEXRAD) ($46.7
million). AWIPS is specialized software that assists forecasters in
preparation of accurate, timely weather forecasts and warnings. ASOS is
composed of the sensors needed to measure and record significant
weather conditions. NEXRAD is the radar system that shows patterns and
movement of weather conditions.

National Environmental Satellite Service (NESS)

The President's budget request for the National Environmental
Satellite Service (NESS) is $2.015 billion, a 44 percent increase over
FY 2010 levels. Due to the movement of assets from NESS into the new
CS, the Administration request would reduce the NESS Operations,
Research and Facilities (ORF) account by $81.3 million (41 percent)
relative to FY 2010 levels, and increase the NESS Procurement,
Acquisition and Construction (PAC) account by $699 million (58 percent)
over FY 2010.

NESS ORF

The ORF budget for NESS is for Environmental Satellite Observing
Systems, and contains programmatic funding for management and
processing of data received from all of NOAA's ground- and space-based
weather monitoring equipment. The requested increases of $5.1 million
over the FY 2010 appropriation would support the routine replacement
and upgrading of ground based equipment and software and to increase
security protocols on NESS computer systems.

NESS PAC

The budget for NESS is dominated by acquisitions for NOAA's two
weather satellite systems: the Polar-Orbiting Environmental Satellites
(POES), which orbit the earth and provide information for medium to
long-range weather forecasts; and the geostationary satellites (GOES),
which gather data above a fixed position on the earth's surface and
provide information for short-range warnings and current weather
conditions. To maintain the continuity of weather forecasting data as
older satellites retire, a new series of satellites are under
development for both systems.
Increases and decreases in the PAC account reflect different phases
of satellite acquisition. For example, there is a proposed decrease of
$50.1 million from the FY 2010 budget for the current series of GOES
satellites, GOES-R, due to a rephrasing of program resources and
continue instrument, spacecraft and ground system development for GOES
R and S. Cost overruns and delays have plagued this program. Originally
scheduled for launch in 2014, GOES-R has been delayed until 2015, and
its projected cost has grown by $5 billion from the original estimate
of $6.2 billion. NOAA consequently restructured the program to achieve
cost reductions, and obtained independent cost estimates for the
program. The Administration now estimates the cost of the new GOES
series at $7.62 billion through 2028. Cost savings were achieved by
reducing the number of satellites in the series (from four to two) as
well as removing one of the satellite's major sensors.
The PAC account also reflects the $687.8 million requested increase
for the Joint Polar Satellite System (JPSS). The JPSS total request of
$1.07 billion comprises most of the nearly 52% increase of the NESS
line office over FY 10 levels. This increase is a sizable portion of
the agency's total $750 million proposed growth in FY 2012.
JPSS evolved from a tri-agency effort to develop a satellite system
known as NPOESS \2\. NPOESS data and products are considered ``mission-
critical'' for both civilian and military weather forecasting and
climatology needs; however, the program had major problems throughout
its existence. Since 2002, oversight by Congressional Committees,
Government Accountability Office (GAO) reports, and independent review
teams have documented problems with satellite instrumentation,
cooperation among the agencies involved, and the program's life-cycle
cost; GAO's most recent testimony to the S&T Committee indicated that
total cost estimates had grown to between $15 billion and $16.5 billion
and were not yet stabilized.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ NOAA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA),
and the Department of Defense (DoD) collaborated to develop NPOESS.
This tri-agency effort was abandoned in February 2010.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Due to these serious management issues, schedule slips, and cost
over-runs, the Administration's FY 2012 budget reflects the major
restructuring of NPOESS that occurred in 2010. The decision dissolved
the integrated program into two separate programs: a military program
managed by the Department of Defense, and a civilian program managed by
NOAA/NASA. The NOAA/NASA program known as JPSS is responsible for
satellites flying in the afternoon orbits while DoD satellites are
responsible for the morning orbits. The United States will rely on
European satellites for operational weather observations for the
remaining late-morning orbit. Satellite procurement will be separated
for each program; however, both programs will deliver data to a common
ground system, and NOAA will continue to operate all satellites while
in orbit. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ NOAA has been operating the Defense Meteorological Satellites
for DoD since May 1998.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part of this program included a research satellite, the NPOESS
Preparatory Project (NPP) that was intended to be launched during the
last years of the original POES satellites in order to compare
instrument functionality and usefulness and to calibrate data coming
from the new instruments against the data from existing instruments.
Due to the delays this program has experienced, the initial May 2006
launch of NPP has slipped to an October 2011 launch date. Instead of
acting as a research tool, NPP has now been designated an operational
satellite in order to ensure continuity of data, given that the first
JPSS satellite is not schedule to launch until 2016. In addition to
procuring these satellite systems, the Administration is requesting
$30.4 million to restore high priority climate sensors that were de-
manifested from the NPOESS program in 2006 as a result of the Nunn-
McCurdy mandated restructuring of the program.
NOAA oversees several satellite systems in addition to GOES and
POES. The Deep Space Climate Observatory (DSCOVR), formerly known as
Triana, has a request of $47.3 million to initiate refurbishment of the
satellite and to develop a Coronal Mass Imager (CME) to maintain
continuity of solar wind data used for geomagnetic storm warnings. The
total life cycle of DSCOVR is projected to be $85 million. The JASON
satellite series is managed in partnership with the European
Organization for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites
(EUMETSAT). The JASON-3 satellite FY 2011 budget request is a $33
million increase over the FY 2010 level of $20 million to continue the
development of this altimetry satellite that will provide data for
ocean climatology and hurricane intensity forecasting.

Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR)

The office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR) is the primary
research arm of NOAA, conducting the scientific research, environmental
studies, and technology development necessary to improve NOAA
operations. OAR activities are carried out at NOAA and via extramural
research activities at 30 National Sea Grant colleges and universities.
The proposed formation of the Climate Service would reduce the size of
OAR by more than half, to $212 million for FY 2012. The Administration
proposes to reduce funding for OAR by $237.1 million, approximately a
53 percent decrease below the FY 2010 $549 million level.
Notable budget changes at the remaining programs at OAR include:

An increase of $6 million in the Phased Array Radar
and Tornado Severe Storm Research.

An increase of $2 million in Weather and Air Quality
Research for wind boundary-layer research to support renewable
energy.

An increase of $1 million in Sea Grant to conduct
risk assessment research for coastal communities preparing for
and responding to natural hazards and extreme events.

The Administration requests $11.6 million in funding
for the Integrated Ocean Acidification Research program. This
work is aimed at enhancing current knowledge to improve
adaptive strategies and management of living marine resources
impacted by ocean acidification.

A decrease of $3 million from Unmanned Aircraft
Systems.

A decrease of $1.3 million from the U.S. Weather
Research Program (reflecting the completion of some research
projects).

A $19.5 million decrease for Congressionally Directed
Programs.

National Ocean Service (NOS)

The National Ocean Service (NOS) protects the National Marine
Sanctuaries and advocates coastal and ocean stewardship. The NOS also
introduced electronic nautical charts which interface with Global
Positioning Systems (GPS) to enhance the safety and efficiency of
navigation of U.S. waterways. The President's FY 2012 request of $558.6
million would reduce overall funding for NOS programs by $20.5 million,
or 3.5 percent, compared to the FY 2010 level.
The NOS ORF account is reduced by $11 million. The Ocean Resources,
Conservation and Assessment account has a proposed net reduction as
compared to the FY 2010 enacted budget of $7.4 million. This includes a
$8 million reduction in the Ocean Assessment Program (OAP), and an
increase of $2.9 million for Response and Restoration oil spill
research. The Ocean Assessment Program includes an increase in funding
for the Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS) Surface Current
Mapping of $5 million, an increase of $8.5 million for IOOS Regional
Observations for marine sensor technology innovations. The FY 2012
budget request includes a $1.2 million increase for the National
Centers for Coastal Ocean Science (NCCOS), and a decrease of $1.2
million for energy licensing and appeals. The NOS-PAC accounts are also
reduced by $9 million. This includes a cut in the Marine Sanctuaries
Construction ($7.5 million) and a decrease of $2.2 million in the
acquisition and construction activities of the National Estuarine
Research Reserve System.

Program Support

The Program Support line office supports corporate services and
agency management. This includes the Under Secretary's office, the
office of the Chief Financial Officer, the Program, Planning and
Integration Office, and the NOAA Education Program. Overall, the
Administration requests an increase in the Program Support account of
$6.2 million, for a total of $301.2 million, a two percent increase
over the FY 10 level.

Overall FY 2012 Budget Request for EPA

The President's FY 2012 budget request for the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) is $8.97 billion, a reduction of 12.9 percent
below FY 2010 levels. The Committee on Science, Space, and Technology
has jurisdiction over the Science and Technology budget listed in Table
2 below.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

FY 2011 Science & Technology Account: Office of Research and
Development

The Administration's budget request for S&T is $826 million. This
includes $584 million for the Office of Research and Development (ORD),
S&T activities conducted by other program offices (e.g. Office of Air,
Office of Water), as well as $27 million requested for S&T activities
associated with the Superfund program. In the past, the Superfund S&T
funds were drawn primarily from the Superfund trust that was funded by
the dedicated Superfund tax. Since the expiration of the tax, this fund
no longer exists and all funds must be appropriated from general
revenues.
Approximately 71 percent of S&T funding is for EPA's ORD, which is
the primary research arm of the agency. Typically, most of the
remaining S&T funds go to the Office of Air and Radiation, and a
smaller amount to the Office of Water and to the other program offices.
ORD conducts and sponsors both fundamental research in
environmental science and more targeted research to inform EPA's
regulatory programs. For example, ORD provides scientific information
to support and implement the Clean Water Act. ORD also develops the
scientific risk information for the agency's Integrated Risk
Information System (IRIS), a database of human health effects of
certain chemicals. This program is used by EPA, individual states, and
other government agencies to determine hazardous waste site clean-up,
drinking water, and other health-based standards. ORD develops the
scientific underpinning for EPA's air quality standards in areas such
as particulate matter and ozone. ORD also investigates the
environmental implications of emerging areas such as nanotechnology and
endocrine disruptors.
ORD carries out these responsibilities by conducting intramural
research at EPA's laboratories, awarding contracts, and supporting
fellowships and research at colleges and universities through the
Science to Achieve Results (STAR) grant program. The table above
provides breakouts of ORD funds among the various research programs at
ORD.
Within the context of a decrease in funding for EPA as a whole, the
FY 2012 budget proposes funding for a range of intramural and
extramural research and development activities.

$86 million for the STAR Program, a $24.7 million
increase over FY 2010 enacted levels, to invest in the next
generation of environmental scientists and to leverage wider
scientific community expertise on key issues.

$83.1 million for clean air research and $20.8
million for global change research.

$5.4 million in for research into electronic waste
and green chemistry.

$4.4 million to study the impact of hydraulic
fracturing technology on ground water quality and implications
for public health and the environment.

An increase of $17.8 million for Chemical Safety and
Sustainability Activities. A budget request of $16.9 million
for endocrine disrupting chemicals research and $ 21.2 million
for computational toxicology. Both are important for human
health and ecological risk assessment.

$2 million for a long-term lab study

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Hall. The Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology will come to order. Good morning to everyone. We
welcome you. This hearing is entitled ``An Overview of the
Fiscal Year 2012 Research and Development Budget Proposals at
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the
Environmental Protection Agency.'' In front of you are packets
containing the written testimony, biography, and truth in
testimony disclosure for today's witnesses. Our first panel
will feature NOAA Administrator Dr. Jane Lubchenco. Our second
panel will feature EPA Assistant Administrator for the Office
of Research and Development, Dr. Paul Anastas.
I recognize myself for an opening statement.
I want to welcome everyone here today for the hearing on
the President's fiscal year 2012 budget request for the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, that is NOAA,
and the Environmental Protection Agency, the EPA.
In the first two months of the year, the President made two
important praiseworthy announcements. He called for a review of
the unnecessary regulations, such as those under which the
benefits don't justify the cost, or those not grounded in sound
science. Then he announced during his State of the Union speech
that he would be willing to eliminate whatever spending we can
honestly afford to do without. The President has followed these
announcements by proposing a budget with over $1 trillion in
deficit spending, and pushing a bevy of job-killing
regulations, without heed to current economic conditions. In
light of his stated priorities, the President's actions on the
budget and regulations are appearing to be empty promises.
The President's fiscal year 2012 budget request for NOAA
contains few surprises, with several concerns. The
administration has proposed the largest reorganization in NOAA
history in order to create a new climate service. As I said at
last year's budget hearing, I am not supportive of this change
and am concerned that it has not been properly vetted by
Congress. I do, however, want to acknowledge to the
administrator that I appreciate that this proposal was made
through the budget process this year. This is a regular order
we were requesting a year ago.
Nevertheless, this Committee has not yet had the
opportunity to fully examine the implications of transition in
the fundamental climate research in the operational office.
Until then, unless Congress reviews and approves the proposal,
I don't expect NOAA to continue to operate as it did prior to
the February 2010 announcement. There should be no changes in
the existing management matrix, no changes in decision-making
or reporting lines within the line offices, and no authorities
changed under the guise of transition.
Another area of the President's budget that concerns me is
the proposed increases for the Joint Polar Satellite System.
This Committee has been engaged in the oversight of this
program since it was the dysfunctional tri-agency mess subject
to recertification under Nunn-McCurdy.
It has been more than a year since the Office of Science
and Technology Policy proposed splitting this program into two
elements: one controlled by NOAA and NASA, and a separate one
controlled by the Department of Defense. In all this time, we
still have not seen how the division of this program has
worked, and whether or not it will reduce the risk of a
potential gap in weather and climate data. Furthermore, we have
still not seen the baseline cost estimate of these two separate
programs. I look forward to hearing from the Administration on
this subject.
Our second panel, we will hear about EPA's fiscal year 2012
research and development budget request. We are all well aware
of the great impact that EPA regulatory actions can have. Often
overlooked in this debate, however, is agency process and how
it affects the quality of underlying science that these
regulations are based on. This is the purview of the Committee
and an issue I am committed to pursue in further detail.
For example, since our last EPA budget hearing, more
information has come to light that the science used to justify
the finding that carbon dioxide is a danger to public health or
welfare is not as solid as was originally claimed. The numerous
admitted mistakes, questionable data sets and lack of
transparency in the process has only intensified the questions
and doubts that this decision was made as a result of politics
instead of science.
Unfortunately, climate is not the only area in which EPA
science is a concern. I was very disappointed with the release
of the draft hydraulic fracturing study. The questions EPA
posed to answer would hardly be helpful to a decision-maker.
This study is focused on the impact possibilities of hydraulic
fracturing on drinking water, without even looking at the
possibilities of such an impact occurring. It seems about as
useful as studying the possible impacts of getting hit by a bus
without ever even considering the probability of such an event
occurring even when existing laws and simple precautionary
steps are taken. Accordingly, I look forward to hearing further
from EPA on the factors driving its hydraulic fracturing study.
There is a lot of work to be done to put our country back
on the right track, and the President's budget request is not
the roadmap that will get us there.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hall follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Ralph M. Hall
I want to welcome everyone here today for this hearing on the
President's Fiscal Year 2012 budget request for the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).
In the first two months of the year, the President made two
important praiseworthy announcements. He called for a review of
unnecessary regulations, such as those under which the benefits don't
justify the costs or those not grounded in sound science.
Then he announced during his State of the Union speech that he
would be willing to eliminate whatever spending we can honestly afford
to do without.
The President has followed those announcements by proposing a
budget with over a trillion dollars in deficit spending and pushing a
bevy of job-killing regulations without heed to current economic
conditions. In light of his stated priorities, the President's actions
on the budget and regulations are appearing to be empty promises.
The President's FY 2012 budget request for NOAA contains few
surprises, but several concerns. The Administration has proposed the
largest reorganization in NOAA history in order to create a new Climate
Service. As I said at last year's budget hearing, I am not supportive
of this change and concerned it has not been properly vetted by
Congress. I do however want to acknowledge to the Administrator that I
appreciate that this proposal was made through the budget process this
year. This is the regular order I was requesting a year ago.
Nevertheless, this Committee has not yet had the opportunity to
fully examine the implications of transitioning fundamental climate
research into an operational office. Until and unless Congress reviews
and approves this proposal, I expect NOAA to continue to operate as it
did prior to the February 2010 announcement. There should be no changes
in the existing management matrix, no changes in decision-making or
reporting lines within the line offices, and no authorities changed
under the guise of transition.
Another area of the President's budget that concerns me is the
proposed increases for the Joint Polar Satellite System. This Committee
has been engaged in the oversight of this program since it was a
dysfunctional, tri-agency mess subject to recertification under Nunn-
McCurdy.
It has been more than a year since the Office of Science and
Technology Policy proposed splitting this program into two elements:
one controlled by NOAA and NASA, and a separate one controlled by the
Department of Defense. In all this time, we still have not seen how the
division of this program has worked to reduce the risk of a potential
gap in weather and climate data. Furthermore, we have still not seen
the baseline cost estimates of these two separate programs. I look
forward to hearing from the Administrator on this subject.
On our second panel, we will hear about EPA's FY 2012 research and
development budget request. We are all well aware of the great impact
that EPA regulatory actions can have. Often overlooked in this debate,
however, is agency process and how it affects the quality of the
underlying science that these regulations are based on. That is the
purview of this Committee and an issue I'm committed to pursuing in
further detail.
For example, since our last EPA budget hearing, more information
has come to light that the science used to justify the finding that
carbon dioxide is a danger to public health or welfare is not as solid
as was originally claimed. The numerous admitted mistakes, questionable
data sets and lack of transparency in the process has only intensified
the questions and doubts that this decision was made as a result of
politics instead of science.
Unfortunately, climate is not the only area in which EPA science is
a concern. I was very disappointed with the release of the draft
hydraulic fracturing study. The questions EPA posed to answer would
hardly be helpful to a decision-maker. The study is focused on the
impact possibilities of hydraulic fracturing on drinking water, without
ever looking at the probabilities of such an impact occurring. It seems
about as useful as studying the possible impacts of getting hit by a
bus without ever considering the probability of such an event occurring
within existing laws and when simple precautionary steps are taken.
Accordingly I look forward to hearing further from EPA on the factors
driving its hydraulic fracturing study.
There is a lot of work to be done to put our country back on the
right track, and the President's budget request is not the roadmap that
will get us there.
I now recognize Ranking Member Johnson for five minutes for an
opening statement.

Chairman Hall. I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mrs.
Johnson, for five minutes, or whatever time she might require
on her opening statement.
I thank you, Ms. Johnson.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Hall, and let me also
wish to welcome the witnesses, Dr. Lubchenco and Dr. Anastas,
to the Science, Space, and Technology Committee.
While the two sides of the aisle might not always agree on
the appropriate resources and directions for NOAA and EPA, I
think that we all agree that good policy begins with good
science.
Testifying today are two of the Nation's top scientists,
running two of our premier science agencies. Not only is this
hearing a venue for Members to ask questions and express
concerns, it should serve as an opportunity for our witnesses
to convey the importance of what these agencies do for the
American people.
From forecasting the weather and assessing the impacts of a
changing climate on our economy, to protecting public health by
ensuring cleaner air and water, and the development of safer
chemicals, in these and in a host of other ways, NOAA and EPA
conduct science to benefit our lives every day, in ways often
too easily overlooked in the fog of partisan politics.
It is important to note that the unique jurisdiction that
this Committee has in EPA and acknowledge that with the Office
of Research and Development and all of the Science and
Technology activities, EPA is not just a regulatory agency. We
must not lose sight of the contribution that science activities
at EPA have provided to the public for decades. Our environment
does not just get better by itself, it requires all of us
working together to protect every American's right to clean air
and water, and a healthier environment.
We are here today to discuss the President's fiscal year
2012 budget request for NOAA and EPA. However, it is difficult
to discuss the outlook for the next fiscal year when we have
not yet determined funding levels for this current fiscal year
and assess the full extent of the damage that the lack of a
fiscal federal budget is causing.
In these challenging economic times, we need not sacrifice
everything for the sake of making cuts. With vision and
perseverance, we can be fiscally responsible while still making
the necessary investments to keep the American economy
competitive and our people and environment healthy.
The President has already made some tough decisions in the
2012 budget request for these agencies. However, the much
deeper cuts included in H.R. 1 that passed the House three
weeks ago would put these and other agencies at risk of failing
to meet their missions.
At the least, we must ask ourselves whether the very
negligible effect these cuts will have on the national deficit
warrants the devastation it would cause to our core scientific
programs, their critical workforce, infrastructure, their
capacity to address natural disasters, and protect public
health and the environment.
If cuts on the order of those in House Bill H.R. 1 were
enacted, thousands of research scientists, graduate students,
technical and administrative staff, contractors, and other
support staff across the country would be laid off or
furloughed; and at a time when we are trying to protect
American jobs.
Critical research activities to develop new technologies
and methods to protect the public from environmental hazards
and monitor long-term environmental change will be stopped or
curtailed.
Weather forecasting systems may fail, creating gaps in
critical weather data and eroding weather services that every
American relies on. We would no longer see the two or three day
advance warnings of extreme events, putting lives, property and
critical infrastructure at risk.
These cuts don't take us back to 2008; they will turn the
clock back and take us back to relying on weather forecasts and
capabilities, and environmental protection standards from over
two decades ago.
America wants us to be fiscally responsible, but if they
can't breathe clean air, and drink clean water, or help
communities and industries prepare for harsh weather and
natural disaster, what does that really mean?
Dr. Lubchenco and Dr. Anastas, as you testify today,
perhaps the most important assistance you can give to this
Committee is a real understanding of how the proposed cuts will
affect your agency's ability to protect the health and well-
being of our citizens and communities, and why you believe the
President's request will move our Nation science enterprise in
the right direction.
Chairman Hall and all the Members of this Committee, I look
forward to working with you in the months ahead, and I look
forward to hearing our witnesses.
Thank you, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Johnson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson
Thank you, Chairman Hall. I also wish to welcome the witnesses, Dr.
Lubchenco, and later, Dr. Anastas, to the Science, Space, and
Technology Committee.
While the two sides of the aisle might not always agree on the
appropriate resources and directions for KOAA and EPA, I think that we
would all agree that good policy begins with good science. Testifying
today are two of the nation's top scientists running two of our premier
science agencies. Not only is this hearing a venue for Members to ask
questions and express concerns, it should serve as an opportunity for
our witnesses to convey the importance of what these agencies do for
the American people.
From forecasting the weather and assessing the impacts of a
changing climate on our economy, to protecting public health by
ensuring cleaner and water and the development of safer chemicals--in
these and a host of other ways, NOAA and EPA conduct science to benefit
our lives every day, and in ways often too easily overlooked in the fog
of partisan politics.
It is important to note the unique jurisdiction that this Committee
has in EPA and acknowledge that, with the Office of Research and
Development and all of the Science and Technology activities, EPA is
not just a regulatory agency. We must not lose sight of the
contribution that science activities at EPA have provided to the public
for decades. Our environment does not just get better by itself; it
requires all of us working together to protect every America's right to
clean air and water and a healthier environment.
We are here today to discuss the President's fiscal year 2012
budget request for KOAA and EPA. However, it is difficult to discuss
the outlook for the next fiscal year when we have yet to determine
funding levels for this current fiscal year and assess the full extent
of the damage that the lack of a final budget is causing.
In these challenging economic times we need not sacrifice
everything for the sake of making cuts. With vision and perseverance,
we can be fiscally responsible while still making me necessary
investments to keep the American economy competitive and our people and
environment healthy.
The President has already made some tough decisions in the 2012
budget request for these agencies. However, the much deeper cuts
included in H.R.l that passed the House three weeks ago would put these
and other agencies at risk of failing to meet their missions.
At the least we must ask ourselves whether the very negligible
effect these cuts will have on the national deficit warrants the
devastation it will cause to our core scientific programs, their
critical workforce and infrastructure, and their capacity to address
natural disasters and protect public health and the environment.
If cuts on the order of those in the House-passed H.R.1 were
enacted:

Thousands of research scientists, graduate students,
technical and administrative staff, contractors, and other
support staff across the country will be laid-off or
furloughed, and at a time when we are trying to protect
American jobs.

Critical research activities to develop new
technologies and methods to protect the public from
environmental hazards, and monitor long-term environmental
change will be stopped or curtailed.

Weather forecasting systems may fail, creating gaps
in critical weather data and eroding weather services that
every American relies on. We would no longer see the 2-3 day
advance warnings of extreme events, putting lives, property,
and critical infrastructure at risk.

These cuts don't just take us back to 2008; they will turn back the
clock and take us back to relying on the weather forecasting
capabilities and environmental protection standards from over two
decades ago.
Americans want us to be fiscally responsible. But if they can't
breathe clean air and drink clean water, or help communities and
industries prepare for harsh weather and natural disasters, what does
that mean?
Dr. Lubchenco and Dr. Anastas, as you testify today, perhaps the
most important assistance you can give to this Committee is a real
understanding of how the proposed cuts will affect your agencies'
ability to protect the health and well-being of our citizens and
communities, and why you believe the President's request will move our
nation's science enterprise in the right direction.
Chairman Hall and all of the Members of this Committee, I look
forward to working with you in the months ahead.

Chairman Hall. Thank you, Ms. Johnson. If there are Members
who wish to submit additional opening statements, your
statements will be added to the record at this point.
Let me say, we are going to try to stay with the five
minute rule. It is not fair to those at the end. Mr. Sarbanes,
for example, has stayed, I think, 2-1/2 hours and didn't get to
ask a question last time. I am inclined to give him my time, he
is so patient, or give him the award for patience here. Nobel
Prize for patience.
I will introduce the first panel witness, and ask the
witnesses to be as direct as you can. Please do your best to
stay with the five minutes, but if you can't, we are honored to
have you here and we will be lenient with the gavel.
At this time, I would like to introduce our first panel
witness, Dr. Jane Lubchenco. I hope I am saying that right.
People mispronounce Hall every now and then, put an ``e'' in it
where there is an ``a'', but I don't like that.
Prior to her service as Administrator at NOAA, she served
as President of the American Society for the Advancement of
Science, a professor at Harvard and Oregon State University,
and she was also on the Board of Directors for the National
Science Foundation. She was sworn in on March 20, 2009, and
this is the third time she has appeared before the Committee.
We thank you for being here.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes, after which the Members of the Committee will
have five minutes each to ask questions. Before I recognize Dr.
Lubchenco, I want to ask you to please do your best to stay
within that. Thank you.
We recognize you now, ma'am.

STATEMENT OF DR. JANE LUBCHENCO, ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL
ATMOSPHERIC AND OCEANIC ADMINISTRATION

Dr. Lubchenco. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Members of the Committee, Chairman Hall, I greatly
appreciate your leadership and your support for NOAA. As you
know, we are one of the Nation's premier environmental science
and stewardship agencies. Your continued support for our
program is appreciated as we work within the Department of
Commerce to improve science, products, and services that are
vital to supporting America's businesses, communities, and
people. At NOAA, our work is everyone's business.
I am honored to be here today to discuss the President's
fiscal year 2012 budget request, which promotes innovation in
American competitiveness, and lays the foundation for long-term
economic growth, while making responsible reductions.
The budget recognizes the central role that science and
technology play in creating jobs and improving the health and
security of Americans. I wish in my oral remarks to highlight
five lynchpins of our fiscal year 2012 request: key savings,
climate services, research and innovation, weather, and
satellites.
Savings highlights. As part of the Administration's
Administrative Efficiency Initiative, NOAA analyzed its
administrative costs and reduced non-essential spending by
$67.7 million. We conducted a rigorous review of our programs
and activities and identified additional savings. The 2012
request is $5.5 billion dollars, a decrease from fiscal year
2011 request, an increase above fiscal year 2010 enacted, due
primarily to our requirements to execute the restructured civil
polar satellite program.
The fiscal year 2012 request includes a proposed budget-
neutral reorganization that brings together NOAA's existing but
widely dispersed climate capabilities under a single line
office management structure, called the Climate Service.
The Climate Service, if approved by Congress, would have a
budget of $346 million. A key point to keep in mind is that
many people think of climate as something that is far down the
road, something way in the future. However, the word
``climate'' generally refers to long-term weather,
specifically, anything longer than two weeks. People are
anxious to have information to plan for the months and years
ahead, and we believe the Climate Service can assist in a
meaningful fashion.
The proposed reorganization would also strengthen world
class fundamental science for which NOAA is justly known. This
Committee has repeatedly said that this goal is important to
you. It is equally important to NOAA and to me. Without
continued advances in basic science that supports our mission,
the quality of our services will degrade.
The climate services we provide demonstrate the intuity of
continually improving our scientific capacity. For example,
through collaboration with the National Association of
Homebuilders and HUD, NOAA developed an air freezing index that
the homebuilding industry estimates saves $300 million annually
in construction costs, and the equivalent of nine million
gallons of gasoline. Advances in science make it possible for
us to provide useful information about the months to year
timeframe, something that has the potential to be of immense
utility to businesses, communities, and military operations.
Parallel to creating the Climate Service, NOAA would
strengthen and realign its core research line office. The
Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research will focus its work
to be the innovator and incubator of new science technologies
and application within NOAA, and an integrator of science and
technology across all of NOAA, consistent with the President's
call for science and innovation.
NOAA'S request includes $212 million to continue
strengthening core capacities such as our understanding of
ocean acidification and its impacts, and promoting conservation
and use of America's coastal resources to our renowned Sea
Grant Program.
The National Weather Service provides critical information
to communities and emergency managers, and it is the Nation's
first line of defense against severe weather. The fiscal year
2012 request for the Service is $988 million. This includes a
$26.9 million increase to modernize our aviation weather
forecasts and warnings to support NextGen developmental
activities.
NOAA's satellites provide the data and information for
forecasters that are vital to every citizen. They enable smart
construction in emergency rescue missions, safe transportation,
whether it is on land, water, or in the oceans and Great Lakes.
The fiscal year 2012 budget request for the satellite service
is $2 billion, which we will invest in multiple satellite
acquisition programs for the continuity of critical weather,
climate, and oceanographic data. This includes an increase of
$687 million for the Joint Polar Satellite System. This program
is essential if we are to maintain the quality of our severe
storm warnings, provide long-term forecasts, and receive
emergency distress signals in a timely fashion.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, I would like to note that I am
holding a nickel in my hand here. I believe that this nickel
represents one of the best bargains I know of. It costs
Americans--each American less than 5 cents a day to run NOAA,
and for this nickel, you get the best weather information in
the world. This nickel means that our oceans and coasts are
healthy and vibrant, and in turn, our coastal communities are
more prosperous. This nickel gives mariners the confidence that
their distress signals will be received. This nickel allows us
to save lives and property when severe storms strike. This
nickel helps business owners succeed: from the farmers in the
Heartland, to fishermen on the coasts, and everyone in between.
This nickel helps keep our homeland secure. At NOAA, our work
is everyone's business. We take our work seriously because we
know that citizens and businesses depend upon us each and every
day.
I look forward to working with Members of the Committee and
our constituents to achieve these goals I have laid out through
the implementation of the 2012 budget, and I am happy to
respond to any questions that the Committee might have.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lubchenco follows:]
Prepared Statement by Dr. Jane Lubchenco, Administrator, National
Atmospheric and Oceanic Administration
Chairman Hall and Members of the Committee, before I begin my
testimony I would like to thank you for your leadership and the support
you have shown the Department of Commerce's National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), one of the Nation's premier
environmental science and stewardship agencies. Your continued support
for our programs is appreciated as we work to improve the products and
services that are vital to supporting America's businesses,
communities, and people. I am honored to be here as the Under Secretary
of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere at NOAA to discuss the
President's FY 2012 budget.
Secretary Locke is singularly focused on how the Department of
Commerce can help American businesses compete for the jobs of the
future. As part of the Commerce Department, NOAA generates value for
the Nation by providing the information and services that communities,
managers, businesses, and individuals rely on every day to make
decisions about their lives and businesses. NOAA touches the lives of
every single American; we work 24/7 to keep families safe, property
protected, living marine resources vibrant, communities thriving, and
businesses strong. NOAA works everywhere, in every state, and from the
surface of the sun to the depths of the ocean. Our research informs our
many services and science guides our stewardship of the oceans, coasts,
and Great Lakes.
The President's FY 2012 budget request promotes innovation and
American competitiveness and lays the foundation for long-term economic
growth, while making responsible reductions. In particular, the budget
recognizes the central role that science and technology play in
stimulating the economy, creating new jobs, and improving the health
and security of Americans.

FY 2012 BUDGET REQUEST AND FY 2010 HIGHLIGHTS

Secretary Locke has brought a dedicated focus on efficiency and
good management to the Department of Commerce. As part of the
Administration's Administrative Efficiency Initiative, an aggressive
government-wide effort to curb non-essential administrative spending,
NOAA analyzed its administrative costs and reduced non-essential
spending by $67.7 million. Beyond administrative savings, NOAA engaged
in a rigorous review of its programs and activities and identified
additional savings that were achievable. For example, we were able to
reduce the cost of operating our current satellite programs, and we
restructured our international portfolio of climate research. Further,
as a member of the newly established Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration
Task Force we are working with federal and state agencies to find
efficiencies, improve coordination and accountability in restoring Gulf
Coast ecosystems.
In short, the FY 2012 budget for NOAA reflects our efforts to focus
on program needs, identify efficiencies, and ensure accountability. It
sustains core functions and services, and proposes increases for only
the most critical programs, projects, or activities necessary to
address the growing demand for NOAA's science, services, and
stewardship. The FY 2012 request is $5.5 billion, which is a decrease
from the FY 2011 request. The FY 2012 request is an increase above FY
2010 enacted due primarily to our requirements to execute the
restructured civil polar satellite program. As I will discuss later,
this new generation of satellites is needed to replace satellites that
will go out of service in the years to come. They are essential for
both routine weather forecasts on which the private weather industry
depends, and for storm warnings and watches that only the government
can issue. The expenditures on satellites are mission critical for
NOAA. People's lives and property depend on them. This year 21 people
have been rescued because of NOAA satellite tracking, and 91 have been
rescued since last October. Beyond weather forecasts, fishermen and
recreational boaters count on NOAA satellites to keep them safe in the
event of an emergency at sea.
The FY 2012 NOAA budget recognizes that environmental and economic
sustainability go hand in hand. We learned through the BP Deepwater
Horizon oil spill and other events that we cannot have healthy
economies without healthy communities and healthy ecosystems and that
good science and stewardship is good business. NOAA's 2012 budget makes
the investments needed to save lives and livelihoods, to understand
these critical connections, and to ensure sustainable communities,
economies, and ecosystems.
Now I will turn to the details of the FY 2012 budget request and
outline areas of significant investment.

Climate Service

The FY 2012 budget request includes a proposed budget-neutral
reorganization that brings together NOAA's existing widely dispersed
climate capabilities under a single line office management structure
called the Climate Service. The proposed organization mirrors the
structure recommended by the National Academy of Public Administration
expert panel that, at Congress' request, completed a study on options
for a climate service in NOAA. The principal goal of this budget-
neutral reorganization is to better align NOAA's existing assets under
a unified leadership to more efficiently and effectively respond to the
rapidly increasing public demand for climate services. The Climate
Service would provide reliable and authoritative climate data,
information, and decision-support services, and to more effectively
coordinate with other agencies, partners, and the private sector. And--
important to this Committee and to me--the proposed structure would
strengthen the world-class science for which NOAA is justly known.
Without continued advances in the science that supports our mission,
the utility of services will degrade with time. Hence, the success of
this organization requires attention to strengthening our core science
capacity, strengthening the service-provision capacity and
strengthening the connections between the two.
NOAA is continually improving our scientific and technological
capacity to develop and deliver a range of science and services. For
example, NOAA's improved maximum precipitation predictions have been
used to develop new standards for dam design that are being implemented
around the Nation to improve dam safety and reliability. Similarly,
through collaboration with the National Association of Home Builders
and the Department of Housing and Urban Development, NOAA developed an
Air Freezing Index that the home building industry estimates saves $300
million annually in construction costs and the equivalent of 9 million
gallons of gasoline.
The budget-neutral realignment of resources within the current NOAA
budget would not change staffing levels, would not require employee
relocations, physical relocation of programs or labs, any new
facilities, and would not increase the size of NOAA's overhead. The
Climate Service headquarters would be located in Silver Spring,
Maryland.
The NOAA Climate Service, if approved by Congress, would have a
budget of $346.2 million. Of this amount, NOAA proposes $3.0 million to
support the Regional Climate Centers (RCC) in FY 2012. This funding
will maintain support for RCCs as critical NOAA partners in the
development and delivery of regional climate services. The RCCs will be
aligned with the six NOAA Climate Service Regions and fully integrated
as core components of NOAA's regional climate services partnership.
Each center will function as a source of expertise in the region,
working to identify stakeholder needs and matching these needs with the
emerging science and decision support services flowing from the Climate
Service's core capabilities. For example, this work could improve
products for farmers, who already rely on NOAA climate data,
particularly in El Nino/Southern Oscillation years, to make smart
decisions about what variety of seed to plant and the amount of
fertilizer to use. These types of forecasts can potentially provide a
$500-$960 million per year benefit to the U.S. agriculture industry.

National Weather Service (NWS)

NOAA's National Weather Service (NWS) is the Nation's first line of
defense against severe weather. NOAA provides weather, hydrologic, and
climate forecasts and warnings for the United States, its territories,
and adjacent waters for the protection of life and property and the
enhancement of the national economy. More sectors of the U.S. economy
are recognizing the impacts of weather, water, and climate on their
operations and are becoming more sophisticated at using weather-related
information to make better decisions. The NWS provides critical
information to communities and emergency managers. In 2010, the United
States experienced a number of extreme weather events including the
historic winter blizzards in the Northeast early in the year, historic
flooding in the Midwest and Tennessee, and the third most active
Atlantic hurricane season on record.
The FY 2012 request for NWS is $988 million. The request envisions
using cost-cutting and cutting-edge technologies to better support the
programs necessary to achieve NOAA's vision of delivering more reliable
forecasts, reducing weather-related fatalities, and improving the
economic value of weather, water, and climate information.
Weather-related air traffic delays cost the U.S. economy over $41
billion in 2007, according to the Congressional Joint Economic
Committee. Two thirds of these delays could be avoided with more
accurate and better-integrated weather information for decision-making.
To meet the rising demands of the air transportation industry, NOAA is
involved in a collaborative partnership with the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and other Federal agencies to create the Next
Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen). NOAA requests a $26.9
million increase to modernize our aviation weather forecasts and
warnings. This funding supports NextGen development activities,
allowing for better integration of weather information into decision-
making solutions for the FAA--potentially reducing the number of air
delays.
Wind shear is hazardous to aviation and critical to hurricane
formation and intensity. The Nation's upper air (UA) network enables
unmatched ability to detect this wind shear and enables much improved
ability to define the jet stream core by providing approximately 78,000
atmospheric profiles (wind, humidity, temperature, pressure and
altitude) per year from ground level to up to 60,000 feet. To improve
the UA network, NOAA requests a $5 million increase for new GPS
radiosondes to provide a 50 percent improvement in wind measurement
accuracy and a 6-fold improvement in vertical resolution. With this
investment, NOAA will fully fund the purchase of GPS radiosondes for
all 102 UA observing stations, ensuring improvements to weather models.
Large maritime data voids exist where no meteorological or
oceanographic data are routinely sampled due to poorly maintained
buoys. This lack of data makes it difficult for forecasters to make
accurate and timely marine warnings and forecasts and to measure the
accuracy of their forecasts. NOAA currently operates 101 moored weather
observation buoys and 49 coastal marine automated network stations.
However, over the last eight years, system performance has trended
downward to the current low of 67 percent data availability as of
February 2011. This trend will continue downward to 65 percent data
availability by 2011 without increased support. NOAA requests a $4
million increase to provide operations and maintenance funding for
damaged and destroyed buoys and to comply with new international
regulations. Funds will also be used to begin reducing the backlog of
deferred maintenance by employing charter vessels to supplement the
diminishing availability of U.S. Coast Guard ship time for servicing
the weather buoy network.
Finally, the underpinning of NOAA's products and services mentioned
previously is the model-based guidance of NOAA's operational high
performance computing (HPC). HPC provides models and model-based
estimates of both current and future states of the Earth's environment,
which are a key component of modern weather forecasts. NOAA requests an
$11 million increase towards transitioning NOAA's HPC to a new
contract, as well as continuing regular improvements to our numerical
weather prediction modeling.

National Environmental Satellite Service (NESS)

NOAA's satellites provide the data and information for forecasts
that are vital to every citizen in our Nation. From safe air, land, and
marine transportation to construction and emergency rescue missions, we
all use satellite products in our everyday lives. In FY 2010, our
satellite program saw a major milestone accomplished with the launch of
Geostationary Orbiting Environmental Satellite (GOES)-15, the final
spacecraft in the latest series. GOES-15 joined three other GOES
spacecraft in assisting the Agency's forecasters to more accurately
track life-threatening weather from tornadoes, floods, and hurricanes
to solar activity that can impact satellite-based electronics,
communications, and power industries. In FY 2010, NOAA satellites also
provided key support in the rescue of 281 people throughout and near
the United States by providing their location to emergency responders.
The proposed reorganization would also affect some programs within
the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service
(NESDIS), which would be renamed the National Environmental Satellite
Service (NESS), as all three of its Data Centers would be transferred
to the Climate Service. The FY 2012 budget request for NESS is $2
billion, which we will invest in multiple satellite acquisition
programs for the continuity of critical weather, climate, and
oceanographic data. NOAA requests an increase of $687.8M for the Joint
Polar Satellite System (JPSS), which is NOAA's responsibility under the
former National Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite
System (NPOESS) program. Polar satellites provide critical weather
forecasting for the $700 billion maritime commerce sector and provide a
value of hundreds of millions of dollars to the fishing industry. The
satellites save approximately $200 million each year for the aviation
industry in ash forecasting alone and provide drought forecasts worth
$6-8 billion to farming, transportation, tourism and energy sectors.
Both civilian and military users will use JPSS data and products, which
will continue to fulfill NOAA's requirements to provide global
environmental data used in numerical weather prediction models for
forecasts. On behalf of NOAA, the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) will serve as the lead acquisition agent for
JPSS, which supports the afternoon mission requirements. The Department
of Defense will continue the acquisition of early morning orbit assets.
NOAA is committed to working with our partners to complete the
transition from the NPOESS program and to assure the continuity of
Earth observations from space.
The GOES-R series satellites will provide critical weather
observations for severe weather events, such as hurricanes, and also
provide key enhancements in observational capabilities for climate,
oceans and coasts, and the space environment. This program is the next-
generation of geostationary satellites and provides mission continuity
through 2036. NOAA continues to support the GOES-R program with a re-
phasing, taking us from a two-satellite program to a four-satellite
program with the addition of two optional satellites (GOES-T&U), while
still providing continued satellite engineering development and
production activities for GOES-R and GOES-S.
An uninterrupted climate record is critical to understanding global
sea level rise, which directly threatens coastal communities and
ecosystems through increased exposure and erosion, more intense storm-
surge and tidal flooding, and loss of natural habitat due to drowned
wetlands. Therefore, NOAA is requesting an additional $33.0 million to
continue development of the Jason-3 satellite, which will provide
continuity of sea surface height measurements, ensuring an
uninterrupted climate record of over 20 years. The Jason-3 mission is a
joint U.S.-European funded partnership. NOAA requests an $11.3 million
increase to partner with the Taiwan National Space Organization for the
launch of 12 satellites to replenish and upgrade the Constellation
Observing System for Meteorology, Ionosphere, and Climate (COSMIC)
satellite constellation. This program is a cost effective means of
obtaining information about temperature and moisture in the atmosphere
around the globe, which will improve forecasting accuracy.
In addition, a requested increase of $47.3 million will support, in
cooperation with NASA, refurbishing the existing NASA Deep Space
Climate Observatory (DSCOVR) satellite and its solar wind sensors and
developing a Coronal Mass Ejection Imager. The data and information
provided by DSCOVR will support the operations of the Space Weather
Prediction Center, which generates accurate and timely 1 to 4 day space
weather forecasts and warnings. Space observations of geomagnetic
storms are vital to reduce negative effects to power grids, GPS,
telecommunications, the health and safety of astronauts, and the
viability of satellite systems.

Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR)

The major change as a result of the proposed reorganization to
create a Climate Service (described above) is that NOAA would also
strategically realign its existing core research line office, the
Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR), to strengthen the
agency's overall science enterprise and advance the atmospheric and
ocean, coastal, and Great Lakes research and applied science goals
expressed in the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010. OAR will
refocus its work to serve as an innovator and incubator of new science,
technologies, and applications, and an integrator of science and
technology across all of NOAA.
NOAA is committed to strengthening and integrating NOAA's science
enterprise consistent with the President's call for science and
innovation. NOAA's request includes $212 million for OAR to continue
strengthening core capabilities, such as improving our understanding of
ocean acidification and its impacts, and promoting conservation and use
of America's coastal resources through our renowned Sea Grant Program,
one of our many direct links to universities, citizens, and communities
around the Nation. NOAA will also invest in the future by supporting
innovation in weather forecasting science that can inform clean,
renewable energy generation, which is related to an MOU with the
Department of Energy. In FY 2012, NOAA requests $2 million to support
research in targeted wind resource regions across the Nation. Funding
will advance weather forecast accuracy and quality to allow for more
efficient implementation of wind power usage in the United States.
Another core capability at NOAA is exploration. The NOAA Ship
Okeanos Explorer is among the most technologically advanced research
vessels and platforms for ocean exploration in the United States. In FY
2012, NOAA is requesting an additional $1.5 million to advance the
operations of the Okeanos Explorer with the operation of telepresence
technology, which enables scientists, educators, and others to
participate and lead ocean exploration missions from remote shore-based
Exploration Command Centers; to operate and upgrade the ship's
autonomous and remotely-operated vehicles; provide additional
scientific days at sea; and reduce our huge knowledge gap of what lies
in the deep ocean.

National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS)

NMFS conserves, protects, and manages living marine resources to
sustain marine ecosystems, affords economic opportunities, and enhances
the public's quality of life. Rebuilding our Nation's fisheries is
essential to preserving the livelihoods of fishermen and related
industries. In 2008, U.S. commercial and saltwater recreational
fisheries supported 1.9 million full- and part-time jobs and generated
$163 billion in sales impacts.\1\ In FY 2012, NOAA requests $1.001
billion to support fisheries and protected resource management to
ensure an optimal balance between conservation objectives and economic
opportunities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Fisheries Economics of the United States, 2008: http: //
www.st.nmfs.noaa.gov/st5/publication/
fisheries
-
economics
-
2008.html
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOAA is making important strides to end overfishing, improve
fishery management, and put fisheries on a path to sustainability.
Working with the Regional Fishery Management Councils, in FY 2010, four
fisheries stocks were rebuilt. Based on estimates, rebuilding U.S.
fisheries would increase the current dockside value by an estimated
$2.2 billion (54 percent) annually from $4.1 billion to $6.3 billion
annually. In FY 2012, NOAA will continue to maximize the potential of
the Nation's most economically important fish stocks through sound
science and management. NOAA will invest $67 million to expand annual
stock assessments to continue to ensure Annual Catch Limits (ACL) are
based on the best available science. ACLs and accountability measures
(AM) are required under the 2007 reauthorization of the Magnuson-
Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act for all non-exempt fish
stocks, including overfished stocks, by the end of 2011 to end
overfishing. This investment will help verify that NOAA successfully
ended overfishing ensuring ACLs are set at the most optimal level
possible so that the return for fishermen is maximized while
maintaining the health of the resource.
NOAA will invest $3 million to improve the timeliness and quality
of catch monitoring in recreational fisheries to ensure recreational
fisheries are not unnecessarily restricted due to a lack of data. This
is part of a broader effort to work more closely with the recreational
fishing community.
In addition to sound science, robust management strategies are
vital to sustainable fisheries. In 2010, NOAA released the National
Catch Share Policy, and we will continue to support consideration of
catch share management by the Councils. Catch share programs, which
include limited access privilege programs and individual fishing
quotas, dedicate a secure share of fish to individual fishermen,
cooperatives, or fishing communities. In the United States, catch
shares are currently successfully implemented in 15 fisheries from
Alaska to Florida, and local Fisheries Management Councils are in the
process of developing them in several additional fisheries. Catch share
programs are difficult and sometimes controversial to implement, and we
recognize that some in Congress are concerned about them. But they have
yielded significant financial and ecological benefits to the fisheries
that utilize this system. Both here and in other countries, catch
shares help to eliminate overfishing and achieve annual catch limits,
improve fishermen's safety and profits, and reduce the negative
biological and economic effects of the traditional ``race for fish.''
This budget includes $54 million to support the voluntary establishment
of catch share programs by those Councils that want to utilize this
tool to achieve the Magnuson-Stevens Act requirements. We want to
support those Councils that believe that catch shares are the way to
better manage their fisheries but need assistance in designing and
implementing them.
In addition to fisheries, NOAA manages protected resources, such as
marine mammals and turtles. This requires balancing conservation
objectives and economic opportunities, including commercial fishing
activities and energy development. Investments in priority research in
recovery actions are required to mitigate harm and maximize economic
potential. In FY 2012, NOAA will invest an additional $2.5 million
dollars to increase NOAA's capacity for protected species stock
assessments that provide the foundation of information for decision
makers. We will continue supporting the Species Recovery Grants Program
with a requested $8.0 million increase to provide grants to states and
tribes to conduct priority recovery actions for threatened and
endangered species, including restoring habitat, monitoring population
trends, developing conservation plans, and educating the public.
Managing fisheries and protected species to their full biological
and economic potential requires additional efforts focused on
maintaining habitat and ecosystem functioning. NOAA requests $24
million for the Community Based Restoration Program, including a new $5
million effort to address larger restoration projects. NOAA plans to
increase fish passage, spawning, and rearing habitat by implementing
large-scale ecological restoration in targeted areas such as wetlands.
To support the restoration and protection of the Chesapeake Bay, we
request a $5 million increase for regional studies in the Bay. NOAA
supports the President's Executive Order to restore the Chesapeake Bay
by providing enhanced understanding of the relationships between the
Bay's living resources and habitat, coordinating protection and
restoration of key species and habitats across jurisdictional lines,
and supporting a coordinated system of monitoring platforms distributed
across the Bay.

National Ocean Service (NOS)

In July 2010, President Obama signed Executive Order Number 13547
that adopted the Final Recommendations of the Interagency Ocean Policy
Task Force and established the National Policy for the Stewardship of
the Oceans, Coasts, and the Great Lakes--reinforcing the notion that
``healthy oceans matter.'' NOS supports this policy by translating
science, tools, and services into action to address coastal threats
such as climate change, population growth, port congestion, and
contaminants in the environment. A pivotal event in 2010 was the
explosion of the BP Deepwater Horizon oil rig on April 20. Within
hours, NOAA responded, providing targeted weather forecasts and oil
spill trajectory maps and mobilizing personnel and assets to respond to
what evolved into the largest oil spill in U.S. history. The Office of
Response and Restoration (OR&R) played a critical role in our response
and is leading our efforts to assess damage caused by the event. Over
half of the U.S. Gross Domestic Product is generated in coastal
counties,\2\ and it is expected that the Nation's coastal population
will grow to more than 11 million by 2015 so NOS' services will become
more vital to the coastal environment and economy.\3\ Increasing
population density, growing economies, and increased vulnerability to
damages from hazards such as sea level rise or storms, habitat loss,
and other threats makes the task of managing coastal resources more
difficult. The President's FY 2012 Budget includes $559.6 million to
enable NOAA to continue delivering a dynamic range of nationwide
coastal and Great Lakes scientific, technical, and resource management
services to meet the vision of being a Nation with safe, healthy,
resilient, and productive oceans and coasts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Kildow, J. T., C. S. Colgan, and J. Scorse. 2009. State of the
U.S. Ocean and Coastal Economies 2009. National Ocean Economic Program.
\3\ Population Trends Along the Coastal United States: 1980-2008,
NOAA 2004
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Human uses of ocean resources (e.g., ocean-based energy, marine
aquaculture, commercial and recreational fishery products, shipping and
navigation services, and other activities) need to be managed
holistically. In FY 2012, NOAA requests $6.8 million to develop an
agency-wide capability to conduct and support Coastal and Marine
Spatial Planning (CMSP) in U.S. waters. CMSP will help us manage ocean
resources in a systematic way by evaluating competing ocean uses,
assessing opportunities and potential cumulative impacts, and working
with industry, state and local decision makers and other stakeholders,
to explicitly make trade-off decisions. CMSP is designed to focus on up
front planning. There are no regulations involved. It does not add
another layer of government but is designed to be more efficient,
effective, and reduce redundancies in decision making. With the new
Ocean Policy we are already witnessing efficiencies in our mapping and
data collection across the Federal government, with data and
information from the Departments of Defense and the Interior, and from
Coast Guard, being integrated into a common database, which will be
available to the public in the future.
The Final Recommendations of the Interagency Ocean Policy Task
Force include a framework for implementing CMSP across the United
States in a manner that respects regional variation of issues and
priorities. This initiative will significantly advance the Nation's
capability to effectively and transparently match competing human uses
to appropriate ocean areas. To further support CMSP and regional ocean
governance, NOAA requests $20 million to establish a competitive grants
program that will support regional ocean partnerships, such as the Gulf
of Mexico Alliance, South Atlantic Governor's Alliance, and the West
Coast Governor's Agreement on Ocean Health that are vital for advancing
effective ocean management. In addition, a proposed increase of $1
million in our mapping program will significantly improve the
accessibility of integrated ocean and coastal mapping data.
The BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill is a stark reminder that spills
of national significance can occur despite the many safeguards and
improvements that have been put into place since the Oil Pollution Act
of 1990 was enacted. The risk of oil spills remains a concern given
increases in marine transportation, pressures to develop domestic areas
for drilling offshore, aging infrastructure susceptible to sea level
rise and violent storms in U.S. coastal areas, and opening the Arctic
to both shipping and oil development. NOAA's OR&R is the lead trustee
for the public's coastal natural resources and an international
scientific leader for oil spill response, assessment, and restoration.
NOAA requests $2.9 million to develop an oil spill research and
development program within OR&R to advance response technologies and
capabilities, especially in deep water and Arctic environments. With
this funding, NOAA will support external grants for essential research
to provide useful information, methods, and tools for planners, oil
spill responders, and assessment practitioners. Also in support of oil
spill response, NOAA requests a $5.0 million increase to implement the
U.S. Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS) Surface Current Mapping
Plan using high frequency (HF) radar surface current measurements. HF
radar provides information vital to oil spill response, national
defense, homeland security, search and rescue operations, safe marine
transportation, water quality and pollutant tracking, and harmful algal
bloom forecasting.
The BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill made it apparent that the
economic and social well being of our coastal communities depends on
the environmental suitability of our coastal resources. Numerous
coastal communities, not only in the Gulf but all along our coasts, are
being impacted by the loss of fishing opportunities. In FY 2012, NOAA
requests $8 million to create a National Working Waterfronts grant
program to assist fishing-dependent coastal communities. These grants
will assist distressed or at-risk fishing communities by providing
resources for planning, capacity building, and other activities to
support economic diversity, resource conservation, and economic capital
growth.

Program Support

To deliver sound science and services, NOAA must continue to invest
in its information technology (IT) infrastructure, the maintenance and
construction of NOAA facilities, and the specialized aircraft and ships
that complete NOAA's environmental and scientific missions. A requested
$9.1 million increase will reduce the risk of cyber attacks by
enhancing security monitoring and response capabilities and consolidate
our IT infrastructure into a single enterprise network. This budget
includes an additional $10 million to support major restoration and
modernization projects to address critical facility condition
deficiencies and to improve safety and operating conditions in support
of NOAA's mission. The FY 2012 request ensures that NOAA's fleet of
vessels is able to provide reliable, compliant, and high-quality ship
support to NOAA programs through several increases. For example, $3.4
million is requested to support environmental compliance costs,
including ensuring that NOAA ships are not contributing to water
quality degradation. Efforts to extend and maintain the life of the
NOAA ships will be supported through an $11.6 million increase for
repair periods.
Also critical to the execution of NOAA's mission is our investment
in the future. Students in K-12 we support today become our workforce
of the future; undergraduate and graduate fellowship recipients provide
immediate dividends; and each and every citizen touched by our literacy
and outreach efforts become stewards of our natural resources. These
down payments help to fulfill the President's commitment to education.
The FY 2012 budget includes $20.8 million for NOAA's Office of
Education to implement and manage scholarship programs aimed at
fostering competitiveness in science, technology, engineering and math
by providing quality educational opportunities.

Conclusion

Overall, NOAA's FY 2012 budget request reflects the commitment that
Secretary of Commerce Gary Locke and I have made to the President to
out-educate, out-build, and out-innovate our competitors in support of
robust economic job growth. We have made tough choices to cut lower
priorities and identify cost-savings measures. The resources that are
requested in this budget are critical to the future success of meeting
our needs in climate, fisheries, coasts, and oceans. I look forward to
working with you, the Members of this Committee, and our constituents
to achieve the goals I have laid out here through the implementation of
the FY 2012 budget. Thank you for the opportunity to present NOAA's FY
2012 budget request. I am happy to respond to any questions the
Committee might have.

Chairman Hall. Alright, thank you very much for your
testimony. Again reminding committee rules that we stay within
the five minutes.
Chair recognizes himself for five minutes for questions.
First, I would like to ask you, NOAA is requesting, I
think, more than $2 billion for the National Environmental
Satellite Service, but it is not all just for Joint Polar
Satellite System or Geostationary Operation and Environmental
Satellite, or better known as JPSS or GOES, arguably, NOAA's
two highest priority systems. If you are prioritizing missions
in this very difficult economy, why aren't you spending
resources on JASON III, which is the satellite that measures
sea level rise, climate change observation, while at the same
time, warning Congress if we do not spend money on weather
satellites there will be a data gap?
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, we believe that all of the
satellite requests in this fiscal year 2012 budget request are
highly important and very useful to the American public. JASON
III is a satellite program that is joint with the Europeans,
and therefore, saves the United States a considerable amount of
money because we pool our resources. Giving communities along
coastal regions information about sea level rise is vitally
important to their planning for the future. This particular
satellite system is essential in providing that high resolution
information that enables communities to plan in a way that is
smart planning.
Chairman Hall. I thank you for that answer, but you know
that you can't have both. I know you need to prioritize within
this economy, and we know we can't afford everything, so can't
you prioritize it--and I ask you that question with your
knowing how I feel about it. I think weather is by any
reasonable person more important than sea level change. We
can't have everything we want, and I know you want the best for
the country, but can't you prioritize a little?
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, we have prioritized the items
that are in the budget. There were a number of other very
important satellite programs that were not included in this
request, and so what we have reflected here is, in fact, a
prioritization.
The Joint Polar Satellite System to which you refer is,
without doubt, one of the most important satellite programs
that we have. It is essential for us to be able to have the
information it provides to do long-term forecasts, to predict
severe storms such as hurricanes, to provide the search and
rescue information that--to receive the beacons that search and
rescue operations entail, and to provide weather information in
general for Alaska. So it is an absolutely critical system.
That doesn't mean that Jason is unimportant; it is important
for a different reason.
Chairman Hall. I don't agree with your answer, but I
respect you for not taking my full five minutes. I don't want
you to filibuster me now.
I have another question I hope I can get in five minutes.
As you may be aware, my amendment to the Continuing Resolution
would prohibit NOAA from using funds to ``implement a NOAA
Climate Service''. It passed 233 to 187 by the Congress
formerly established in the House of Representatives, opposite
position against a NOAA climate service in fiscal year 2011.
You are aware of that, yes or no?
Dr.. Lubchenco. Yes, sir.
Chairman Hall. And in my statement on the House Floor, I
argued that I was concerned that implementation of the climate
service was already underway in the form of significant
planning, transition and reorganization.
Can you give me a yes or no answer to that? Is that true?
Dr. Lubchenco. Mr. Chairman, before this administration
began------
Chairman Hall. Can you give a yes or no to that?
Dr. Lubchenco. Planning began the last administration for a
climate service, and planning continues, but we have not
implemented a climate service because Congress has not
approved.
Chairman Hall. Just to reiterate the assurances you wrote
to me in a letter this January, ``NOAA is not yet implementing
the climate service.'' Is this correct?
Dr. Lubchenco. That is correct.
Chairman Hall. And the lines of reporting for daily
operations of NOAA have not changed from the structure that was
in place January 2010, is this correct?
Dr. Lubchenco. Yes, sir.
Chairman Hall. Last question. NOAA will wait for
congressional approval before implementing any such climate
service. Is this a yes?
Dr. Lubchenco. Yes, sir, it is. Absolutely.
Chairman Hall. I thank you. I have eight seconds left. That
is just enough time for me to recognize Mrs. Johnson. I thank
you for your answers.
Dr. Lubchenco. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Johnson. Satellite coverage is essential for us to
monitor Earth, forecast weather, and protect lives and
property. You know, I fly back and forth home just about every
weekend, as many other Members here do, and very often, we
depend on the forecast to determine whether we can--have to
change our plans or go later or land somewhere that is not
home. I am wondering--I was told by Mr. Bolden that these
satellites were getting rather old, and that while we can't
predict the life of them, they are far beyond what had been
predicted. And so I am wondering now about the development of
the next generation of this polar-orbiting weather satellite.
GAO has indicated that JPSS has an inadequate funding plan,
and I am concerned that both the Continuing Resolution made
over the fiscal year 2011 budget, and the House passed H.R. 1
will lead to new costs growth and schedule delays that will set
the program back even further.
What impact is the 2011 Continuing Resolution budget having
on your ability to making progress to keep us safe?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congresswoman, thank you so much for asking
about the Joint Polar Satellite System. It is a vitally
important tool that we have that provides essential information
to do a number of things. This program is vital to the American
public in many different ways. It is essential--these polar
orbiting satellites are essential for our ability to predict
severe storms. If we want to be--our ability today to provide a
hurricane forecast that are as accurate as they are today with
two to three day advance warning are a direct result of the
information that we get from the polar orbiting satellites. So
too is the information from those satellites to provide long-
term weather forecasts. The short-term weather information that
we have comes from different satellites, the ones we call
geostationary. But the polar orbiting satellite of which we're
speaking now is essential for the long-term forecasts, and that
is very, very important for the military in making decisions
about troop deployments or refueling planes in air. It is also
essential for farmers deciding what crops to plant, or when.
So both severe storm warnings and the long-term forecasts
depend on these polar orbiting satellites.
Also very important to many individuals, especially
mariners, is the ability of these satellites to receive signals
from emergency distress beacons. Without this satellite system,
we would probably at least double the response time for search
and rescue missions, and obviously in an emergency, a matter of
minutes is often critically important, and so doubling your
response time is certainly problematic.
So for all of those reasons, the polar orbiting satellite
system is critically important. We currently need, in this
fiscal year, in fiscal year 2011, $910 million to keep this
program underway. That is not an insignificant amount. I fully
appreciate what a large number that is, but the consequences of
not having it are very severe. For every dollar that we do not
spend this year on this program, it will cost us $3 to $5 in
the future to build this program back up. If we don't have
those resources this year, we terminate contracts, we lose
people that have the expertise, and the consequences of that
will not be pretty.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much. My time is about expired.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. Thank you very much. Recognize the
gentleman, long time Member of this Committee, very valuable
member, Mr. Rohrabacher from California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and let
me note that my very first job when I was a go-for in the news
business was to read the following into a machine when I
arrived in the morning, five o'clock the morning at the news
bureau. ``Good morning. This is the National Weather Service
forecast for Los Angeles and vicinity. Today, the high will be
at Civic Center 75 degrees. Low expected tonight at 62. Coastal
Orange County, high as well will be 72 degrees, a low of 65--''
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. I appreciated that job, and--
----
Chairman Hall. Do we have a new reading--another reading of
that?
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, I thought--I was very proud to give
the National Weather Service forecast, and that was very
important news, actually. We got all kinds of hits on that--it
was a telephone service--and thousands and thousands of people
called in every day from Los Angeles to get their weather. I
would hope that what you are doing now in your restructuring of
NOAA, so that you now have a climate service, that that does
not distract from the important work that your organization has
been doing in terms of weather.
So I guess maybe what I should ask is will this change of
name and structure into the Climate Service--will it in any way
distract from the resources? Will you then be transferring
resources from weather to spending those resources on things
like a human adaptation for the change in climate that may take
centuries in order to see that change?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman Rohrabacher, thank you for
highlighting how important the National Weather Service is. It
is vitally important to save lives and property, and it is
widely recognized as being so. The 122 weather forecast offices
we have around the Nation will be delighted to-- have heard--
your rendition and to recognize their importance. The budget
request for the National Weather Service for this year
increases the number of very important areas that are essential
for the investments in fundamental science that enable us to
continue to get better and better at our forecasts. In fact, we
have seen significant improvements in our forecasts, but there
is ample room for more, and this budget requests a number of
items to advance that agenda.
Aviation weather, which is vitally important, is--we have
an increase targeted for that for operation and maintenance of
our weather buoys that give us vital information about what is
happening over the ocean. For weather and climate, super
computers. I would highlight those three areas where there
are------
Mr. Rohrabacher. How much money would you expect--all these
things I support. That is great. We all do. They are very
significant to the jobs and well-being of Americans. But when
you get to the idea of predicting the climate so that you will
have adaptation--and of course, my reading of that is that we
are talking about ocean rise, which may take a century or 2
centuries for us to see it. Where is the money coming--how much
is being spent on adaptation versus weather, and where is the
money coming from if it is not coming from what you were doing
in weather?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, the creation of the climate
service--the proposed creation of the climate service entails
an internal reorganization that does not change the basic
functions of the different offices that they are currently
executing. It puts those offices together in a way that they
can be more effective in delivering the kind of--not just
short-term, 10-day weather, but longer term weather information
that is properly called climate, but that is actually months to
years out.
For example, you know that this is a La Nina year, and
therefore, we can analyze past La Nina years and------
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right.
Dr. Lubchenco. --predict that under these circumstances, we
know that this will be--you know, we can tell you something
about precipitation for southern California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And that is very important to a lot of
people, especially in California. Let us hope that with that
type of service that you provide so well now, isn't undercut by
some of the more trendy frou-frou things like we have seen--I
won't go into detail, but we have seen that here. So thank you
very much.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. Gentleman's time is expired. Now
I recognize Mr. Miller, the gentleman from North Carolina, the
ranking member on Energy and Environment, for five minutes.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Lubchenco, one of the certainly difficult tasks that
the Administration faced is dealing with an oil spill that
wasn't supposed to happen, and in some ways the administration
equated itself well, and in others, less well. But could you
please explain how you are going to work with other agencies to
monitor and understand what the effect of the oil has been in
the long term? We have heard a lot about how well it is being
dispersed, how it is being absorbed, degrading, whatever. What
is the plan going forward?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, part of NOAA's responsibilities
with respect to not only Deepwater Horizon spill, but other oil
spills, is to participate actively in the process that is known
as the Natural Resource Damage Assessment Process, or NRDA.
This is a legal, scientific, and economic process that is done
in conjunction with the federal trustees of which NOAA and the
Department of Commerce, the Department of Interior, Department
of Defense, are the three federal trustees, and there are five
state trustees. Those trustees work collectively together to
evaluate the impact that the spill had on natural resources in
the Gulf, and the public's loss to those natural resources, and
build a court case to take, if necessary, to court in order to
get the resources to do restoration. NOAA is providing much of
the scientific underpinnings for that evaluation of the damage
that was done because of the spill to these natural resources
and the public's loss to them. That is a process that is well
under way. Some damages are very easy to see, oiled birds,
oiled turtles or dolphins. Others are much more difficult to
measure directly, impacts of small droplets of oil on fish eggs
or fish larvae, for example, or crabs or shrimp.
And so this is a process that necessarily needs to take the
appropriate amount of time. We are conducting multiple research
expeditions on ship as well as very considerable activities on
the shore, and have been pretty much since the beginning of the
spill, in order to evaluate the damage that was done.
Mr. Miller. Dr. Lubchenco, unlike Mr. Rohrabacher, I have
never depended for my livelihood on your weather products, but
I recognize their importance. Could you tell us how what you do
in weather forecasting or weather generally is going to be
affected by the proposed cuts that were included by H.R. 1, the
continuing resolution that the House passed a few weeks ago?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman Miller, I don't--the cuts--it is
difficult to say the exact consequences of H.R. 1 on specific
programs, because we don't have that fine-tuned information.
What I can tell you is that it is likely to be very devastating
to our ability to continue to provide the kind of weather
information that Americans depend upon to save lives, to save
property.
The cuts are of a nature that there would be significant
hits throughout NOAA's programs, and we have very grave
concerns about exactly what those would look like.
Mr. Miller. Okay. You distinguished in your testimony
between climate and weather. Can you tell us how weather
forecasting really fits in with climate forecasting, and is it
important that we have climate predictions and why?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, there really is a continuum
between weather and climate. I think Mark Twain famously said
that climate is what you expect and weather is what you get.
And in fact, it really is a continuum. The ways that scientists
go about making predictions and forecasts about either weather
or climate entail different types of models. Weather
forecasting models are fundamentally different from climate
forecasting models. The weather models are very short-term.
They are initialized with current immediate conditions. They
take into account changes in the atmosphere, they are happening
now, and look out a number of days to a week or so. So we have
7- to 10-day forecasts. Those are different types of models
from climate models, which are farther out, so 15 days and
farther out are a different type of model, which is why we say,
you know, distinguish between climate and weather.
Both are vitally important and one of the major research
challenges now is to bring those models together so that we
have better resolution of what is happening in the near--not
just the short-term, but the medium scale that has been very,
very difficult because of the need to merge those models. Both
are very, very important.
We are getting absolutely inundated with requests for
information that is months to years to decades out, not
centuries, but people want to plan and know what--water
managers, for example, or city planners or farmers are trying
to evaluate what should they plan for for next year or for the
next year, and it is that type of information where we see a
huge opportunity to provide what we call climate services that
will help in that type of planning.
Mr. Miller. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. At this time, recognize Congressman
Bartlett, the gentleman from Maryland.
Mr. Bartlett. Thank you very much. As you know, there is an
indisputable fact that atmospheric CO
2
is rising.
Nobody disagrees on that. The facts are in considerable
dispute. The number of people that believe that because
CO
2
is a greenhouse gas that it will warm the Earth,
absent other causes, this will cause short-term climate changes
and acidification of the ocean. Climate changes could be
disruptive. The acidification of the ocean could be
catastrophic in the long run. Ultimately, if we really do get
warmer, the sea levels will rise.
There are a number of people who think this is all a bunch
of hooey, and they keep criticizing us, but I want to point out
that there are two other constituencies that have common cause
in wanting exactly the same solution that the folks who are
concerned about CO
2
footprint want, and that is to
move away from fossil fuels to renewables, because it reduces
CO
2
released into the atmosphere. One of those other
groups are those who are concerned about national security. We
have only two percent of the world's oil. We use 25 percent of
the world's oil. We import two-thirds of what we use. The
obvious solution to that is exactly the same solution that
those people have who are concerned about CO
2

increase and climate change and so forth. It is to move away
from fossil fuels to renewables.
The third group that has common cause with this are those
who understand, as Hymen Rickover did more than 50 years ago
that oil is finite. It will run out. The world almost certainly
has now reached what we call peak oil, that is, its maximum
ability to produce oil. It is about 84, 85 million barrels a
day. We are stuck there which is why our economy is in trouble.
It is not going to rise. The solution to that problem obviously
is to move away from fossil fuels to renewables so that the
fossil fuels will last us longer and we will have an energy for
our activities now.
I hope that these three groups will stop sniping at each
other's premise and lock arms and march forward, because
although they have three very different agendas, they have
exactly the same solution to these very different problems.
Now for a question. I am on the Armed Services Committee,
and obviously we have an enormous interest in climate and
weather as we plan. What are you doing to make sure that your
efforts are collaborative and you don't have duplicative
efforts with the Department of Defense for weather?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, we work very closely with the
Department of Defense, and in particular, with the Navy on a
number of--in a number of different ways. Those include both
oceanographic information, weather information, and climate
information on all of those fronts. We have active exchanges of
information and we--as far as I know, there is no duplication
of information. It is nicely complimentary. We keep them
informed of what we are doing, they keep us informed, at least
to some extent, to what they are doing, and there are a number
of venues in which--that exist to keep that flow of information
going.
We know from what the Navy in particular, but DoD more
generally, have told us is that what we provide to them is
essential for their planning purposes, both short-term as well
as long-term.
I had the pleasure of visiting the aircraft carrier, the
Harry S. Truman, about a year and a half ago now, and was
amazed when I walked around inside, the room that had all of
the equipment to give them state-of-the-art information about
what the conditions were when they were running war game
exercises, and a vast number of the computers in the room were
showing NOAA information, whether it was oceanographic models
that they were running or weather information or whatever,
nautical charts. And so we clearly have, even at the scale of a
ship, a very tight collaboration and interaction. I think it is
a very productive exchange. They are very concerned about this
Joint Polar Satellite System and the potential loss of that
system to our ability to provide the long-term weather forecast
for them that are very important in making decisions about
troop deployments, for example.
So although I am sure there is always room for improvement
in terms of interactions, I think we have a very productive
interaction and exchange with the Department of Defense, but I
would highlight the Navy in particular.
Mr. Bartlett. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Dr.
Lubchenco, for coming here this morning.
One of the things that I am concerned about is the
reliability--the long-term reliability and the short-term
reliability of the existing satellites, and how important this
program is to making sure that we have reliable information.
I hope I am not beating a dead horse, but could you comment
on that?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, are you referring specifically
to the Joint Polar Satellite System, or satellites in general?
Mr. McNerney. No, the Joint Polar Satellite System.
Dr. Lubchenco. There currently are polar satellites that
are in space now that provide--there is one satellite that
provides us with much of the information I described earlier
that is absolutely essential for severe weather forecasts, for
long-term weather forecasts, for search and rescue, and for
weather in Alaska. These satellites orbit the poles and give us
a very different type of information from a different type of
satellite system, which are geostationary satellites.
Those geostationary satellites, there is one that sits
pretty much over the East Coast and sees the eastern half of
the country, there is one that sits over the West Coast, and
they stay in place and constantly see the same place. They are
very high up. The polar orbiting satellites orbit at a much
lower orbit, and are essential to tracking what is coming
across the Pacific, for example, or following storms as they
are developing. POES,the current satellite that is up there
will not--it has a finite life span, and this Joint Polar
Satellite System is to build the satellite and the instruments
to replace that satellite when it is no longer functional.
The current C.R. has already resulted in a delay in that
program of around 12 months. Additional delays because of lack
of resources will delay that program even further. What that
means is that down the road, we will inevitably have a gap
where we will not have the ability to do severe storm warnings
as we do today.
Mr. McNerney. So you are saying that this is inevitable at
this point, that we will absolutely have a gap because of the
longevity of the current polar satellites?
Dr. Lubchenco. It is highly likely we will have a gap, and
the longer we wait, the longer that gap gets. If you consider
that for each dollar that we don't spend this year on this
program, it will cost $3 to $5 to bring that program up. Even
those additional resources will not close that gap, so there is
great urgency in addressing this problem.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Another thing I would like to ask
is about the need for a federal clearinghouse for climate data.
What I would like to see is a lack of overlap or lack of
duplication in that regard. Do you see NOAA becoming a key
player or a key--a central player in terms of providing data to
federal agencies and other agencies that are interested in
climate data?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, we currently serve that
function. We house much of the climate data and make it all
publicly available. We routinely do peer reviews and quality
checks to ensure that it is of the highest quality. We share
that information very broadly.
Last year, we reorganized the information that is available
through our website to create a more user-friendly way to
access all the data and information that we have that concerns
climate. There is ample opportunity to improve in that regard,
and we will continue to do that, and the requests in the
current budget are in part designed to help move that ahead.
Mr. McNerney. Has there been any criticism of the
objectivity of that data or the accuracy of that data?
Dr. Lubchenco. Every investigation of those programs has
concluded that it is very well run, that the data are
trustworthy. They are, in fact, widely considered to be the
gold standard.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, my time is up. I yield back.
Chairman Hall. Chair recognizes gentleman from Maryland,
Dr. Harris.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much. Thank you, Dr. Lubchenco,
for coming before the Committee.
I have four questions I am going to ask.
First is when I look at the chart of the request, the
fiscal year 2012 request is about 35 percent more than the
fiscal year 2008 request, is that right? Fiscal year 2008 is
$4.07 billion, fiscal year 2012 is $5.49 billion.
Dr. Lubchenco. That is correct.
Mr. Harris. Okay. So it is--so what you are asking for is
the American people, at a time when everybody is tightening
their belt, we are tightening everybody's belt, you want 35
percent more, okay? And I will go through the justifications in
your testimony.
Let me talk a little bit about some of that spending,
because one of it goes to a satellite called Discover, which in
my understanding is going to spend tens of millions of dollars
to put an 11-year-old satellite bus. You know, you got to put
new sensors on it, but you know, technology--why would we
choose that path, spending tens of millions of dollars to
refurbish an 11-year-old satellite bus instead of doing what I
understand is available, which is letting a private company
launch the same sensors and just buy the information? I mean,
why are we doing something that a private company can do?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, the Discover satellite has been
essentially kept in good shape, and the analyses that we did
suggest this is the most cost-effective way to get critically
important information, by refurbishing it and then flying it.
Mr. Harris. Can you provide me a copy of that analysis?
Dr. Lubchenco. Yes, sir.
Mr. Harris. Specifically versus going to a private------
Dr. Lubchenco. Yes, sir.
Mr. Harris. Okay, thank you very much.
Let me go on to one other issue--two other issues that
regard the fisheries. One is this idea of catch shares, because
I think there is, again, tens of millions of dollars going into
establishing catch shares. My understanding in talking with
fishermen in Maryland, we have fishermen both in the bay and in
the ocean, that one of the results has been to force smaller
fishermen basically out of business. They just put them out of
business. They can't afford to buy the catch shares to make a
living that they would have to otherwise, so they end up
selling them to larger corporations, literally corporations who
then go and just hire fishermen to catch. So we are kind of
putting the--I hate to say mom and pop fishermen, but mom and
pop fishermen kind of out of business as small business owners.
Is that, in fact, what does occur? I don't say all the time,
but is that occurring? Is that what we have been observing to
occur where we have established catch shares?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, thanks for raising that issue
because I think it is a common misconception about catch
shares. Any particular catch share program depends on the way
it is designed, and much of our focus now is helping to ensure
that they are designed in a way that reflects the wishes of the
fishermen in the area, and I think there is broad recognition
that preventing consolidation is highly desirable. We are very
strong champions of and believe that we need a diverse fleet,
and that the small boat fishermen are a vital component of
that.
Mr. Harris. But my question is, is that--has that been
observed, the fact that the smaller boat fishermen, in fact,
are driven out of the business as primary owners? I mean, they
may end up working for one of these corporations that hold the
catch share licenses, but is that--you know, I met with a group
who were put out of business in the scallops fishery off the
Maryland coast. You know, I sat across the table from him so I
know it exists. I mean, what is the experience nationally,
though? Does that occur? Is that one of the things that has
occurred? I know you are concerned in minimizing it, but is
that------
Dr. Lubchenco. In some catch share programs that were not
well-designed there have been individuals who have not been
allocated a share. I think it is important to realize that
fishermen don't have to buy a share. They are given a share
that is based on their past fishing history. But the rules of
design for a catch-chare problem are determined by the fishery
management councils on which fishermen sit, and so they have
the opportunity------
Mr. Harris. I understand some fishermen sit on it. I
understand that, and again, it just kind of politicizes what is
going on in the private sector.
Finally, there is a request for a $5 million increase for
regional studies in the Chesapeake Bay. Are these grants? Who
are going to get these? And second one is, you know, it says we
are going to understand the relationship between some of the
things that have to do with cleaning up the bay and the next
panel will have someone--I am going to ask specifically about
TMDL's, but don't you do the research before you establish the
policies? I mean, what are we studying here with this $5
million and who is that money going to?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, I frankly don't recall that
specific program and I would be happy to get that information
to you. I know that we collaborate closely with other agencies
as part of a larger focus on the Chesapeake, but I will get you
information on exactly what our request is.
Mr. Harris. Thank you. In light of the GAO study that
reports on multiple duplications, I would love to see that, and
I thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. At this time I recognize the
gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Wu.
Mr. Wu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would also like to
thank the gentlelady from Maryland for her courtesy in
permitting me to ask a couple of questions, and also then fit
in a few constituent meetings.
Dr. Lubchenco, thank you for your service to our Nation. We
in the Pacific Northwest are very proud of your service. We
followed your career earlier at Oregon State. It is a fine
academic background, and we are very proud of your national
service now.
In particular, I would like to comment that in my studies
of the catch share program, my fishermen are generally in favor
of implementing a catch share program and I would like to thank
you, and I would like to thank Secretary Locke for making some
adjustments so that our catch share program in the Pacific
Northwest can be implemented sooner, which is what my fishermen
would prefer to have happen.
Secondly, with respect to this satellite program that has
been the subject of some discussion, I would just like to
insert in the record that as the former chair of the
Subcommittee with jurisdiction over that satellite program, I
have developed more knowledge of that satellite program than I
had ever hoped--even as someone who is very interested in
satellites, that most importantly, this is a program that has
had a track record in three administrations. Not one, not two,
but three administrations, a good half of the Clinton
administration, all of the Bush administration for eight years,
and now a little bit of run time in the Obama administration.
While I have not agreed with all of the judgments made by each
of the three administrations, I believe that the data from that
satellite is necessary to establish some data independence from
nations which may or may not always share data with us, but we
hope that it is a sharing program and that data would permit us
to participate in that sharing.
I would like to ask you, Dr. Lubchenco, about a specific
budget item in the NOAA budget, and that is that the NOAA
budget has a specific proposal to create a structure for the
NOAA Climate Service, and that this structure involves creating
a new line office by performing a programmatic reorganization
of existing resources. One of the primary line offices that is
proposed to transfer over there is the Research and Program
Resources from the Oceanic and Atmospheric Research Office, or
OAR, and OAR is the research enterprise of NOAA's basic and
innovative research. This is very, very important.
Dr. Lubchenco, how do you plan to balance the need to
provide climate services based on good climate research,
balancing that with the need to ensure OAR does not lose its
current basic and innovative science-driven research?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman Wu, it is nice to see you. Thank
you very much for your nice comments. The Catch Share Program
in the West Coast was seven years in the making and has really
benefited from considerable input by fishermen up and down the
West Coast for this--the ground fish ITQ, and I am very pleased
that it has the support that it has, and that the fishermen are
telling you that they are pleased with it. I too have met with
them a lot, and they are saying we can finally see the light at
the end of the tunnel, and we are anxious to get underway with
this program.
You mentioned the Joint Polar Satellite System, which
obviously is very, very high priority for us. We--Secretary
Locke and I heard you and other Members of Congress loudly and
clearly when we first came in, and you said this is a flawed
program, fix it. And I am very proud of actions that we have
taken with the White House to put this program on a path to
success. What is critical now is that we have the funding to be
able to deliver on this new path, and I appreciate your
attention to it, because you recognize how vital it is.
On your question with respect to the climate service, this
is indeed an internal reorganization that is proposed. It would
not change the research that anyone at NOAA is doing. It simply
makes the research and services pieces be more tightly
connected, so that they can be more effective in providing
climate information, by way of services and data, to the
American public. It does not undermine research at NOAA. That
is a high priority of mine, to strengthen scientific research,
and I pledge to do everything I can to continue to have
research be very strong in every line office. But we are
looking to the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research to be
the leader in innovation and integration of research. Thank
you.
Chairman Hall. Gentleman's time has expired. At this time
recognize Mrs. Adams, gentlelady from Florida.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Dr.
Lubchenco.
Before I get started, I want to also reiterate what my
colleague said about Catch Share. My fishermen too are
concerned about that, and they have brought it to my attention,
and I have met with several of them. They are worried about
being put out of business by larger groups, and along that
line, I would like to talk to you for a moment about an issue
which is an incredibly urgent matter, and it is something that
I find very troubling. You are probably aware of--in July of
'08 your agency issued a letter to the South Atlantic Fishery
Management Council that the South Atlantic red snapper stock is
overfished and undergoing overfishing. This is a massive
problem for the State of Florida. The decision is costing
thousands of jobs in Florida, and again, it is about jobs in
the economy, and throughout the country, and will potentially
decimate a $13 billion industry. I have heard from fishermen in
my district, and across the state, that NOAA's efforts to
manage the fish populations are hurting fishermen in the name
of incorrect and insufficient science--scientific data.
Now, I was there at one of the meetings, and heard one of
your people, one of your representatives, say that it was
flawed. As recently as February 17, Roy Crabtree, the Southeast
Regional Administrator for NOAA's Fishery Service said, ``The
latest science suggests that the planned area closure is not
necessary for the red snapper population to continue to
improve.'' NOAA website says, ``NOAA is an agency that enriches
life through science.'' Could you explain what science you are
using to enrich the lives of fishermen in Florida with these
rules to help--halt fishing red snapper, and beyond that, how
are you even able to pay for this science when in your own
budget request you are decreasing the amount of money being
spent on the research?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congresswoman, the fisheries, especially for
the red snapper to which you refer, are vitally important ones.
I fully appreciate how important they are to the economy, not
only of Florida, but to the region generally. We are required
by the Magnus and Stevens Reauthorization Act to use the best
available information to make our determinations about the
status of different stocks, and to set catch limits
accordingly.
Mrs. Adams. Can you please be very succinct? Because I have
more questions, and I do want some answers. But your own people
are saying your data is flawed. So if your data is flawed, and
they recognize it, why are you implementing it without further
research? Just quickly, shortly.
Dr. Lubchenco. Congresswoman, the initial determination was
based on information that was available. New information became
available that is more current, and said that the closure is no
longer needed. And so we are doing exactly what we have been
told by Congress to do, which is to update decisions based on
new information when it becomes available, and that is exactly
what we have done.
Mrs. Adams. So are you going to halt the closures?
Dr. Lubchenco. Yes. It is no longer needed because we have
new information, and we have announced that.
Mrs. Adams. Okay. I had another question. I am trying to
get back to it. There is just so much to ask in so little time.
There was something in your testimony a few--I think it was
last year's testimony, I am trying to get to it, about the
acidification of the ocean, and I can't find it now, so I guess
I will wait, and I will come back around when we have more
questions.
Chairman Hall. Are you finished? Okay. Thank you. Chair
recognizes the gentle lady from Maryland, Mrs. Edwards.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Dr.
Lubcheco. It is good to see you again, and I just want to let
you know how much we really do appreciate all of the work of
the fine Federal workers------
Dr. Lubchenco. Thank you.
Ms. Edwards. --at NOAA, and the work that they do for us. I
want to ask you for a minute, again, about the impact of some
of the--both--some of the budget considerations that are
floating all around Capitol Hill, and particularly the
continuing resolution that passed out of the House. And I know
we are--continue to work on that, but I wonder if you could
share with us what it would mean in real terms, in terms of
staffing, for NOAA, some of the budget cuts that are projected
for the agency. And can you confirm that you would have to
absorb the severe cuts that are planned in the budget with
personnel actions like furloughs?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congresswoman, thank you for recognizing our
Federal workers. We greatly value our folks at NOAA and know
what a spectacular job they do day in and day out. Because we
are about halfway through this fiscal year, the longer we go
without having clarity about what our budget is, the more
challenging it is to make adjustments for the remaining part of
the year.
It is premature to say exactly what those consequences to
Federal workers will be. Obviously there are--lots of
speculation, and even that speculation is very challenging to
workers who have great uncertainty about what is down the road
for them. So the uncertainty itself is problematic. But
because--we are in the process of doing various scenarios,
various planning, as are all agencies, but it is hard to be
specific until we know exactly what the bottom line is and, you
know, what the specific constraints are. I can tell you that it
is looking like it would be very, very significant, very
serious.
Ms. Edwards. I mean, the reality is it wouldn't be--I mean,
you can't very well cut programs. I mean, obviously we need to
continue things like the weather service and other services,
and so that only leaves people. But that is just my conclusion.
I want to ask you, you know, about the end of this fiscal year,
as we are entering hurricane season, even today, in this region
we are, you know, I pulled up my notice from the weather
service that tells us that I had better be on the lookout for
floods in my neighborhood, and in neighborhoods all throughout
this region. Those are things that we couldn't know if we
didn't have the weather service, if we didn't have NOAA. It is
certainly--those are certainly things that we couldn't know if
we didn't have satellite coverage.
And so can you describe for us what some of these--the
longer term implications are of these budget considerations
when it comes to leaving a gap? I mean, my understanding is
that, with the cuts that are being proposed, there is potential
for a 100 percent gap in satellite coverage over the long term.
And what that means to agriculture, to commerce, to moving
goods all around the--this country is pretty--energy, pretty
significant. And so I wonder if you could describe from your
testimony, when we vote to cut funding for NOAA, we are
essentially voting to expose people to risk. Their lives, their
businesses, their property and all the rest.
Dr. Lubchenco. Congresswoman, the bread and butter services
that we provide to Americans each and every day depend on those
satellite systems. They depend on the Federal workers. They
depend on the other observing systems, whether they be buoys or
anything else, and those are very much at risk with some of the
budget cuts that are being discussed. The kinds, the quality of
weather forecasts that people take for granted today, we would
not have that should there--should we not have funding for this
Joint Polar Satellite System. There would inevitably be a gap.
You cannot close that gap with more money, and we would not
have severe storm warnings. We would not have maritime
forecasts for shipping. We would not have long term weather
forecasts. Search and rescue times would be increased very
significantly. Each and every one of those is a problem. All of
them together would be very, very significant impact.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you very much. And I will just close,
and I--again, I want to really say thank you very much for the
work that NOAA does. It is incredibly important to our lives,
to our economy, to all of our communities. And I hope that, in
Congress, we actually recognize the danger and the jeopardy
that we put in peoples' lives and their businesses and their
communities when we willy-nilly cut the important science
investigation, research, personnel and programs of the--of
NOAA. So thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. Chair recognizes the vice-chair of this
Committee, Mr. Sensenbrenner.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Dr.
Lubchenco, at a December 2, 2009 hearing on ``The
Administration's view on the state of climate science'' before
the former House Select Committee on Energy Independence and
Global Warming, Representative Inslee asked you if there was
anything about the CRU e-mails that affect ocean acidification
at all. You replied, ``Congressman, I haven't read all of the
e-mails, but I have seen nothing in them in those that I have
read about ocean acidification. It is really not an area that
is something that that particular research group was focused
on.''
Your response to Mr. Inslee indicated that you had read at
least some of the e-mails, yet on page nine of the enclosure to
the DOE Inspector General response, it is stated, ``Dr.
Lubchenco told us she could not be sure whether she had seen
any of the CRU e-mails or received a briefing from her staff on
the results of NOAA's CRU e-mail review prior to testifying
before the House Select Committee.'' Now, can you please
explain this apparent discrepancy? Had you or had you not read
any of the CRU e-mails prior to December 2, 2009 hearing?
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, to the best of my knowledge, I
had read some of them, but certainly not all of them.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Then why did you tell Mr. Inslee one
thing and the Inspector General another?
Dr. Lubchenco. When I was responding to the Inspector
General's staff, I said I could not recall if I had read them
or not.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, the thing says ``Dr. Lubchenco
told us she could not be sure whether she had seen any of the
CRU e-mails or received a briefing''. Now, I think you--what
you have said is consistent, but the fact that there was doubt
about this issue, doesn't that indicate that you really weren't
concerned about the Climategate scandal that the e-mails
exposed?
Dr. Lubchenco. I was concerned about the Climategate e-
mails, but they--there were a large, large number of e-mails
involved, and I simply did not have time, or think it
appropriate for me to take time, to sit down and read through
each and every one.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, why not? Because if the e-mails
were correct, it indicated that the fix was on to come up with
a certain conclusion on what the science of global warming was,
to the exclusion of scientists that had contrary views.
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, as I think you are aware, every
single investigation has indicated that there was no
manipulation of the climate information or the climate------
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well------
Dr. Lubchenco. --data.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. --that depends upon how the
investigations were put together. You know, certainly the e-
mails indicated that, when there was a suggestion that people
be fired in scientific journal--from scientific journal
editorial boards, that whenever there was a contrary viewpoint,
the people on the other side, you know, basically denigrated
the scientific credentials of those who came up with that. And
none of those internal investigations actually did the type of
peer review that is needed for those of us who are not
scientists to be able to reach a conclusion.
Now, you know, it seems to me that what you have just
testified to indicates a very callous lack of concern over the
consequences of what the e-mails said, because apparently
folks, and I am not sure whether you were one of them or not,
had already decided the fact that the e-mails were to be, you
know, completely denigrated and not even look for an
investigation. Now, you know, maybe all this came out of a
White House science advisor's office, because when he was at
MIT his name was on those e-mails. I don't think you have
really blown away the cloud of doubt on it, and I thank you for
your answer, and yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hall. Thank the gentleman. Recognize Mrs. Fudge,
gentlelady from Ohio, five minutes.
Ms. Fudge. I have no questions, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Chairman Hall. Chair recognizes Mr. Smith, the Chairman of
Judiciary, for five minutes.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Lubchenco, I would
like to address my first question to you, and it is related to
the BP Deepwater Horizon oil budget report of last year. You
are on record, and individuals in your office are on record, as
not wanting to distinguish between oil that was dispersed
chemically and oil that was dispersed naturally. And I have to
say to you that a lot of people feel that that was an
intentional effort to give the Administration more credit than
maybe they deserve by blurring the lines between those two
different kinds of dispersals. Can you--you are welcome to
respond to that, but I think any reasonable person would say
that if you are trying to blur the distinctions between the
two, that is going to give the Administration more credit,
rather than being scientifically accurate.
Dr. Lubchenco. Congressman, I completely agree with you
that it is important to distinguish between oil that was
chemically or naturally dispersed, and, in fact, NOAA is on
record for continuing to want to do that, and the oil budget
report that was released, in fact, did make a distinction
between those two types of------
Mr. Smith. Right, but aren't you on record in e-mails with
your Deputy Administrator as opposing distinguishing the two,
or you are not?
Dr. Lubchenco. No, sir.
Mr. Smith. Okay.
Dr. Lubchenco. The two processes by which that happen are
very different------
Mr. Smith. Right.
Dr. Lubchenco. --and it is important--oil that was shooting
out of the Macondo well------ is naturally dispersed because of
the physical turbulence that is right where it is coming out.
And use of chemical dispersants------
Mr. Smith. Right.
Dr. Lubchenco. --also broke up oil into small microscopic
droplets------
Mr. Smith. Um-hum.
Dr. Lubchenco. --and we believed it was very important to
distinguish what oil--what fraction of oil came from naturally
versus chemically dispersed, and, in fact, that is what was in
the report, both the initial report that was released on August
4, as well as------
Mr. Smith. Right.
Dr. Lubchenco. --the much more lengthy technical documents
that provided all the background information. That went into
even greater detail when it was released in November.
Mr. Smith. What percentage was chemically dispersed and
what percentage was naturally dispersed?
Dr. Lubchenco. The final report indicated--our initial
estimates were that eight percent was chemically dispersed.
That was later revised upward, with more information, to 16
percent of the total amount of oil that was spilled. The 4.9
billion--million barrels, plus or minus ten percent, 16 percent
of that was chemically dispersed.
Mr. Smith. All the government efforts were responsible for
16 percent of the dispersal, and the rest was natural? 84
percent natural?
Dr. Lubchenco. I am sorry, around one-quarter of the--all
of the oil that was spilled was dispersed. Of that------
Mr. Smith. Right.
Dr. Lubchenco. So 16 percent of 100 percent was chemically
dispersed. So of--this--I am sorry, this is confusing.
Mr. Smith. No, no, I------
Dr. Lubchenco. Of the quarter--of the total that was
dispersed------
Mr. Smith. Right.
Dr. Lubchenco. --more was dispersed chemically than
naturally. And I can give you the precise numbers, if that
would be useful to you.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Appreciate that. Thank you. Thank you----
--
Dr. Lubchenco. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. --Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. All right. Mr. Sarbanes, my gosh, I am glad
to see you. Recognize you for 12 or 15 minutes, whatever you
need.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to wait
until the next panel, but I do understand from my staff that
you were thinking of having me nominated for the Nobel Prize
for patience, which my children, particularly my two teenage
sons, would have great amusement at hearing. So--but I will not
be------
Chairman Hall. It would be a lot better than a bunch of
them that have been recognized. So I thank you, Dr. Lubchenco,
for your testimony, and I thank the Members for their
questions. I thank you for hanging so close to the five minute
deal. Members of the Committee may have additional questions,
Dr. Lubchenco, and we will ask you to respond to those in
writing. The record will remain open for two weeks for
additional comments from Members. And you are excused, and we
will move to our next panel, and we thank you for your very
valuable time.
Dr. Lubchenco. Thank you, Chairman Hall, and Members of the
Committee. I greatly appreciate your attention to our budget.
Chairman Hall. Okay. We will move now to our second
panelist, Dr. Anastas from EPA, and I welcome you, Dr. Anastas.
Prior to his services as Assistant Administrator, Dr. Anastas
was the Director of the Center for Green Chemistry and Green
Engineering at Yale University. He was Chief of the Industrial
Chemistry Branch and EPA's Office of Prevention, Pesticides and
Toxic Substances.
This is also the third time you have appeared before the
Committee, and I am pleased that you could be here, and I thank
you for being here. As our witness should know, spoken
testimony is limited to five minutes, after which the Members
of the Committee will have five minutes each to ask questions.
And we ask you to do your best, but your importance tells us
that we will have some leeway there if you want to finish
answering a question. But try and stay as close to five minutes
as you can. I think if I were you, I would want to answer them
and then wind it all up. How about--who is next here? Dr.
Anastas, we recognize you now for your first five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. PAUL ANASTAS, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE
OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT (ORD), U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY

Dr. Anastas. Thank you very much, and good morning,
Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson, and the Members of the
Committee. My name is Paul Anastas. I am the Assistant
Administrator for the Office of Research and Development at the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and the science advisor
for the agency. I am a trained synthetic organic chemist from
Brandeis University, and prior to my current position, I was on
the faculty at Yale University and the Director of the Center
for Green Chemistry and Green Engineering at Yale. It is a
pleasure to be with you here this morning to discuss the
President's fiscal year 2012 budget for the Office of Research
and Development at the EPA. As the Members of this Committee
know, the EPA is not only a regulatory agency, EPA is a science
agency. I am happy to discuss the excellent science that is
taking place at the EPA.
As millions of Americans are cutting back and spending
less, they expect the same good fiscal sense out of their
government. The EPA research and development budget reflects
this responsibility and the hard choices needed to support both
the fiscal health of our nation and the research needed to
protect the health of the American people and the environment.
EPA research is unique. In the environmental science community
we conduct both intramural and extramural research that spans
across the entire spectrum of scientific disciplines in support
of EPA's mission. And while there are other agencies that focus
on environmental issues and other agencies that focus on public
health, the EPA is the agency, and the Federal government deals
with both human and environmental health, and the intersection
of these two areas.
The President's 2012 budget includes $584 million for the
Office of Research and Development, a decrease of $12.6
million. While this decreased budget reflects the tough choices
that are needed in today's fiscal climate, it allows the EPA to
continue conducting the research and development necessary to
protect all Americans. We will continue to address complex
environmental challenges of the 21st century by pursuing the
latest science with the most cutting edge research tools
available. We will focus on efforts to understand the
environmental threats we face and on the innovative approaches
that promote synergy between human health and environmental
protection that catalyze economic growth.
With the 2012 budget, ORD will do more with less. We will
work to strengthen the planning and delivery of our science by
realigning our research programs so that they are integrated
and transdisciplinary. This strategic internal realignment will
help us conduct the best possible science to address today's
transdisciplinary environmental challenges. EPA will also
enhance its outreach to the research community through its
Science and Technology to Achieve Results Program, the STAR
Program. This investment compliments our internal EPA expertise
by tapping into the expertise of academia and engaging the
broader scientific community. Excellent research that, I may
add, is taking place in most of the districts of the Members of
this Committee.
The 2012 budget request also supports high priority
research areas that are of national importance. For example,
the budget supports work on computational toxicology, an area
that is revolutionizing the way that we assess chemicals and
their potential toxicity to humans and the environment.
Computational toxicological tools can help us get critical
information more efficiently and at a lower cost. The budget
also supports research in the field of green chemistry, an area
focused on the design of chemicals that are environmentally
benign and less hazardous to people. Green chemistry practices
have demonstrated co-benefits in both environmental protection
and economic growth.
The 2012 budget includes a focus on innovative aging water
technologies to address the nation's drinking water
infrastructure. Through collaborations with strategic partners,
both large and small business, universities and local
governments, we will work to develop new cost-effective
drinking water strategies.
STEM fellowships in science, technology, engineering and
math are also the focus of the 2012 budget. We recognize the
importance of teaching, mentoring, and encouraging the next
generation of scientists and engineers who will protect our
environment into the future. Our STAR Fellowships Program will
help ensure maximum intellectual capability and creativity are
applied to today's environmental challenges. And finally, the
2012 budget supports air monitoring research, which is critical
to the development of 21st century technologies that can
improve measurement data and address emerging air quality
questions.
To conclude, I believe EPA has a strong tradition of
excellence in science. Today our expertise and capabilities
leave us well positioned to take environmental protection to an
even greater level of effectiveness, even during this time of
tough fiscal choices. For decades we have worked to protect
human health and the environment by reducing air pollution,
reducing water contaminants, and by cleaning up hazardous waste
sites. In 2012 and beyond we have the opportunity to align our
research in ways that can strengthen this legacy. Thank you for
the opportunity to appear before you today, Chairman Hall.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Anastas follows:]
Prepared Statement by Dr. Paul Anastas, Assistant Administrator, Office
of Research and Development (ORD), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Good morning Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson, and other
Members of the Committee. My name is Paul Anastas. I am the Assistant
Administrator for Research and Development at the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. It is a pleasure to be here with you
this morning to discuss EPA's FY 2012 President's Budget for the Office
of Research and Development (ORD).
As millions of families are cutting back and spending less, they
expect the same good fiscal sense out of their government. The EPA
research and development budget reflects the hard choices needed for
our nation's short- and long-term fiscal health, while at the same time
allowing us to maintain critical research needed to protect public
health and the environment.
ORD is unique in the environmental science community because we
conduct intramural and extramural research across the entire spectrum
of disciplines necessary to support the mission of EPA. In addition to
the cutting edge science that we have traditionally pursued, we will
invest in research on innovative technologies and promote synergies
between environmental protection, public health protection and the
pursuits of economic growth and job production. As science advances,
EPA is working to address the increasing complexity of the 21st
century.
The President's 2012 Budget includes $584 million for EPA's Office
of Research and Development, a decrease of $12.6 million from the FY
2010 enacted budget, to support research and innovation into new and
emerging environmental science. With this investment, we will focus on
enhancing and strengthening the planning and delivery of science by
restructuring our research and development programs to be more
integrated and cross-disciplinary. By strategic internal redirections,
EPA will enhance its outreach to the broader scientific community
through its Science to Achieve Results (STAR) program, which funds
competitive research grants across a broad range of environmental
science and engineering disciplines. This investment will bring
innovative and sustainable solutions to environmental science
challenges by engaging the academic research community. This request
also supports high-priority research of national importance in such
areas as:

Computational Toxicology, which is revolutionizing
how chemicals are assessed for potential toxicity to humans and
the environment by conducting innovative research that
integrates advances in molecular biology, chemistry and
innovative computer science to more effectively and efficiently
prioritize chemicals, including potential endocrine disruptors,
based on risks.

Green chemistry to develop innovative approaches and
tools that inform the design of chemicals throughout their life
cycle.

Innovative drinking water technology to address the
Nation's aging water infrastructure by advancing new
technologies and working with strategic partners to help bring
new cost-effective technologies to the market.

Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM) fellowships to focus the best scientific minds in the
environmental field to focus on our hardest problems and
develop the next generation of scientists and engineers that
will provide the solutions to our Nation's environmental
challenges

Air monitoring research to provide 21st century
technologies to improve measurement data to address emerging
air quality questions.

Conclusion

In conclusion, we have a strong tradition of excellence in science
at EPA-one that we are well positioned to build upon to take
environmental protection to the next level. For decades, we have
protected human health and the environment by reducing air pollutants
and water contaminants, cleaning up hazardous waste sites, and many
other significant actions. In 2012 and beyond, we have the opportunity
to strengthen this legacy.
I look forward to working with the Committee to address current and
emerging environmental problems that will help our Agency protect the
environment and human health. Thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today.

Chairman Hall. Thank you for your testimony. Reminding
Members that committee rules limit questioning to five minutes,
the Chairman at this point will open the round of questions,
and I recognize myself for five minutes.
Doctor, your office has released a draft study plan to
investigate the relationship between hydraulic fracturing and
drinking water, right?
Dr. Anastas. Correct.
Chairman Hall. I am concerned about the scope, design, and
objectivity of this study. I understand that the EPA Science
Advisory Board is hearing from stakeholders this week regarding
similar concerns.
Dr. Anastas. True? The Science Advisory Board is reviewing
the study plan this week.
Chairman Hall. Can you commit to me that you will give
strong and thorough consideration to all stakeholder comments
filed on this study, and that you will proceed with it in an
objective and transparent manner?
Dr. Anastas. We always will take------
Chairman Hall. This is not what you always do. Will you
tell me you are going to do that this time?
Dr. Anastas. As always, we will------
Chairman Hall. Yes. Do you know how to say yes------
Dr. Anastas. I do.
Chairman Hall. --to me?
Dr. Anastas. As a matter of fact------
Chairman Hall. You never have.
Dr. Anastas. --end of my sentence.
Chairman Hall. Okay. All right. I understand that this
study is expected to take a couple of years. Will you also
commit to providing opportunities for public and stakeholder
input, including from State regulators, industry and academic
community on study activities after it has been initiated? Yes
or no?
Dr. Anastas. Yes, we--yes.
Chairman Hall. Okay. All right. I will get to the next
question. It will be much easier, probably, than that one. How
will the proposed study take into account whether current State
and Federal regulations are capable of effectively managing and
addressing drinking water issues related to the hydraulic
fracturing? Right now it seems to me that you are ignoring
State regulations.
Dr. Anastas. Chairman Hall, this is such an important
topic. Let me just say one important thing about it. We do not
presuppose the results of a study before it is completed. This
is a study to understand what the potential impacts are, and it
would be inappropriate and unscientific in order to presuppose
what the results of that study is going to be. This is to
determine whether or not there are impacts from this important
area.
Chairman Hall. Well, if potential concerns are not examined
in the context of current rules and practices, how is the study
going to have any value in terms of informing key decision
makers, like the States?
Dr. Anastas. Key decision makers are going to be involved,
engaged, in this--have been engaged and will continue to be
engaged in the formation of the study design, and as we go
forward with it. But this is a research study that we are not
presupposing the outcomes of the potential impacts, if any, on
this important area.
Chairman Hall. A lot of your planned study focuses on the
possible impacts of hydraulic fracturing------
Dr. Anastas. Correct.
Chairman Hall. --with very little focus on the probability
of those impacts occurring if current State level regulations
are followed. With a million wells hydraulically fractured, and
over half a century of history, how do you justify not
incorporating well established risk assessment and
characterization methodologies into this study in order for
decision makers to quantify and better respond to any risks
that are identified?
Dr. Anastas. It would be impossible to calculate the
probability of an event happening if we don't first determine
whether or not a risk--whether or not an event, an impact,
actually can happen. So while I understand the nature of your
question, it is a follow up consideration after we determine if
there are potential impacts.
Chairman Hall. I recognize Mrs. Johnson for her five
minutes.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much. Dr. Anastas, I am a
native Texan. We are a stubborn group, and we don't care too
much about what people think, but I want to applaud your office
for looking out for our future. The Office of Research and
Development budget request highlights the Administration's goal
to strengthen the future scientific work force by increasing
funding for fellowships to students through Science and
Technology to Achieve Results. That is the STAR grant, and the
fellowship program. How is the Office of Research and
Development leveraging the work of STAR grantees to make
progress on the agency's research priorities, and what impact
would the House passed 2011 funding bill have on your research
programs, and which programs would be terminated or severely
crippled?
Dr. Anastas. Well, thank you very much for recognizing the
important role that our STAR fellowship program and our STAR
grants program plays. It is critical to complement the
excellence and the expertise in the Office of Research and
Development by tapping into the expertise in the broader
scientific community. And that is research, as I mentioned in
my opening statement, taking place in the universities and
research institutes in the districts of many of all of you.
In addition, the STAR fellows are our investment in the
next generation of scientists. These fellows, which go through
a very competitive process in order to get these fellowships,
often become environmental professionals at universities, at
the State level, and yes, even at the EPA, and so it is an
extremely important role that they play. I would just say that,
while we recognize that the proposed budget cuts are broad and
severe, it is difficult, with the level of detail currently, to
know exactly which programs would be curtailed or need to be
eliminated. But it--it is important that, when we look at the
foundation, the scientific foundation of how we protect our
air, water, and land, that the proposed budget allows us to
continue that important research, and some of the cuts being
proposed would be--would severely impact that.
Ms. Johnson. Now comes the question that reflects on where
I am from. The Administration's budget request highlights the
Sustainable and Healthy Communities Research Program, which
develops innovative approaches to help communities increase
their environmental sustainability and resilience more
efficiently and effectively. How will EPA ensure that lower
income communities are able to participate in this program?
Dr. Anastas. One of the things that has been seen over the
past years is that the impacts on low income communities are
disproportionate to the population in general. There is study
after study that shows that this is an important consideration.
And what we need is the scientific basis for understanding, not
just assessing the risk chemical by chemical, but the
cumulative impacts on these disproportionately impacted
communities from a variety of chemicals, a variety of different
substances.
And so one of the things that this budget includes, and one
of the priorities of this Administrator, is focusing on
environmental justice in disproportionally impacted
communities. So what that looks at is the new scientific tools.
As a matter of fact, this past year we held a groundbreaking
symposium on the basic research, the basic scientific tools,
around environmental justice, and are in the process of
developing those types of technical guidance documents for the
models, the tools, the scientific tools that are necessary for
these types of analyses.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much. My time is about over.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady yields back and I recognize
the gentleman from California, Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am
sorry, I have had to run back and forth today between two very
significant hearings, and so I will hope that the questions I
have in mind are not repetitive of some of the points you may
have made in your opening statement, but I will be reading your
opening statement in its total this afternoon.
I would like to ask about the EPA's finding of CO
2

essay, a pollutant, and thus a danger to human health. This is
something that many of us are deeply concerned about, because
we find that to be, at least after looking at the justification
of that, to be a stretching of the definition of human health
to the point that it opens up broad new areas of controls over
peoples' lives than what people really believe does--what human
health was all about, and--originally.
That report--the technical support document in backing up
that report relied heavily on the intergovernmental panel on
climate change. In fact, 50 percent of the sources on this
support document either were directly from the IPCC or relied
on the IPCC. Do you think that you can rely that much on
people--scientists that are not necessarily familiar to you
personally to do something as dramatic as claiming the powers
that then flow from this decision?
Dr. Anastas. The technical support document that you refer
to does rely on a number of sources. Certainly relies on the
reports out of the National Academies and the National Resource
Council of this------
Mr. Rohrabacher. Um-hum.
Dr. Anastas. --country, the--several studies from the
National Academies.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And some of the National Academy studies
rely--if you read them, rely on the IPCC research that was then
given to them.
Dr. Anastas. There are both original, as well as------
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay.
Dr. Anastas. --assessments in synthesis. There are also the
studies from the U.S. Global Change Research Program, as well
as the IPCC.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. Well--let me put it this way. After
the disclosure of the Climategate e-mails, many of which talked
about suppressing dissent, many of which talked about
manipulating graphs, and as we know, one important graph by Mr.
Hansen over at NASA eliminated an entire--what they call a
hockey stick, an entire description of the mini-Ice Age and
ended up saying that there wasn't a mini-Ice Age. With all of
that--the shenanigans that were indicated by these e-mails, you
still think that we can rely upon people who suppress dissent,
manipulate graphs and actually limit--and manipulate computer
input?
Dr. Anastas. I think it is always important to ask the kind
of questions that you are asking, Congressman. What I think we
have seen is the--whether it is reviews from universities,
whether it is reviews from--even the House of Commons in the
UK, that investigation after investigation on whether any of
these concerns have changed the science or the scientific
conclusions, the answer is definitively no. But I can't say it
better than the National Academies said it this past year, and
I will quote, ``A strong credible body of scientific evidence
shows that climate change is occurring is caused largely by
human activities and poses significant risks for a broad range
of human and natural systems.''
Mr. Rohrabacher. And that climate change is something that
now the EPA has expanded a definition of human health to
include climate change. Mr. Chairman, I would, at this point,
like to submit for the record a list of 10 quotes from the EPA
Climategate documents, the e-mails that were made public that
indicate that those involved in--the research centers being
depended upon were engaged in manipulation of information, of
suppressing dissent, and other unscientific activities.
Chairman Hall. Without objection, they are admitted.
[The appears in Appendix II:]
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate this chance to get a chance to talk to you.
Chairman Hall. Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. I have never been confused--have you listened
to the way I talk? You think I am from------
Chairman Hall. I have suffered from the way you talk.
Mr. Miller. I would have thought you would have been
comforted by the way I talk.
Chairman Hall. But you are a great lawyer. I want to hear
from you.
Mr. Miller. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am Miller
of North Carolina. One of the issues that this Committee and
the Oversight Subcommittee has looked at in the last few years
has been the clusters of rare cancers in rural areas, the
clusters of rare birth defects in lightly populated areas, that
has to have been caused by the environmental exposure. There
really is no other explanation, but it is very difficult to
tell exactly what it is that led to it. The EPA has had for
some time now the IRIS Program, the------
Dr. Anastas. Yes.
Mr. Miller. --registry of chemicals that are considered to
have a public health effect, or may have a public health
effect. The risk assessment for those, which has come under
great criticism, although there are thousands--at least
hundreds, certainly, and perhaps thousands of new chemicals
entering the market every year, IRIS has really done--produced
two or three new assessments a year. And the GAO has had the
IRIS Program on the high risk watch for programs that simply
are failing, and the apparent reason is the interference with
the White House Office of Management and Budget. OMB is
specifically--OIRA, the Office of Regulatory------
Dr. Anastas. Information and Regulatory Affairs.
Mr. Miller. There you go, what you said. And we have been
promised reform of that, and what is the status of that reform?
Were you--or what steps are you taking to get IRIS off the high
risk watch list? What are you doing to make sure that there is
not political interference by OMB, by OIRA, by industry or by
the agencies that themselves use chemicals that have public
health consequences?
Dr. Anastas. First of all, thank you very much for the
question, and the chance to address this topic, because it is--
it goes to the core of the scientific integrity that this
President and this Administrator insists upon. The IRIS program
is extremely important and was on the high risk watch list
because of its importance and because of necessary changes that
needed to take place. The changes that have taken place are a
reformed IRIS process that Administrator Jackson put in place
in May of 2009.
Since that time, the number of IRIS assessments that have
been produced exceeds the number of assessments from the
previous four years combined. We made significant investments
in fiscal year 2009 to the base of that program, an increase of
25 percent in personnel and 40 percent of the budget back in
2009. Because of those--the reforms of the process, because of
the reforms of the--and the advancements made, we believe that
IRIS is on the right path to being a--to being the type of
solid program that we can all be proud of. But we agree that a
program of this importance, it is appropriate to have the level
of scrutiny that the GAO is saying to keep it on the high risk
list.
Mr. Miller. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Rohrabacher moved
into the record, without objection, quotes regarding the e-
mails from East Anglia. Those have been examined closely by
several scientific bodies. The British House of Commons had an
inquiry that produced a report that found that there was
overwhelming scientific evidence of anthropogenic, in other
words, man caused, human caused climate change, and cleared
the--or University of East Anglia. That was by scientists. In
addition, there was a Penn State inquiry as well that found the
same thing. I do not have those reports with me, but I can
gather them pretty quickly, and I would like to move those into
the record as well.
Chairman Hall. You don't have anything from Libya?
Mr. Miller. I did not understand you, sir.
Chairman Hall. I say, without objection, they will be
admitted.
[The appears in Appendix II:]
Mr. Miller. Okay. Thank you. I am sorry, I do have one,
which I will provide now, and I will provide the other later.
Chairman Hall. Okay. I thank you. Now we recognize Dr.
Harris from Maryland.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you, Doctor, for appearing for us. I have to tell you, I don't
always listen word for word for what--our wonderful Chairman
when he introduces witnesses, but he did use that word organic
chemist in there. And to a physician who went through pre-med,
it still strikes fear in our hearts. Anyway--so
congratulations, being an organic chemist. Anyone who has been
there will know what I am talking about.
Doctor, you know, you mentioned--I am going to follow up
from the gentleman from California. You know, you gave the
quote there that said, well, you know, there are going to be
significant impacts, but you and I both know what significant
means, to a scientist means P less than .05 at any amount,
okay?
And we are going to get into TMDLs in a second, but with
regards to CO
2
--see, that is the problem. I mean,
look, I know that the temperature is increasing, and I know
that CO
2
probably has a little bit to do with it.
The question is, can we make a significant--have a significant
effect by spending trillions of dollars doing it? So that--in
my mind, that is the question. It is not whether there--we
could significantly affect it. Sure, we probably can. We can
probably make that much change, or that--I don't know, and it
is all based on modeling.
I am going to segue into TMDLs, the total maximum daily
loads out of tributaries, very important to the Chesapeake Bay.
I just need to know, did your office have anything to do with
developing the modeling for TMDLs?
Dr. Anastas. The Office of Research and Development works
very closely with the Office of Water in developing underlying
science. It is the Office of Water that then is involved with
the determinature of the------
Mr. Harris. Thank you. So let me get into that, because you
say the underlying science, but my understanding is that the
Chesapeake Bay Watershed model--and, look, I have done
scientific research. My understanding of science is you go out,
you make some observations, and you collect data from a group
of observations, and you comment on those observations, and
then postulate about the possible meaning of those
observations.
This Chesapeake Bay Watershed model is a computer model. I
mean, it is modeling, and most people who know computers know
you can kind of program it to get whatever results you kind of
want. So it is based on--I mean, I think that is true. That is
what my kids tell me. It is--so what you have got is you have
got a model based on urban point sources that then have to have
something called the scenario builder application applied to it
to actually go and to look at agricultural non-point sources,
and then come up with a justification for TMDLs.
Now, I am just going to ask you do we have any evidence,
real evidence, in any water shed anywhere that implementing a
TMDL regulation of this magnitude, because this will cost tens
of billions of dollars in the Chesapeake Bay Watershed. I have
one county alone, $1.87 billion in that county. They would have
to double or triple their property taxes to pay for it. Similar
to the CO
2
speculation--I will call it speculation
because we really don't know what that curve looks like, except
we do know it is flatter than postulated originally.
Given that speculation, are we, you know, how do you call
that science if what you are doing is you are creating a
computer model that doesn't work on real data and has no real
data, in terms of efficacy, to prove that it is worth the
investment of tens of billions of dollars? I mean, is this
really just based on a computer model?
Dr. Anastas. Thank you very much for the question, Dr.
Harris. This is an important point. The Office of Research and
Development plays an important role in looking at what the
different contaminants are, what the different substances are
that might cause adverse consequence to the environment, to the
ecosystem, et cetera. The modeling that you discuss is
something employed by the Office of Water in making regulatory
determinations.
I will suggest, just as a general comment on modeling, that
validation of models is an essential and important part of the
utilization of any model. And so, when we take a look at this
model that is being used by the Office of Water to make these
determinations, certainly sensitivity analysis modeling
validation is crucial. And one of the other, I think, very
important points to make is some of the basic research that is
being developed is how do we look at the various approaches,
for instance, in the Chesapeake Bay, of comparing the
traditional--what is called gray infrastructure, or constructed
facilities, to help purify the water with green infrastructure,
the natural ways that the ecosystem does it, and------
Mr. Harris. Sure. I understand, Doctor, and I just don't--I
only have three seconds left, so I am just going to ask, is
there validation, and could you share that validation? Is it
based on real observations, and if it is, could you--are you
willing to share that with my office, what conclusions you came
up with, or validations?
Dr. Anastas. I will be more than happy to go and take that
question back to the Office of Water and get that information.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Hall. Thank you, Doctor. Now recognize the
gentleman really from California, Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was
wondering if you were going to say I was from North Carolina, I
appreciate that you didn't. Anyway, I have some very direct
questions here.
How do you think the continuing resolution that was passed
would affect the agency's ability to prevent another Love Canal
or similar type of occurrence?
Dr. Anastas. The role of the Office of Research and
Development is to provide the scientific basis for the actions
that are taken, the scientific basis for the decisions that are
made. So we know that, in general, the types of cuts that are
being proposed would significantly impair the ability of our
research programs on air, water, land, but it is difficult,
with the current level of specificity, to know exactly which
would be impacted at this time.
Mr. McNerney. Well, one of the complaints that the majority
has about the Environmental Protection Agency is that it will
cost jobs, but I think that that is a false choice. We can have
jobs, and we can have clean air, and we can have clean water.
In fact, we have to have clean air and clean water to have
jobs. So--and also, I think there is an effect that many jobs
were created because of the Clean Air Act. Could you comment on
that?
Dr. Anastas. It is an excellent point, because we have
heard this discussion about the tradeoff between jobs and that,
and we know we are all concerned about job growth, especially
at this time. When we take a look at the accomplishments that
have taken place since the founding of the EPA, the dramatic
improvements to air quality, the purification of the water at
the same time that our gross domestic product has increased 207
percent over that time. When we take a look at the study
required by the Congress on the effect of the Clean Air Act
that you mentioned, that--the Clean Air Act would result in $2
trillion of benefits over the course of the life of the--since
the passing of the Clean Air Act amendments, and a 30 to one
return on the cost of those regulations. That is dramatically--
that is a dramatic return on return on investment.
Mr. McNerney. Well, that is certainly dramatic. Another
thing is that the, again, the CR's effect on the EPA's ability
to promote stem education, science, technology, engineering,
mathematics. Would this discourage students from getting into
those fields, this kind of a CR, and also does it drive current
practitioners out of the fields--of those fields?
Dr. Anastas. Our STEM fellowships are one of the real gems
that we are very proud about. It allows students to be involved
in this area, and it is extremely competitive. We are able,
because of the popularity of this particular program, to only
fund a small percentage of those students who apply for it. But
those students who compete successfully are the cream of the
crop, true excellence, and are the vanguard of the scientists
who will inform the environmental protection into the future.
Mr. McNerney. So--I mean, it sounds to me like the majority
party is willing to risk our ability to protect our communities
from toxic waste, the--they are willing to risk the creation of
new jobs, and they are willing to put--or prevent scientists
from going into the field, and all because of a few--not a few,
but many misguided e-mails sent by a few scientists in East
Anglia. Thank you. That is the last of my question.
Chairman Hall. I thank you. At this time we will recognize
Mrs. Adams, the gentlelady from Florida, who will be given some
excess time. She didn't get all of her answers last time, but
we recognize you for five or five
d a half minutes, or
something like that.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Well, quite honestly, I have just been listening, and I
heard you say it was 31--30 to one return.
Dr. Anastas. Yes.
Mrs. Adams. Do you have what those 30 are? I mean, can you
provide that to--my office?
Dr. Anastas. Oh, would be happy to. As a matter of fact,
this is a report that is required by Congress to be put out on
the effectiveness and the costs and the benefits of the Clean
Air Act. Would be happy to provide that, and what the number is
in the Clean Air Act amendments, which are largely known to be
among the most expensive regulations that the EPA puts out,
also have the highest return, as I mentioned, $30 in benefits
for every $1.
Mrs. Adams. Correct, but I--as a new Member, I would love
to see that, if you------
Dr. Anastas. Be---
Mrs. Adams. --get it to my office.
Dr. Anastas. --happy------
Mrs. Adams. You know, I was listening to Congressman Smith,
and when he was asking about the Deepwater oil spill, and I am
sure you heard the discussion that was being had. And one of
the things that--the Doctor said something about--she mentioned
this Gulf seafood and everything else, and there has been some
discussion on whether it is safe to eat, whether it is not safe
to eat. It has been ruled that it is safe to eat, but listening
to discussion this morning, I wondered if the American people
that were listening were wondering if that was now true, based
on her comments.
But I noticed that there has been, you know, there has been
crossover between agencies, and--related to the August 4
Deepwater Horizon budget report, titled ``What Happened To The
Oil?'' An e-mail from EPA Deputy Administrator Bob--I------
Dr. Anastas. Perciasepe.
Mrs. Adams. There you go. Summarizes comments made by you,
Al Venosa and Greg Williams, opposing the idea of
distinguishing between oil that is in the ocean naturally or
dispersed via--versus the chemical dispersions--I will say Bob,
not real good with his last name, states, ``The physically
dispersed versus chemically dispersed has a logical basis.
However, that is different from saying it is accurate.'' He
also stated, ``EPA feels that the evidence is currently not
sufficient to enable us to distinguish accurately chemical from
physical dispersence mechanisms.'' And, you know, blurring the
lines between, as Mr. Moore said, what was chemically dispersed
and what was naturally dispersed. Do you believe the
Administration, and specifically the Administrator that just
was here before you, was trying to give the information that
the Federal response was greater than it was actually needed?
And I just want to note something. There was an e-mail to
Bob from her that said, ``Chemically dispersed is part of the
Federal response, and naturally dispersed is not, and there is
an interest in being able to sum up the Federal response
efforts.''
Dr. Anastas. So--thank you for the opportunity to speak to
this important question. Couple of things. One, NOAA took on
the very difficult scientific question of estimating the
current state at the time of where the oil was going, and the
natural scientific discussions about the approaches were an
important discussion. The one thing------
Mrs. Adams. I asked a question, though, and that was------
Dr. Anastas. Oh, I am--I------
Mrs. Adams. --was the Administration trying to give the
impression that Federal response was greater than it actually
was?
Dr. Anastas. No. Let me explain why. Even with that first
draft, it would be the exact opposite. If you wanted to
demonstrate that the government response was more needed or
more effective, the assumptions would have been exactly
reversed. The revision--the later revisions and refinements of
the data increased the amount of chemically dispersed oil. And
so the first------
Mrs. Adams. So you don't believe that chemically
dispersed------
Dr. Anastas. --in an understatement.
Mrs. Adams. So you don't believe--because, I mean, when I
interpret this e-mail, and it says, because naturally dispersed
is not part of a Federal response, we need to, you know, there
is an interest.
Dr. Anastas. In that first draft that you are discussing,
naturally dispersed was portrayed as being higher------
Mrs. Adams. Okay. Why are there no EPA scientists listed on
the August 4 BP Deepwater Horizon's oil budget report, titled
``What Happened to the Oil?'' There were earlier drafts of the
report listed, and at least one, Dr. Venosa was on that one.
Dr. Anastas. Dr. Venosa was asked to comment on the report
after it was drafted. Dr. Venosa, it is my best understanding
that he was not involved with the drafting of the report, but
asked to comment on it after it would, I believe, be------
Mrs. Adams. So why are there no other EPA scientists on
there?
Dr. Anastas. They weren't involved with the drafting of the
report. Commenting on the report after it is drafted probably
isn't the best way to include somebody as an author.
Chairman Hall. Gentleman's time expired. Recognize Mrs.
Fudge, the young lady from Ohio, five minutes.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Anastas, on this Committee we talk a lot about
innovation and technology development, and much of what we hear
in this Congress about the EPA relates to regulatory work and
how regulations kill jobs and hurt our economy. Last week,
during a hearing with DOE, I asked Secretary Chu about how the
Clean Air Act has helped compel new developments in clean
technologies. Secretary Chu explained that regulations have
helped spur a variety of new technological developments.
In fact, I have a Department of Commerce report that states
that the environmental technology and services sector have
experienced dramatic growth since the passage of the Clean Air
Act, and by 2008 had generated approximately $300 billion in
revenues and supported nearly 1.7 million jobs.
I just want you for--again, for the record, to talk about
the impacts of the Clean Air Act on jobs and the economy, and
how do EPA regulations and scientists spur innovation.
Dr. Anastas. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to this
topic, because I certainly believe that some of the most--among
the most important jobs that we can have is jobs that do
contribute to protecting Americans' health, protecting
Americans' environment. And you are correct in saying not only
has that emerging area of environmental technologies, as you
cited, been a $300 billion market, but globally it is projected
to be a $700 billion market, which would allow for some of the
technologies built here in America to be an export in a growing
market.
Perhaps one of the most exciting areas of innovation is how
we start thinking about our understanding of what causes us
concern for environmental and public health, such as some of
the chemicals that we use every day, you know, the basis of our
society and our economy. And in addition to getting the deep
insight about what makes some of these chemicals cause the
problems for our health and for our environment, we are able to
take this insight and turn it into design of next generation
substances that both increase performance, increase
profitability and are good for humans and the environment. This
is the area of green chemistry that is recognized by the
Presidential Green Chemistry Challenge Awards, with leaders in
industry, small business and academia showing that they can use
innovation to make themselves more profitable, while being
environmentally beneficial.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you very much, Doctor. Thank you for your
testimony, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Anastas. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. This time recognize Vice-Chairman
of the Committee, Mr. Sensenbrenner.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you very much, Dr. Anastas.
Dr. Anastas. Thank you.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. I want to go back to Mr. Rohrabacher's
line of questioning------
Dr. Anastas. Um-hum.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. --and I just want to reiterate some
figures. With the technical support document released on
December 7, 2009, there are 35 references from the IPCC and the
Climate Change Science Program. There are an additional 43
references for the individual chapters or summary within those
35. There are five more studies that were incorporated into
Chapter Seven of the 2007 Working Group One IPCC report, which
again, is 35 mentioned--one of the 35 mentioned above, and
there are further 29 reports from either the National Academy
of Science or from government agencies.
Now, the total of that is, out of the 146, 77 came from
inside the government, or from the IPCC, or the Climate Change
Science Program, and 69 outside. So a majority of the studies
were from government or government related, because the IPCC is
a UN group. Do you agree that this is a high amount of
dependence on the IPCC?
Dr. Anastas. I think it is important to recognize that the
IPCC--and as I--I believe I have the figure that there is 619
contributing authors of scientists from different universities,
from different research institutes that contribute to the IPCC.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, I am asking you whether you think
it is a high amount of dependence upon the ICC--IPCC and
related sources.
Dr. Anastas. I think what we are talking about------
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Yes or no?
Dr. Anastas. No.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Okay. What are you doing about ensuring
that the EPA's policies are based on a diversity of sources for
scientific input into its decisions? This doesn't look very
diverse to me, where it is 77 from inside and 69 from outside.
Dr. Anastas. The contributions to these assessments are
from the primary scientific literature conducted by research
institutes and universities. This is what makes up these
assessments. So the diversity is not on the assessments
themselves, it is where those assessments compile their primary
scientific literature, the primary research.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. There have been a lot of mistakes that
have been, unfortunately, discovered, the worst of which was
when the Himalayan glaciers would melt. It has gotten so bad
that the government of India doesn't rely on the IPCC, even
though its chairman is an Indian citizen, and they have one of
their institutes outside of New Delhi. So, you know, I think
there is at least one government that wants to reach
independent conclusions from the IPCC in determining what they
are doing.
Now, let me ask you, sir, since you are the principal
science advisor to the Administrator, how can you assure us
that the data relied on meets all basic EPA data quality
standards?
Dr. Anastas. One of the things that the Administrator said
to me when she approached me about taking this position was her
commitment to scientific integrity and her insistence that I
always do everything in my power to ensure scientific
integrity. What we have is a framework for preserving that
scientific integrity. It involves everything from insisting on
peer review of the scientific analyses that are conducted, and
it says------
Mr. Sensenbrenner. And I am sorry, Dr. Anastas, but, you
know, there was one report that was in one of the IPCC
documents that was written by, you know, some student that
appeared in a scientific magazine, it might have been
``Nature'', or somebody else with absolutely no peer review.
Now, have you gone back and look at how much of this stuff was
vigorously peer reviewed and how much simply slipped through
the cracks and was published as gospel by the IPCC without any
peer review?
Dr. Anastas. Of the thousands of scientific studies that
are published in the peer review literature that contribute to
these assessments, the data that is relied upon by the agency
not only looks at peer review, we also look at review by a
science advisory board. We also get input from such bodies as
our Board of Scientific Counselors. The structure of preserving
scientific integrity is something that is------
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Um-hum.
Dr. Anastas. --of paramount importance to me, and of
paramount importance to this Administrator.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, I, you know, as you know, I
disagree with this Administration on the job killing global
warming thrust that I think has been sufficiently discredited.
Even the last Congress defeated it. But let me suggest you put
the wagons in a little bit tighter circle, because you will
hear more about this. And I yield back.
Chairman Hall. I thank the gentleman. Finally I recognize
Mr. Sarbanes from Maryland.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for being here, Mr. Anastas. Just on the climate change issue
briefly, before I ask a question on another line, as I
understand it, the mistakes that the IPCC has made along the
way are ones that have been acknowledged, that they have
recognized, that when you lay them against all the rest of the
information and analysis and assessment that has been done,
really pales in comparison to the very good work that has been
done there. And I just want to commend you and the EPA for
being careful in responding to criticism of the IPCC to make
sure that you don't sort of throw the baby out with the bath
water.
And, frankly, having scientists acknowledge that a mistake
may have been made here or there, but that the overall weight
of the evidence and analysis is still very, very powerful and
compelling, I think, frankly, will give it more credibility
going forward, and I commend the agency on trying to make those
distinctions, because that is how you need to proceed in order
to make important recommendations with respect to policy
relating to climate change. So I just did want to acknowledge
that.
I wanted to get back to the Chairman, when he initiated the
questioning on this round, did refer to the fact that the EPA
will be taking a look at this hydrofracking issue, and I am
glad that that is the case. The folks in Maryland and the
Chesapeake Bay Watershed, our radar is starting to go up on
this issue as we see what is happening with the development of
the Marcellus Shale. Frankly, my perspective is that the
industry is moving faster than is prudent in this region right
now. There is a kind of a pell-mell quality to the way they are
moving. If the promise of this is what it is described as by
the industry, and certainly there is profitability in it, from
what I can gather, it is all that it is being touted as, then
certainly we can afford to make sure that we are proceeding in
a careful manner, that it is being done right, and that it is
being based on science.
What I was curious about is whether the study that will be
conducted by the EPA will be taking a look at the impact with
respect to waste water, the impact of that being released into
tributaries within the Chesapeake Bay Watershed, the potential
now for there to be radioactive elements. There is one concern
now that is being looked at. Are those all things that will be
within the boundaries of the study?
Dr. Anastas. Thank you very much. This is an important--
another important topic that is so appropriate. When the
American people raise these types of concerns, when their
representatives in this Congress raise the concern to call on
the EPA to carry out this study, I think it is so important.
Will this study be focusing on the so-called radionuclides in
the water? Yes, that is definitively and explicitly part of
this study. Will this study be focusing on the impacts of
drinking water and the vast number of questions that we are
looking at around drinking water and water quality? Yes. Can
this study answer all of the questions that we would like to
have addressed, because there are quite a few that we have been
informed about through this engagement with the stakeholders,
with the industry, with the scientific community? This is a
study that is going to be responsive to the charge from
Congress, and this study will inform other research questions
and important questions that I think need to be addressed.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you. And then I wanted to just quickly
touch on a third topic. My colleague raised the issue of the
TMDLs, and------
Dr. Anastas. Um-hum.
Mr. Sarbanes. --I understand that, you know, the plan going
forward with respect to TMDLs obviously has to rely to some
degree on the modeling that was mentioned. My perspective is
also that the kind of data we have available to us now is much
more extensive and robust than we have ever had before, and
also that we can take it down to a level of particularity that
wasn't available before so that, in doing these models,
building these models, we do have a robust data source out
there that can help promote the accuracy of it. And then,
again, as is always the goal here, inform our policy going
forward.
I did just want to put in a plug for the idea of citizen
stewardship------
Dr. Anastas. Um-hum.
Mr. Sarbanes. --with respect to the health of the
Chesapeake Bay, and, frankly, connecting the efforts of
ordinary citizens to the TMDL goals. And what I mean by that is
I think there may be an opportunity going forward to quantify
the contribution of the ordinary homeowner to improving water
quality in the Chesapeake Bay. So, for example, if somebody
meets a particular standard that may be set with respect to
reducing the impermeability of surfaces and so forth, that can
count towards a TMDL obligation. I look forward to working with
you on that. And I yield back. Thank you very much for your
indulgence, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. Thank you very much. You were worth waiting
for. Chairman recognizes Mr. Palazzo, gentleman from--
Minnesota?
Mr. Palazzo. Mississippi, Mr. Chairman, but--almost spelled
close. Not------
Chairman Hall. Not very far off.
Mr. Palazzo. It is a lot warmer in Mississippi.
Chairman Hall. Both start with an M.
Mr. Palazzo. M-i. Well, my colleague from Florida started
out--she mentioned something--and I haven't been tracking all
the testimony today, and talking about Gulf seafood. And I, for
one, being from the Gulf states, South Mississippi, I am the
only Congressman in Mississippi that borders the Mississippi
Gulf Coast, and I have to say our seafood has been tested more
than any time in our history. It has to be the safest seafood
in America, if not the world, because of the testing process.
And our Gulf seafood is not only safe, but it is the best in
the world. And I am just going to tell you how it is, and if
you don't believe me, come on down to the Mississippi Gulf
Coast, enjoy our seafood, our golf, our beaches, our
entertainment and our hospitality that is only found in the
South.
Doctor, I appreciate you coming out here today. A major
concern of constituents in my district is the overreach of the
EPA restricting business growth and development. I am concerned
that regulation is adversely affecting job growth in my
district, in our country. One example of such overreach is the
EPA's recent expansion of the interpretation of its authority
under the Clean Air Act to regulate CO
2
emissions,
which threatens to cost out economy seven trillion in lost GDP
by 2029, according to The Heritage Foundation, and hundreds of
thousands of jobs.
By comparison to this anticipated economic loss due to
overregulation by the EPA, what will be the net private sector
economic gain, if any, from the $584 million investment stated
in your testimony, which basically went--research and
innovative technologies and promotion of synergies between
environmental protection, public health protection and the
pursuits of economic growth and job production by the Office of
Research and Development?
Dr. Anastas. One of the things--if I could just say, at
first, especially over the course of this year, I got a chance
to spend a lot of time down on the Gulf Coast, and specifically
in our Gulf Coast Resource Program down at Stennis. And every
time, I can tell you, I ate a lot of that Gulf Coast seafood,
and it was delicious and wonderful, and I would do it again.
So------
Mr. Palazzo. Great.
Dr. Anastas. --thank you very much. One of the things that
we focus on at the Office of Research and Development is
certainly not only using our traditional expertise of
understanding the nature of the problems that we are
confronting, but how those problems will lead to solutions,
providing the basic information, the basic insights that are
going to be crucial to the innovations that our private sector
will make, very fundamental issues of chemistry and molecular
science and ecosystems biology. Tying these--this understanding
of how to be both proper--profitable, creating jobs, while at
the same time being environmentally protective I think is
essential to the mission of the agency as a whole, as this
Administrator has said.
Mr. Palazzo. What exactly are these deliverables on the
investments? What, and if, are the job numbers that will be
created?
Dr. Anastas. Oh, as a matter of fact, there are several
examples out of our Small Business Innovative Research Program.
We have companies that have just recently been recognized by
the Small Business Administration on technologies, one small
business now employing--has grown to over 1,000 employees, and
looking at a range from energy efficiency to water
technologies. We have a student program that founded businesses
where they are looking at water technologies, where they have
both patents, as well as creating jobs and engaging in export.
So there is a range of programs that have resulted in
innovations.
Mr. Palazzo. Are the pursuits of economic growth and job
creation, is that a taxpayer, you know, because the EPA is
taxpayer funded, is that a mission of the EPA?
Dr. Anastas. This is--getting the synergies--in other
words, accomplishing our mission and ways that we think about
how it can be beneficial, mutually beneficial, and not in any
way decreasing our shared desire to have job growth and
economic growth.
Mr. Palazzo. Well, I think a lot of people in my district
believe that not only the EPA, but a lot of the regulatory
agencies are going to kill and hurt vibrant industries that are
currently in existence today in search of unproven,
unpredictable jobs in the green market. It is almost as if
there is a lot of people in the Federal agencies running around
with solutions, and they are just in search of a problem. So
please be careful moving ahead, because I know we depend on a
lot of those jobs.
Dr. Anastas. I think you are making an extremely important
point. What we are not looking to do is to drive any particular
approaches, any particular products. That is the business of
the private sector. What is the business is providing the
science that can be used in order to make sure environmental
protection and economic growth are synergistic and working hand
in hand.
Mr. Palazzo. My time is up. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Hall. And I ask unanimous consent to the letter
dated March 10, 2011 from Debra L. Swackhamer, chair of the EPA
Science Advisory Board, addressed to Mrs. Johnson and to me, be
included in the record. This is at their request. They couldn't
appear. Is there objection? Chair hears none.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Hall. Thank you, Dr. Anastas, for your very
valuable testimony, and the Members for their questions, and we
have done real good at staying within the five minute range
this time. The Members of the Committee may have additional
questions for you, Doctor, and we will ask you respond to those
in writing, if you will, and the record will remain open for
two weeks for additional comments from Members. I have some
questions that I want to send you and ask for an answer, and
would like to have that answer within two weeks, if we could
get it. And you are excused, and we thank you, and the folks
with you for your time.
Dr. Anastas. Thank you, Chairman Hall.
Chairman Hall. We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:31 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
Appendix I:

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Jane Lubchenco, Administrator, National Atmospheric
and Oceanic Administration

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1.  There has been a lot of discussion about what a climate service
would look like. Certainly, NOAA's proposal is not the only way a
climate service could be structured. Please describe why you chose this
format over the four others suggested by the NOAA Science Advisory
Board.

A1. Yes, there has been significant analysis and discussion both
internal to NOAA and among external groups about the best
organizational structure for a climate service in NOAA. The breadth of
expertise and interests represented and the time that was afforded for
these discussions was tremendously beneficial to the formulation of
NOAA's proposed reorganization. The Department of Commerce and NOAA
have taken such discussions and the ideas they have generated very
seriously. In response, NOAA has worked with some of the brightest
minds on institutional planning and administration, service delivery,
stakeholder involvement, and climate science to develop, evaluate and
integrate the many ideas that have arisen from these discussions into
the proposed reorganization contained in the President's FY 2012 budget
proposal.
The idea of creating a Climate Service in NOAA is not new. The
concept first surfaced in the early 1970s and later gained prominence
in NOAA during the George W. Bush Administration. NOAA and external
groups have been engaged in efforts ever since to further develop this
idea and improve climate science and services. The proposed Climate
Service would better respond to our constituents' growing demands for
accessible and authoritative climate information by consolidating
NOAA's existing world-class climate capabilities in one Line Office--a
single point of access to NOAA's climate science, information, and
products. For example, this proposed change would provide a clear point
of access to the burgeoning private sector climate industry that is
emerging around NOAA's climate information, in much the same way that
the roughly $1 billion weather industry has grown up around NOAA's
weather data. The proposed reorganization is also budget-neutral; a
clear good government solution for science, services, and the American
taxpayer. It would allow NOAA to operate more efficiently and
effectively to better meet growing public demands for climate
information with the climate science and service funding we are
appropriated.
NOAA's proposal to create a Climate Service took great care to
consider and reflect recommendations from numerous prominent studies
and external groups, including the NOAA Science Advisory Board (SAB)
and more recently the National Academy of Public Administration (NAPA)
study that was requested by the Commerce, Justice and Science
Subcommittees of the House and Senate Appropriations Committees, to
provide recommendations for how NOAA should be better organized to
deliver reliable and timely information on climate to a variety of
stakeholders.
From 2008 to 2009 the NOAA SAB and its Climate Working Group (CWG)
undertook an effort to compare and contrast specific options for the
development of a National Climate Service--a broad enterprise of
agencies, including NOAA, and organizations comprised of users,
researchers and information providers. The CWG established four Tiger
Teams and a Coordinating Committee to evaluate the pros and cons of
each option. This effort resulted in the June 5, 2009, SAB report
entitled Options for Developing a National Climate Service.

The four options evaluated in the report were:

1.  Create a national climate service federation that would
determine how to deliver climate services to the nation

2.  Create a non-profit corporation with federal sponsorship

3.  Create a national climate service with NOAA as the lead
agency with specifically defined partners, and

4.  Expand and improve weather services into weather and
climate services within NOAA.

In evaluating these four options, the SAB's report concluded that
each option had significant strengths and weaknesses and that no option
was viewed as an ideal option for a National Climate Service. The
report did not make specific recommendations as to how NOAA should
reorganize its own internal climate capabilities. Among its findings,
however, the SAB clearly stated:

``The current NOAA organization is not well-suited to the
development of a unified climate services function. Greater
connectivity between weather and climate functions and between
research, operations and users is required.''

The SAB also recommended that the successful development of a
National Climate Service hinges on collaboration between the research
and user community, and an internal reorganization of NOAA that enables
greater connectivity of weather and climate functions. NOAA's proposal
was designed to specifically address these and numerous other findings
and recommendations from the SAB's insightful work.
More recently, the SAB CWG winter 2011 report further reinforced
NOAA's proposal for a dedicated Climate Service Line Office, stating:

The lack of action in several areas highlighted in the
previous reviews speaks loudly to the need for a new line
organization for climate services. These responses clearly
illustrated the considerable inertia that exists within the
present system and the difficulty in moving from a matrix
managed program to a line organization. Let there be no
mistake: there is a tremendous amount of world-class climate
research being performed within the agency. Yet, transitioning
such high quality research into a service-oriented and
operational setting is quite another matter. There are some
fairly major systemic challenges that need to be confronted
going from a loose federation of somewhat independent NOAA
organizations to a functioning climate service. Short of a
Climate Service line organization with budgetary authority, the
CWG believes it will prove very difficult to effect change if
NOAA's approach to climate services continues in a matrix
structure or manner. (SAB CWG Winter 2011 Report)

In the end, NOAA's proposal to consolidate components from several
Line Offices to create a Climate Service Line Office as outlined in
NOAA's current FY 2012 budget request was developed after great
deliberation and consideration for its impacts and opportunities across
the agency, in particular on NOAA's science. NOAA used input from the
Congressionally-requested NAPA study and analysis of organizational
options for a Climate Service within NOAA, the SAB CWG, and other
internal and external input, to guide the development of its Climate
Service proposal. NOAA's reorganization proposal closely aligns with
NAPA's final recommendations, such as the inclusion of the National
Weather Service's Climate Prediction Center, and recognizes the
importance of having a temporary leadership position for change
management in the new organization.
The proposed Climate Service Line Office structure reflects NOAA's
response to the needs of numerous demands for climate services, so that
the agency can: 1) promote integration of NOAA's climate science and
service assets; 2) heighten the accessibility and visibility of NOAA's
climate services for our partners and users; and 3) allow NOAA to more
efficiently address user and partner needs compared to our current
distributed structure. To make this new organization successful, it
will encompass a core set of longstanding NOAA capabilities that have
proven success, including climate observations, research, modeling,
predictions and projections, assessments, and service delivery
infrastructure. NOAA has proposed that the Climate Service be a Line
Office, providing a single point of entry for people to access NOAA's
climate science and service assets, and enabling improved information
sharing and more productive partnerships with federal agencies, local
governments, private industry, other users, and stakeholders.
NOAA's proposed reorganization also maintains the highest standards
of scientific integrity for all NOAA science and seeks to strengthen
and integrate science across the agency. The proposed Climate Service
Line Office will enable better transition of high quality climate
science into usable services. It will also be an opportunity to refocus
OAR's efforts to incubate solutions to tomorrow's long-term science
challenges, integrate an agency-wide science portfolio, and drive NOAA
science and technology innovation. In addition, the OAR Assistant
Administrator will serve as vice-chair of the NOAA Research Council.
Further, as leader of the central research Line Office, the OAR
Assistant Administrator will become the senior advisor to the NOAA
Chief Scientist. Of critical importance, none of NOAA's climate or
other research capabilities are diminished by this proposed
reorganization, and we do not anticipate any marked change to the
balance of internal vs. extramural funding, pending appropriations.

Q2.  Arguably, the Climate Service is providing information to assist
decision-makers with adaptation choices.

a.  Is the research moving from OAR into the Climate Service only
adaptation research?

b.  Or does it include basic, physical science research as well?

A2. (a&b) The proposed Climate Service would include basic, physical
science research as well as adaptation research. In total, the proposed
Climate Service would consolidate many of NOAA's existing climate
science and service components currently dispersed across the agency
into one Line Office. That said, select climate-related programs and
research would remain in OAR and other Line Offices because climate is
an issue that intersects all of NOAA's mission areas.
As proposed in the PB FY 12, OAR would transfer the Geophysical
Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, the Climate Program Office, and three
divisions of the Earth System Research Laboratory--Chemical Sciences
Division, Physical Sciences Division, and Global Monitoring Division--
to the proposed Climate Service. The proposed transfer would not result
in deviations from the core missions or activities of these programs.
Virtually all of the climate adaptation research in OAR is
conducted by the Climate Program Office through its Grants Program, in
particular the Regional Integrated Science Assessment Centers (RISAs),
based on the U.S. Global Change Research Program working definition of
``Adaptation Science.'' The Global Change Research Program defines
adaptation science as ``integrated scientific research that directly
contributes to enabling adjustments in natural or human systems to a
new or changing environment and that exploits beneficial opportunities
or moderates negative effects.''
Creating a single Line Office would establish a stronger position
for NOAA to strategically guide its climate research, monitoring, and
assessment work in a coordinated fashion. It also would create an easy
to find, single point of entry for people to access NOAA's climate
science and service assets, and enable improved information sharing and
more productive partnerships with federal agencies, local governments,
private industry, and other users and stakeholders.
As mentioned above, this reorganization proposal would maintain the
highest standards of scientific integrity for all NOAA science. In
doing so, the proposal would preserve the OAR as NOAA's core research
and innovation hub, a key NAPA recommendation, and would seize on the
opportunity to strengthen science across NOAA by strategically renewing
OAR's forward looking research agenda. In proposing to house much of
OAR's climate research in the proposed Climate Service Line Office,
NOAA would both be able to better transition its high quality climate
science into usable services and seize upon the opportunity to refocus
OAR's efforts to incubate solutions to tomorrow's long-term science
challenges, integrate an agency-wide science portfolio, and drive NOAA
science and technology innovation.

c.  How will NOAA ensure that the pressures of a service organization
will not force the focus of the research in one direction over another?

A2c. To ensure that the pressures of the service aspect of a Climate
Service would not force the focus of the research in one direction over
another, a climate senior scientist is included in the reorganization
proposal. This new position would ensure sound business practices that
embrace a ``co-production of knowledge,'' wherein climate science
informs, but does not prescribe, decision-making, and decision-making
informs climate science, but does not prescribe research priorities. In
addition, NOAA is in the process of seeking confirmation for a Chief
Scientist and the OAR Assistant Administrator will serve as the senior
advisor to the NOAA Chief Scientist once on board.
In contrast to the National Weather Service model, where science
and service (or operations) are housed in separate Line Offices, NOAA
does not envision a service delivery component for the Climate Service
that is remotely on the scale of the NWS with its 122 local forecast
offices and other regional infrastructure. In fact, the research and
science component of the proposed Climate Service is expected to
continue to be much larger than its services component; NOAA plans to
leverage the service delivery infrastructure of the NWS and other
partners like NOAA's Regional Integrated Sciences and Assessments
(RISAs), Regional Climate Centers, state climatologists, Sea Grant
extension, Coastal Services Centers, National Marine Sanctuaries, and
other parts of NOAA.
The proposal to bring climate science and services together under
one Line Office provides a tremendous opportunity to integrate science
and service delivery without detracting from a commitment to pursue,
fund, and sustain basic climate research and science. Science is an
essential component of all NOAA responsibilities, and underpins the
agency's ability to provide quality services, based on sound science.
Americans depend on NOAA's climate information to make smarter
choices at home and in their communities and businesses. NOAA's climate
information (e.g. forecasts of conditions from two weeks to seasons to
decades out) continues to be at the forefront of this improved decision
making. Similar to information about weather, information about the
climate is not new or controversial. Throughout history, as well as
today, people around the country and the world use climate
information--long-term forecasts on the order of two weeks to seasons
to decades- to inform major decisions from agriculture to national
defense to energy production. For example, electricity providers use
climate data to determine anticipated user demands for heating and
cooling power and set electricity prices. Additionally, home insurance
companies use climate data such as the ``normal'' temperature and
precipitation to calculate your insurance premium. These are just a few
examples of how NOAA's climate science currently translates into
applicable services for Americans. High quality climate science is at
the core of climate services. Housing both science and services under
one organizational structure will allow NOAA to better transition
research findings into usable information and services that help
businesses and communities make better economic decisions and safeguard
lives and property.
Climate science and service must go hand in hand in order to
develop products and services that can evolve and be initiated rapidly
when needed, in response to scientific information as it emerges. The
continuous advancements in climate science demand a close proximity to
the service, not only so that those advancements can constantly improve
products (science push), but also so that the users can be asking new
questions of the science (user pull).
Related to this issue, the NOAA Science Advisory Board's (SAB) 2009
report, Options for Developing a National Climate Service, found:

"The current NOAA organization is not well-suited to the
development of a unified climate services function. Greater
connectivity between weather and climate functions and between
research, operations and users is required.''

The SAB also recommended that the successful development of a
National Climate Service hinges on collaboration between the research
and user community, and an internal reorganization of NOAA that enables
greater connectivity of weather and climate functions. NOAA's proposal
was designed to specifically address these and numerous other findings
and recommendations from the SAB's insightful work.
NOAA scientists and their academic and governmental partners, both
nationally and internationally, have long been involved in cutting edge
climate system research and have contributed greatly to advancing the
scientific understanding about the climate system. NOAA is committed to
ensure this basic research does not get diluted and remains a priority
as part of the climate service. This Administration is committed to the
honest and open conduct of science. One of my first actions as NOAA
Administrator was to appoint a scientific integrity team at NOAA. Their
charge was to review the state of science and scientific integrity at
NOAA, to actively assist OSTP in developing recommendations that would
strengthen the integrity of science in government, and to draft a
scientific integrity policy for NOAA.

Q3.  In your testimony, you cite ``a rapidly increasing public demand
for climate services.'' Please provide the Committee a listing and
description of all requests to NOAA for climate services from State and
municipal governments as well as private sector stakeholders.

A3. NOAA's climate capabilities have significantly matured and markedly
grown in sophistication over the past 40 years to the point where
Americans who depend upon this essential information to make decisions
for their family, business and community balance sheets are now
demanding more data, increasingly complex products, and advanced
scientific study.
The following statistics demonstrate the tremendous increase in
demand via incoming requests through a number of NOAA's user
interfaces.

1.  Direct requests from users for climate related data and
information services: From fiscal year 2009 to 2010, NOAA saw
an increase of 11 percent in direct requests (includes
individual requests via phone calls, emails, and other direct
correspondence) from 26,000 to 29,000 individual requests.

2.  Climate related data provided from data centers: NOAA saw
an 86% increase in climate related data provided from data
centers in FY 2010 compared to FY 2009--from 806 terabytes to
1500 terabytes (or 1.5 petabytes). To put this in context, your
favorite Kindle or other electronic book download averages
about 800,000 bytes. So, in calendar year 2010, NOAA served up
a total of at least 1.9 billion Kindle books worth of climate
data, roughly 867 million more Kindle book equivalents than in
2009.

3.  In calendar year 2010, NOAA's National Climatic Data Center
(NCDC) Comprehensive Large Array data Stewardship System site
served over 5 times as much climate related data as in calendar
year 2009--from 43 terabytes to 253 terabytes.

4.  From FY 2009 to FY 2010, web-hits for NOAA climate services
experienced a 57% increase in climate related data and
information website hits--from 906 million to 1.4 billion hits.
This does not include hits to our new Climate Portal that
launched in February 2010 and currently hosts over 27,000
visitors every month. Because of the huge numbers involved it
would not be practical to provide documentation of each
request. We can however, provide statistics as to the origin of
the requests related to the domain name of the user request.
Our statistics indicate the following approximate distribution
over the past two years.

.com -- 15%

.edu -- 9%

.gov -- 12%

.mil -- 1%

.net -- 24%

.us -- 7%

Foreign -- 13%

Unresolved -- 19%

Such demands come in from multiple interfaces across multiple Line
Offices within NOAA, and we are unable to track all in a comprehensive
manner. Housing NOAA's climate programs in one Line Office could allow
us to more effectively track and analyze the nature of these requests.
Within this increasing demand are requests from a breadth of economic
and industry sectors, including both governmental, private sector, and
non-governmental stakeholders. Specific examples of these types of
requests that were received include:

In the first days of the Fukushima Nuclear Plant
situation following the recent Japanese earthquake and tsunami
tragedy, the White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy requested long-term historical climate data for numerous
locations in Japan. This preliminary analysis established a
historically-based likelihood for springtime winds by direction
and speed, as well as the likelihood of rainfall events of
varying intensities. Both of these factors are important
climatological considerations when assessing the potential
distribution of airborne hazardous material.

An agricultural expert in Wilkes County, NC requested
daily high and low temperatures for the 2010 growing season
from April 1st, 2010 thru October 31, 2010 to calculate the
growing degree days or temperature above 50 degrees fahrenheit
in the Wilkes County area. He is researching growing degree
days and length of growing season for a possible vineyard in
the Yadkin Valley, American Vitacultural Area.

Public Service/Utility Commissions around the country
downloaded NOAA's Climate Normals, which include spatial and
temporal averages of climatological variables (e.g.,
temperature, precipitation, etc.) that describe base climatic
conditions. Utilities subsequently use this information in
formal processes to determine the rate that each utility is
allowed to charge its customers.

Municipalities around the country accessed NOAA's
U.S. Snowfall Climatology information, which includes
historical information about the severity of extreme snowfall
events and return period probability. This information is used
to develop annual municipal snowfall removal budgets and
results in efficient planning and cost savings.

Overall, as much as one-third of U.S. gross domestic product
depends on accurate weather and climate information, and American
communities and businesses are using NOAA's climate information to make
smart investments to manage their risks and reap economic benefits. For
example, through an effort with the National Association of
Homebuilders, NOAA provided climate data to help the home building
industry establish the most cost-efficient insulation standards for
protecting building foundations from frost. According to industry
estimates, this information is said to save roughly $330M in annual
building construction costs and annual energy cost savings of 586,000
megawatt hours.
NOAA's climate forecasts, from seasonal precipitation and drought
outlooks to weekly on-the-ground assessments of the U.S. Drought
Monitor, are also helping firefighters in Texas to prepare for and
respond to a record wildfire season. And NOAA's improved maximum
precipitation predictions have been used to develop new standards for
dam design that are being implemented around the Nation to improve dam
safety and reliability.
These are just a few examples of how the importance of NOAA's
climate services to decision makers is fueling an increased demand for
more data, increasingly complex products, and advanced scientific
study. Throughout NOAA's efforts to develop the proposed Climate
Service reorganization, the agency has consulted with and benefited
from the input and advice of a wide array of external partners and
stakeholders across public and private sectors. The unanimous
conclusion of internal and external scientists and decision makers is
that establishing a single management structure for the agency's core
climate capabilities is required if the agency is to rise the meet the
Nation's growing need for increasingly sophisticated information.
In the conduct of the National Academy of Public Administration's
research for its report to Congress, ``Building Strong for Tomorrow:
NOAA Climate Service,'' a survey found:

The themes that the Panel heard often and found compellingly
stated were: strong support for the concept of creating a NOAA
(or a National) Climate Service; the need to improve federal
interagency coordination of resources and service delivery; the
importance of partnerships with the public and private sectors;
a need for more localized and more accessible research; the
potential positive impact of using innovative service delivery
technologies and tools; and the importance of supporting a user
community that is large and diverse. (Building Strong for
Tomorrow: NOAA Climate Service, pg 16).

The Academy report's survey results were based on over 40
interviews with current and former government officials, and external
stakeholders; three roundtable discussions with over 50 key NOAA
climate constituents, including federal agency partners, state and
local government leaders, and academics and other subject matter
experts; and lastly, a national Online Dialogue that solicited ideas
about how to structure and operate a NOAA Climate Service from June 14
to June 28, 2010.

The Academy's report, resounding as it is in its response, is one
of a vast array of expressions of support for NOAA's proposed
reorganization. Below are a number of additional examples of external
stakeholder feedback for the need for climate services:

``Our organizations, representing hunters and anglers across
the country, are very concerned about the impacts of climate
change on fish and wildlife, and we recognize that providing
good information to resource managers will be critical to
helping ecosystems, fish, and wildlife adapt to the coming
changes in climate.''

``While the broad implications of climate change are becoming
better understood, the need for more regional and local
understanding of future climate impacts is urgent. The federal
government's investment in observing, researching, modeling,
and developing tools to respond to the impacts of climate
change will be significant, and the ability to disseminate that
information to states, municipalities, and non-governmental
organizations, while responding in turn to their specific
information needs, is critical. NOAA's climate service can play
an important role in gathering, analyzing, and presenting that
information to those in need of it.''

Randi Swisher, President, American Fly Fishing Trade
Association; Tom Franklin, Director of Policy and Government
Relations, Theodore Roosevelt Conservation Partnership; and
Steve Moyer, Vice President for Government Affairs, Trout
Unlimited

``WGA supports the establishment of a NOAA Climate Service,
and we commend the leadership and work of NOAA to make the
climate service a reality''. Western Governors Association

``As climate adaptation becomes an increasingly important
strategic path, the new climate service will provide essential
information to the public and private sectors. The insurance
industry is heavily dependent on public data and information
related to climate, and the creation of a NOAA Climate Service
with new data services will greatly enhance the industry's
analysis of climate and extreme event weather risk.''

Frank W. Nutter, President, Reinsurance Association of
America

``Addressing climate change is one of our most pressing
environmental challenges. Making climate science more easily
accessible to all Americans will help us gain the consensus we
need to move forward. The new NOAA Climate Service is a welcome
addition to our national climate change capabilities. It will
help bring people together so we can also bring about an
economic recovery by more rapidly modernizing our nation's
energy infrastructure.''

Jim Rogers, President and CEO, Duke Energy

``Establishing a NOAA Climate Service demonstrates that the
Administration and NOAA understand there is a real need to
deliver climate services in this country. This is a giant leap
forward in meeting this need. NOAA plays a central role in many
aspects of climate science including climate modeling,
observations, and assessments, and has a major role to play in
the efforts to establish a more coordinated and integrated
government-wide National Climate Service. The creation of a new
NOAA Climate Service will allow it to be a more effective
partner with other federal agencies, the private sector, and
the research and academic community, in that effort.''

Dr. Rick Anthes, President, University Corporation for
Atmospheric Research

``NOAA's proposed climate service would be a welcome and
critically needed asset to the public health community, both in
the U.S. and around the world. Every key sector of the public
health community, from first responders to those who provide
food and medical supplies and services, would draw on the
information. Forecasting air quality, drought, natural hazards
and climate-sensitive diseases all impact public health. Better
predictive tools, monitoring and other resources will inform
our decision-making and advance our efforts to get further
ahead of the curve. Lives can be saved as a result.''

Georges C. Benjamin MD, FACP, FACEP (Emeritus), Executive
Director, American Public Health Association

``I was delighted and thrilled to learn of the commitment by
the Administration to form the NOAA Climate Service. I have
been a long time supporter of this vision and it is very
gratifying to see it accomplished. NOAA has worked for many
years to become proficient in climate science, climate
observation, and data management. Additionally, with vast
experience in producing world-class weather forecasts,
extension of these skills to climate is a natural step and will
go far in improving the foundation for rational science based
policy making. My thanks and congratulations to the hardworking
NOAA team members who over many years have made this event
possible.''

Honorable Conrad C. Lautenbacher, Ph.D.,Vice Admiral (U.S.
Navy Ret.) Vice President, Science Programs, CSC, ATG, Under
Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere and NOAA
Administrator, 2001-2008

``I am very excited by today's announcement regarding
formation of the NOAA Climate Service. Working in tandem with
the highly skilled work force from the National Weather
Service, the NOAA Climate Service will enhance NOAA's ability
to deliver world class climate services and to address the wide
variety of issues related to climate change.

``NWSEO intends to work closely with the Obama
Administration, NOAA's leadership and the NOAA Climate Service
to effectively launch this new venture. We look forward to
forging a close working relationship with the NOAA Climate
Service, which will effectively utilize the skills of NWSEO's
members and satisfy America's needs to better understand and to
predict climate change.''

Dan Sobien, President, National Weather Service Employees
Organization (NWSEO)

These are examples of the broad array of support for NOAA's
proposed Climate Service from stakeholders; and many more are listed
at: http://www.noaa.gov/climateresources/testimonial.html. As a final
example of feedback that has been received, attached please find a
letter the Department received from a diverse and distinguished group
of business leaders including Microsoft, Deloitte, and Governor Jim
Geringer.

Q4.  After the Nunn-McCurdy recertification and restructuring in 2006,
it was realized that providing satellite coverage in all three orbits
would be financially impossible within the budget the National Polar-
orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) had at the
time. The strategy was then changed to rely on the Europeans to cover
the late-morning orbit, but to use instruments provided by NOAA. It is
our understanding that these instruments, whose total design life is
eight years, were delivered to the Europeans more than nine years ago.

a.  Has NOAA conducted a risk analysis of using data from the European
satellites using instruments that are beyond their design life?

A4. (a) Yes, NOAA continues to employ an active risk mitigation program
by conducting annual activation checks on the NOAA-supplied instruments
\1\ on the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological
Satellites (EUMETSAT) Metop-B and -C satellites. NOAA-provided
instruments have been designed for a three-year mission once in-orbit.
Prior to launch, these instruments are maintained in a controlled
environment and placed in a storage container before integration onto
the Metop spacecraft. After the instruments and spacecraft are
integrated, they go through a rigorous test program to verify their
flight readiness prior to receiving the go-ahead to proceed to launch.
If an anomaly arises as a result of this testing, the instrument is de-
manifested from the spacecraft so that additional testing can take
place at the instrument level by the manufacturer. If applicable,
component or subsystem refurbishment or replacement upgrades are
completed before re-integrating onto the spacecraft. NOAA has also
funded a spare parts program for each of the instruments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The NOAA provided instruments are the Advanced Very High
Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR/3), the Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit
(AMSU-A), the High Resolution Infrared Radiation Sounder (HIRS/4), and
the Space Environment Monitor (SEM).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOAA and NASA engineers are present at the facility when spacecraft
testing occurs. For example, the Metop-B AVHRR Instrument is currently
progressing through its annual recalibration test program, with NOAA
and NASA personnel on-site during this testing. On a parallel track,
the NOAA/NASA Instrument Team also have personnel on-site participating
in readiness reviews and training for the upcoming mechanical testing
of the Metop-C satellite in Toulouse, France.
NOAA believes that there are sufficient engineering processes in
place to ensure that the instruments on Metop will perform as designed.

b.  If something happens to the NPOESS Preparatory Project (NPP) or the
VIIRS instrument, and the Europeans have trouble with these older
instruments, it could cause the loss of data from two orbits. What is
the operational impact of such a data loss?

A4. (b) The operational impact of losing all data from both the
European satellite in the mid-morning and NOAA satellite in the
afternoon polar orbits would be catastrophic to the Nation.
Observations from the microwave and infrared sounder instruments on
these satellites are critical to the accuracy of National Weather
Service forecast models. Without these data, model forecast accuracy
will revert to 1970s levels. The ability to accurately predict weather
events 3-5 days in advance will be severely degraded.
The operational impact of losing the imager data from both the
European and NOAA polar orbiting satellites is also significant. The
Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) on the current NOAA
and European satellites provides many products used by NOAA and its
customers to monitor and predict changes to the atmosphere, oceans, and
land.
AVHRR is the primary source of observations for the NOAA global sea
surface temperature product, used in atmosphere predictions and ocean
models, hurricane forecasting, fisheries management, and many other
applications. In the high-latitude regions of the globe, including
Alaska, where NOAA geostationary satellites have limited coverage,
AVHRR is the primary source of satellite data for use in weather
forecasts and warnings to the public. AVHRR detects volcanic ash
plumes, which are hazardous to aviation, and can be carried thousands
of miles from their source. It is also used for wildland fire detection
and response activities, and as input for warnings to the public on
smoke and other unhealthy air advisories. AVHRR is also an input to the
NOAA global vegetation index product, and is used by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, the U.S. Geological Survey, and the U.S.
Agency for International Development for drought monitoring and other
land products.
Current NOAA and European Metop polar-orbiting satellites carry a
Space Environment Monitor (SEM) to measure the impacts of the space
weather environment on the satellite and its sensors. The SEM suite of
instruments provides us with the ability to determine if the magnitude
of solar events, such as geomagnetic storms, will be detrimental to
telecommunications and power grids. In the future, the Metop and the
Defense Weather Satellite System (DWSS) will carry SEM, from which NOAA
will leverage their data needs.
NOAA and European satellites also carry a Search and Rescue
Satellite Aided Tracking (SARSAT) antenna/transmitter and on-board
storage system to receive and relay distress signals from mariners,
aviators, and other users who have activated their beacons. Without
this capability on NOAA and European polar-orbiting satellites, the
ability to locate distressed individuals in a timely manner is reduced,
leading to an increased risk of injury or death.
Finally, NOAA and European satellites carry a Data Collection and
Relay Service, called Argos. The system consists of an antenna/
transmitter and on-board storage system to receive signals from remote
platforms, such as ocean buoys, remote weather stations, and endangered
animal species. In many cases, Argos is the only way to monitor
changes, such as the pre-cursor changes to the ocean environment in
remote locations, which signal the start of an El-Nino or La-Nina
event.
The operational impact of losing all data from both the European
satellite in the mid-morning and NOAA satellite in the afternoon polar
orbits would result in loss of capability across the global weather
community. The lack of information and data would affect each and every
U.S. citizen. NOAA would be unable to provide advance warning of
extreme weather conditions and events, which would impact military
planners, airport planners, emergency managers, environmental disaster
responders, Alaskan mariners and pilots, coastal residents, and
fisherman. Across the Nation and throughout the global weather
community, NOAA's ability to provide weather information needed to make
decisions to protect lives and property would be compromised.

Q5.  Although the Nunn-McCurdy requirement of recertification only
applied when the Department of Defense provides funding to a program,
NOAA and NASA have each been directed to provide a baseline for the
National Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System
(NPOESS) in two separate laws. Public Law 109-155 and Public Law 110-
161 require NASA and NOAA to perform this baselining. Even with the
dissolution of the NPOESS program into the Joint Polar Satellite
System, or JPSS, it would not remove the requirement of rebaselining.

a.  Where is NOAA in the process of this task?

A5. (a) NOAA notes that the NPOESS Program was explicitly excluded from
the reporting requirements in section 112(a)(3) of Public Law (PL) 110-
161. However, going forward, NOAA will comply with the provisions of PL
110-161 for the JPSS program.
The JPSS program planned to establish a formal baseline for both
the JPSS Program and the first mission, JPSS-1, by the 4th Quarter of
FY 2011. This plan was made with the assumption that the program would
receive the President's requested FY 2011 funding. The delay in
receiving FY 2011 funding created uncertainty in the program and led
the program to focus much of its existing resources on fielding and
testing the ground system in support of the NPP mission (scheduled for
launch in October 2011), which NOAA plans to use to support its
operational weather forecasting mission. The additional FY 2011 funds
that NOAA has redirected to JPSS (please see the Department's spend
plans submitted on June 15, 2011 for more details) combined with
receipt of the FY 2012 appropriation of $1.070 billion, will allow the
program to ramp up work on JPSS instruments and spacecraft; however,
the funding delays have prevented the JPSS program from completing the
program baseline as planned.

b.  When can we expect to see a full life-cycle accounting of the JPSS
program compared to the original NPOESS program?

A5. (b) Due to the postponement of JPSS formulation into FY 2012, the
program will not have a full life cycle baseline until the 3rd Quarter
of FY 2012. The program is currently re-planning the formulation phase
of JPSS based upon the final FY 2011 appropriation, and should have an
updated schedule this summer.

Q6.  NOAA has provided a 90% certainty of a forthcoming data gap if
funding is not provided for JPSS. Please provide a description of how
this figure of 90% certainty was attained, including assumptions,
calculations, and procedures used to generate the estimate.

A6. There is now at least a 90% probability of a gap since the
requested increase of $677.8 million for the JPSS Program was not
provided in the FY 2011 Continuing Resolution Appropriations Bill (P.L.
112-10). This gap probability was derived by using a series of
probability runs that are common in the satellite community. The number
is derived by taking the probability of selected components still fully
functioning at their end of design life (called wear-out probability)
and forms an overall probability of the mission still performing at the
same period. Only the critical (those which perform the key parts of
the mission) sensors and the spacecraft (the electronics and
communications part of the mission) are considered. For NPP and JPSS,
NOAA used the spacecraft and the following sensors, Visible/Infrared
Imager/Radiometer Suite (VIIRS), Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder
(ATMS), and Cross-track Infrared Sounder (CrIS) in its assumptions.
The critical sensor wear-out probabilities are multiplied by the
space craft wear-out probability over time to form a wear-out curve.
This is combined with a random probability of success (done by running
thousands of simulations) and plotted against time (data are derived in
monthly increments) to get the probabilities in question.

Q7.  As you know, the Space Weather Prediction Center's critical solar
wind and storm prediction satellite, the Advanced Composition Explorer
(ACE), is currently failing. NOAA and the President's budget request
have indicated that the former NASA environmental observation
satellite, Deep Space Climate Observatory (DSCOVR), is to be selected
as its replacement.

a.  What other options have been considered beyond DSCOVR and in what
way is DSCOVR better suited to meet the Nation's important space
weather prediction needs?

A7. (a) NOAA considered three options for the follow on to the Advanced
Composition Explorer (ACE) satellite. One option was to refurbish the
existing Deep Space Climate Observatory (DSCOVR) satellite. The second
option was to build a new government procured satellite with a
government procured launch vehicle. The third option was a potential
commercial data buy. A joint-agency, Office of Science Technology
Policy (OSTP)-requested study determined that refurbishing the existing
DSCOVR satellite is the most favorable option on the basis of cost,
risk and schedule. An independent NOAA-Air Force analysis concurred
with this finding.
The Nation is currently at risk for a gap in solar wind
measurements because the existing assets have been operating well
beyond their design lives. \2\ This is a serious concern given the need
for reliable warnings of geomagnetic storm conditions that can
negatively impact global military operations, communications, the
nation's electrical grid, aviation, and other activities. Based upon
the extensive interagency analyses regarding the most favorable
approach for addressing this concern, NOAA has partnered with NASA and
has the highest confidence in the schedule, costs, and risk assessments
associated with the DSCOVR refurbishment option. The DSCOVR satellite,
which will be positioned at the Sun-Earth Lagrangian Point (L1),
already has space weather sensors that have been thoroughly tested by
NASA and, after refurbishment, could be made flight worthy. Steps for
this refurbishment are well understood. Further, the L1 point is
located approximately one million miles inside the Earth's orbit around
the Sun and is the ideal location for a solar winds monitoring
platform. The DSCOVR satellite bus has been stored under carefully
regulated climate controlled conditions for the last ten years. It can
be launched in FY 2014 if NOAA receives the $47.3M requested in FY 2012
to begin refurbishment and the U.S. Air Force receives the FY 2012
funds of $134.5 million it requires to support the launch and launch
services for DSCOVR.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ NASA Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SoHO, also at L1) has
been operating for 16 years, and the Advanced Composition Explorer
(ACE) has been in orbit for 14 years.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While refurbishing DSCOVR for this purpose is the prudent and
appropriate next step to address our solar wind monitoring needs, NOAA
continues to assess the potential of commercial services for the future
and will solicit commercial participation in the DSCOVR project for the
purpose of assessing the performance of the commercial business case in
association with an operational space weather warning project in order
to assess future commercial viability.
b.  Congressional staff have requested a report from the Office of the
Federal Coordinator for Meteorology (OFCM) that was submitted to OSTP
regarding the other options for ACE's replacement. Can you assist the
Committee in the procurement of that document?

A7. (b) We have informed OSTP of the Chairman's request for a copy of
the study.

Q8.  The National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and
Offshore Drilling Staff Working Paper titled, ``The Amount and Fate of
the Oil'' notes that ``in late April or early May 2010, NOAA wanted to
make public some of its long-term, worst-case oil trajectory models,
which were based upon flow rates of up to 50,000 bbls/day, and
requested approval to do so from the While House's Office of Management
and Budget. The Office of Management and Budget did not grant NOAA's
request.''

a.  Please explain OMB's authority to approve or deny NOAA's request to
release worst-case oil trajectory models?

b.  What was OMB's official role within the National Incident Command
(NIC) hierarchy?

c.  Did OMB supersede the U.S. Coast Guard's role within NIC?

A8. (a-c) OMB did not prevent release of information regarding oil
spill trajectory models, nor did it supersede the U.S. Coast Guard's
role within the National Incident Command. Consistent with its
traditional coordination role for Executive Branch agencies on
legislative, budget, and regulatory matters, OMB coordinated
interagency review of materials related to the oil spill, including
NOAA's report on the potential threats to U.S. coastlines that might
result before a relief well stopped the flow. OMB worked to help ensure
that the information conveyed to the public was as clear as possible
and reflected input from the relevant agencies, as well as the latest
response efforts. The report was released on July 2, 2010. As NOAA
concluded in its letter to the National Commission on the BP Deepwater
Horizon Spill and Offshore Drill, ``I believe the end product was
consistent with the highest professional standards and best available
scientific data.''

Q9.  The budget for the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research
(OAR) includes a reduction of $3 million for the Unmanned Aircraft
Systems (UAS) research program. This program seems to be the
innovative, transformative research that you describe as being OAR's
new mission and seems to have the potential for long term benefits at
very little upfront cost.

a.  Where do these aircraft come from and how much does NOAA pay for
them?

A9. (a) The NOAA UAS Program has conducted a wide variety of scientific
UAS demonstrations using high, medium, and low altitude platforms and
payloads. Generally, these demonstrations are conducted in partnership
with other Federal agencies, universities, or private industry who own
UAS assets. During the last three years, the NOAA UAS Program has
utilized approximately 75% of its annual program budget to sponsor
field demonstrations with partners. The NOAA UAS Program contributes
approximately $200,000-500,000 per demonstration through university
grants or interagency agreements. One exception was a NOAA contribution
of $3.5 million plus personnel and payload support for a three-year
partnership with NASA to demonstrate the scientific capabilities of the
high altitude Global Hawk UAS. NOAA generally provides in-kind
contributions such as personnel support or ship services to field
demonstrations conducted with private industry. NOAA has also purchased
five small low altitude short endurance UAS for an approximate total of
$800,000. The results of these numerous demonstrations have identified
promising UAS technologies which could improve NOAA observations for
high impact, polar, and marine monitoring.

b.  This program seems to be the definition of a win-win scenario, so
why is it being cut?

A9. (b) In FY 12, NOAA requested a decrease of $3 million to reflect
the planned completion of the High-Altitude Long-Endurance (HALE) UAS
testing and demonstration program. Currently, the UAS Program is
drafting its Strategic Plan, to be completed by the end of FY 11. OAR
and NOAA hope to reemphasize and renew an even greater focus on
innovative and transformative research by identifying emerging R&D
priorities to enhance U.S. competitiveness; promoting U.S. leadership
in oceanic and atmospheric science in the applied use of such
knowledge; and advancing ocean, coastal, Great Lakes and atmospheric
R&D, including transformational research, consistent with NOAA's
mission.

Q10.  It is the Committee's understanding that OAR is currently using
less than $2 million of the $13 million annual Information Technology
R&D appropriation for the integration and conversion of commodity 64-
bit Graphic Processor Units (GPUs) into ``massively parallel fine-
grain'' supercomputer boards to run weather and climate models up to 30
times faster.

a.  Can you provide more detail and specificity regarding GPU potential
for increasing NOAA high-performance computing capability and reducing
hardware costs through this innovative initiative?

A10. (a) The use of Graphics Processor Units (GPU) is showing great
promise as an innovative and cost effective approach to increasing the
computational capability for NOAA, especially for geophysical (weather
and climate) models. In order to effectively use GPU systems to run
geophysical models, however, a completely new approach to programming
these models is required. This is because most current models have been
designed to run on computing systems with a relatively smaller number
of powerful processors, with each processor making complex calculations
over one data point (for example: one spatial point out of many points
across a geographic region) at the same time. This type of computing
system differs from GPU systems that are highly parallel, or comprised
of a large number of significantly less powerful, relatively less
expensive, processors that are programmed to simultaneously execute the
same calculation over different data points. Because geophysical models
themselves are highly parallel--i.e., require many of the same
relatively smaller calculations to be run on vast numbers of data
points--GPU systems are proving to be a good fit and able to provide
extraordinary speed and savings as compared to existing systems. This
additional speed allows for additional computing capability over the
same time period.
NOAA's Earth System Research Laboratory in collaboration with
industry has been researching a programming approach for GPUs that
scientists could use to develop geophysical models. Recent research has
demonstrated that a full atmospheric model runs 30 times faster on a
GPU system, as compared to a standard single CPU. The cost performance
comparison for a GPU versus a standard multicore cluster has yet to be
determined. By pursuing research needed to run weather and climate
models on GPUs and other similar technologies, NOAA is advancing
transformative research and technology development at the cutting edge
of cost and performance innovation in support of its operational
weather and climate supercomputer acquisitions.

b.  What is the optimal annual level of funding to most rapidly
research and develop this technology and maximize performance?

A10. (b) Answer: NOAA's Information Technology appropriation has kept
NOAA at the forefront of cost effective and state-of-the-art
supercomputing. With the exciting new potential for massively parallel
fine grain computing, NOAA is assessing the possibility of
reprioritizing some of its developmental efforts, particularly at its
three supercomputer development centers (National Center for
Environmental Prediction (NCEP), Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory,
and Earth System Research Laboratory) to pursue the use of GPUs and
other similar technologies for their respective weather and climate
models.

c.  What level of annual funding starting in FY 2011 is required to
make much more affordable GPU high-performance computing capability
available for the next planned NOAA supercomputer infrastructure
procurement or acquisition?

A10. (c) In FY 2011 and previous years, about $2 million of NOAA's
Information Technology appropriation has been used to develop the basic
approach needed to use GPUs for an atmospheric model (ocean and other
geophysical models are similar enough that they can use the same
software frameworks).

Q11.  Since the announcement of the NOAA Climate Service proposal in
February, 2010, have offsite trips, travel, conferences, workshops and/
or retreats been used to make transition and reorganization decisions
and do Climate Service planning, development, strategy, vision, and
implementation?

a.  How many meetings outside the Washington DC metro area have there
been?

A11. (a) NOAA's climate research, information and services staff and
capabilities are distributed throughout the United States in numerous
labs and centers. In order to ensure NOAA's climate vision, strategy,
and priorities reflect the breadth of its expertise, it continues to be
critically important for the agency's key climate scientists and
managers to be brought together in person from time to time.
Particularly, as NOAA developed its reorganization proposal and the
draft Vision and Strategic Framework, it was more critical than ever
that NOAA hear from scientists and managers across the agency to ensure
that these developments benefit from their insights, expertise, and
experience.
Since NOAA's announcement in February 2010 of the intent to create
a Climate Service in NOAA, there have been a total of five meetings
outside the Washington, DC metro area focused on developing NOAA's
reorganization proposal, which is contained in our fiscal year (FY)
2012 Budget Request currently before Congress for approval, and writing
the draft Vision and Strategic Framework document. The majority of
these meetings have been held in locations where NOAA has facilities
(one in Boulder, CO and two in Asheville, NC), and the others were held
in a central location (Chicago, IL) relative to the NOAA scientists and
managers who participated.

b.  How many NOAA employees have traveled and attended these gatherings
outside the Washington, DC metro area?

A11b. A total of approximately 81 NOAA employees have traveled to one
or more these five meetings. The number of employees who traveled to
each meeting is listed below.

1.  Boulder, CO. 65 travelers.

2.  Asheville, NC. 12 travelers.

3.  Chicago, IL. 13 travelers.

4.  Chicago, IL. 23 travelers.

5.  Asheville, NC. 23 travelers.

c.  How much has all such travel cost?

A11. (c) Total travel costs (e.g., airfare, lodging, per diem, ground
transportation, and miscellaneous) for these meetings were
approximately $117,517.61.

d.  Please submit a listing of all the trips, conferences, workshops,
retreats, and other sessions, their itineraries, who attended, and how
much each cost NOAA?

A11. (d) Meetings listed below were attended by climate scientists,
subject matter experts, lab and center directors, headquarters staff,
and administrative staff, including representatives across all NOAA
Line Offices.

1.  Boulder, CO. Travel cost: $ 61,979.60; no facilities cost.

2.  Asheville, NC. Travel cost: $ 12,433.93; no facilities
cost.

3.  Chicago, IL. Travel cost: $ 17,542.00; facilities cost:
$16,486.32 (for both Chicago meetings).

4.  Chicago, IL. Travel cost: $ 29,784.55; facilities cost
included in item 3.

5.  Asheville, NC. Travel cost: $ 12,263.85; no facilities
cost.

Questions submitted by Representative Randy Neugebauer

Q1.  In your written testimony you specifically mentioned that your
budget proposal makes responsible reductions. As I am sure you are
aware, we are currently facing a $1.6 trillion deficit this year and a
national debt over $14 trillion. Even if you make choices within the
budget to cut certain programs, you are still drastically increasing
spending in other areas. How can any budget that, in total increases
funding by nearly 16 percent over Fiscal Year 2010 levels be considered
fiscally responsible?

A1. The Fiscal Year 2012 President's Budget request is the result of a
rigorous bottom-up review. NOAA continues to be as efficient as
possible in performing its mission and is also committed to controlling
costs by proposing planned reductions for FY 2012. The reductions to
lower priority programs were made out of necessity and many of those
cuts, under different budget conditions, NOAA would not support. In
addition to the program cuts, a large reduction is $67.7 million in
administrative costs. These reductions are a key component of the
President's Administrative Efficiency Initiative and were identified by
consolidating activities, identifying more efficient acquisition
vehicles, and cutting back on travel.
Most of the proposed budget increase for FY 2012 is related to
NOAA's on-going satellite acquisitions, critical assets for many of
NOAA's programs and services. $687.8M of the $749.3M increase is
associated with NOAA's Joint Polar Satellite System (JPSS). With the
transition from the National Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental
Satellite System (NPOESS) program to JPSS, NOAA is now solely
responsible for acquiring polar satellites for the afternoon orbit and
ground system development, activities that were previously shared with
the Department of Defense.
NOAA's satellites, including JPSS, are critical to our Nation's
infrastructure and economy and provide 98% of the input to the Nation's
prediction models. They ensure the safety and viability of the maritime
commerce sector. They allow coastal managers to safely evacuate
millions of residents during hurricane season. They give our farmers
the long-term weather information that they need to know when and what
to grow. They provide our military and homeland security leaders with
critical information to keep our Nation safe and deploy troops
overseas.
The U.S. weather satellite program has been in place since the
early 1960s and is now threatened by funding uncertainty. Funding
decisions made now will determine the long-term costs and the quality
of essential weather services provided by NOAA to the American public
as early as 2016.
Delivering satellites and their data services on time maximizes the
public benefit, allows the government to execute acquisitions at the
lowest cost, and demonstrates NOAA priorities are focused on its most
critical assets to protect lives and property.

Q2.  What practices will you put in place to ensure that scientific
objectivity will not be compromised in favor of more agenda-driven
research practices within the Climate Service, as included in FY 2012
budget proposal?

A2. Science guides all of NOAA's activities, and the proposed Climate
Service would be no exception. NOAA holds itself to the highest
standards of data quality and transparency, and as a science agency is
well positioned to provide trusted information on climate variability
and change.
This Administration is committed to the honest and open conduct of
science. One of Dr. Lubchenco's first actions as NOAA Administrator was
to appoint a scientific integrity team at NOAA. Their charge was to
review the state of science and scientific integrity at NOAA, to
actively assist the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) in
developing recommendations that would strengthen the integrity of
science in government, and to draft a scientific integrity policy for
NOAA.
NOAA's first priority is to maintain the highest quality climate
science while being responsive to user needs. The principal goal of the
proposed Climate Service is to make the scientific data and information
about climate easily accessible in order to help people make informed
decisions in their lives, businesses, and communities.
The National Academy of Public Administration (NAPA) endorsed this
approach in their study and recommended that NOAA bring its research,
observation and monitoring, and service development and delivery
capacity into a single Line Office. NAPA noted that, ``It would
undermine the whole concept of an integrated NOAA Climate Service if
these research assets were not an integral part of the new line
office.'' The National Academies of Science have also stated that a
decision support initiative for climate should be ``closely linked'' to
its research element. (Informing Decisions in a Changing Climate,
2009).
NOAA would also use the proposed reorganization as an opportunity
to strategically realign its existing core research Line Office, the
Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR), to strengthen the
agency's overall science enterprise. OAR would refocus its work to
serve as an innovator and incubator of new science, technologies, and
applications for its missions, and an integrator of science and
technology across all of NOAA. The OAR Assistant Administrator would
serve as vice-chair of the NOAA Research Council. Further, as leader of
the central research Line Office, the OAR Assistant Administrator would
become the senior advisor to the NOAA Chief Scientist.

Questions submitted by Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson

Q1.  The President's budget request includes a $2 million increase for
research related to wind renewable energy. It is my understanding that
NOAA is working closely with the Department of Energy on this research.

a.  Please describe your wind research activities?

A1. (a) NOAA is currently engaged in several wind research activities
in relation to renewable energy. Several projects and initiatives are
described below:

1.  Boundary Layer Characterization Research in the NOAA FY 12
Budget--NOAA is requesting $2 million in FY 12 to improve the
Nation's understanding of the atmospheric phenomena driving and
determining boundary layer winds. Developing more accurate
nationwide wind forecasts will enable industry to make more
accurate predictions of wind power production, which will help
facilitate the expansion of U.S. clean energy generation.
Additionally, the improved weather forecasts that result from
this work will benefit many other NOAA efforts and national
priorities, such as aviation, surface transportation, air
quality, and plume dispersion studies. The $2 million will
focus on two activities:

a.  (1) Deploying wind test beds--To improve short-term
operational predictions, NOAA will deploy wind test beds in
different regions of the Nation because there are different
factors that influence weather, including wind speeds and wind
direction in different regions. These test beds will help
determine the optimal mix of instrumentation needed for wind
resource characterization and forecast improvement. Regions
include the Pacific Northwest, offshore along the Atlantic
Coast, the Appalachian region, the inter-mountain west, and
California.

b.  (2) Improve the HRRR weather model--The observations
collected at the test beds will be used to initialize the High-
Resolution Rapid Refresh (HRRR) weather model to understand how
to best utilize new observations in different locations to
produce a more accurate forecast of wind speed and direction.
In addition, operational observations will be obtained and
assimilated into the HRRR weather model. NOAA will leverage
high performance computing investments that the agency has
already made to facilitate improved Numerical Weather
Prediction forecasts.

2.  Wind-Forecast Improvement Project (WFIP)--The WFIP is a 12-
month field demonstration project funded by the Department of
Energy (DOE) that will occur in two regions of the country: the
upper Midwest and Texas. DOE is funding NOAA in this project
because DOE recognizes NOAA as a key partner in the atmospheric
science and services required for the development of renewable
energy. NOAA's weather forecasts are currently used by the
renewable energy sector but are not advanced enough to provide
the level of accuracy needed. The WFIP is a one-time field
project, and it aims to demonstrate that forecasts of turbine-
level (80-100 m) wind speeds and wind ramp events can be
improved by collection and assimilation of additional
meteorological observations. In addition, the results of the
WFIP will add to the published estimates of the economic value
of wind forecasts to the energy industry. Published studies
currently indicate that day-ahead wind forecasts save the
industry $1-$5 billion per year.
To do this, NOAA will deploy meteorological instruments, run
a research-grade weather model (High-Resolution Rapid Refresh
model), and analyze data from the WFIP. DOE is also funding two
private-sector companies that will use NOAA's improved wind
forecasts to create more accurate wind power predictions in the
WFIP.

3.  Collaboration with Duke Energy Generation--NOAA's Air
Resources Laboratory (ARL) is currently working under a
Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) with
Duke Energy Generation (headquartered in Charlotte, NC). This
CRADA was initiated as a public-private partnership to explore
potential improvements in techniques used to support hub-height
wind forecasts. Through the CRADA, ARL has deployed various
weather measurement capabilities at the Duke Energy's Ocotillo
wind farm located near Big Spring, Texas. The goal is to
conduct research on the structure of low-level winds affecting
wind turbines. ARL's research and observations are also being
made available to the various NOAA weather forecast groups
supporting renewable energy.

4.  Planning for the Future via the NOAA Energy Team--On
January 24, 2011, a memorandum of understanding (MOU)
formalized cooperation between the DOE/Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy and DOC/NOAA to work on initiatives of mutual
benefit and interest to the two parties on weather-dependent
and oceanic renewable energy. The MOU also requires that by May
20, 2011, the two parties sign an action plan that identifies
key challenges, goals and proposed initiatives to develop
improved science and services to support growth of renewable
energy, such as wind (terrestrial and offshore), solar,
biomass/biopower, conventional hydropower and marine
hydrokinetic (waves, tides, and currents). A draft action plan
is currently being prepared.

Q1. (b)  What is the arrangement between DOE and NOAA and what is DOE's
contribution to NOAA's work? Is DOE procuring equipment for NOAA or
providing technical assistance related to wind energy generation?

A1. (b) While DOE is not procuring equipment or providing direct
support for this wind research initiative, staffers of the two agencies
meet regularly to share information and advice on how to best support
the information needs for wind, solar and other renewable energy
generation such as hydrokinetic and biomass sources. The primary focus
of this request is wind energy as DOE and NOAA are in agreement that
the information needs for wind energy are currently most pressing and
most attainable. NOAA's expertise lies in meteorology and climate
science that are needed for optimal operations and planning for both
renewable energy generation and facility siting. Separate from the FY
12 request for Boundary Layer Characterization Research (as described
above), DOE is funding NOAA to participate in a one-time, 12-month
field research project. This project is called the Wind Forecast
Improvement Project (WFIP). NOAA hopes to have all instruments turned
on and collecting data from July 2011-July 2012.
Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Paul Anastas, Assistant Administrator, Office of
Research and Development(ORD), U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

IRIS ASSESSMENT

Q1.  On June 15th, the EPA placed the IRIS assessments for several
chemicals ``on hold'' citing the need to determine whether questions
raised by the National Toxicology Program's review of the Ramazzini
Institute's methanol study will require the Agency to revise the
assessments or take additional action to verify the data used in these
assessments.

a.  It is my understanding that the Agency is in discussions with the
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) to send an
additional team of pathologists to Italy to visit the Ramazzini
laboratory to conduct a full review of the chemical studies in
question. Is that accurate?

A1. (a) EPA and NIEHS are jointly sponsoring an independent Pathology
Working Group (PWG) review of selected studies on methanol, MTBE, ETBE,
acrylonitrile, and vinyl chloride conducted by the Ramazzini Institute.
The PWG review is currently underway and involves a team of
pathologists traveling to the Ramazzini laboratory in Italy to conduct
the review.

b.  If so, how do you intend to conduct this review?

A1. (b) EPA coordinated with NIEHS to outline the issues related to the
specific chemicals of concern and is co-sponsoring the effort. NIEHS is
overseeing the PWG review, which was designed in accordance with
standard procedures established for NIEHS's National Toxicology Program
(NTP) pathology reviews.

c.  What will you do to ensure that this effort is conducted in a fully
transparent manner that allows for the public to comment?

A1. (c) EPA announced in an April 11, 2011 press release that a PWG
review was being conducted, co-sponsored by NIEHS and EPA and in
cooperation with the Ramazzini Institute. The PWG review is ongoing and
is being conducted independently by NIEHS using standard pathology
review procedurespathology review procedurespathology review procedures
\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Standard procedures outlined in p605-608 Principles in
toxicology http://books.google.com/
books?id=vgHXTId8rnYC&pg=PA606&lpg=PA606&dq=pathology+working+group+proc
edures&s ource=bl&ots=IW8kjubP-
d&sig=iSYelcWvpgzlxs5002MMIKUudME&hl=en&ei=naTJTdnMEafu0
gGvhemZCg&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=5&ved=0CDAQ6AEwBA#v=onepa
ge&q =pathology %20working%20group%20procedures&f=false

d.  If you are not in discussion with NIEHS, please tell me in detail
what you are doing regarding the IRIS assessments that are currently on
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
hold?

A1. (d) EPA continues to work closely and collaboratively with NIEHS on
methanol cancer review. The non cancer assessment for methanol is not
impacted by Ramazzini data and is moving forward to an independent
external peer review. Based on other available data, EPA has determined
that reliance on Ramazzini Institute study results is not necessary to
continue with assessment development for MTBE, ETBE and acrylonitrile
(EPA released for a 60 day public comment and peer review on June 30,
2011), including an assessment of cancer risks. Therefore, work on the
assessments for the three chemicals will continue during the PWG
review.

RAMAZZINI INSTITUTE

Q2.  In June 2010, EPA announced that it had ``under[taken] a thorough
review of all ongoing and previous chemical assessments to determine
which, if any, relied substantially on cancer testing from the
Ramazzini Institute,'' had ``found four ongoing chemical assessments--
on methanol, MTBE, ETBE and acrylonitrile--that rely significantly on
cancer data from the Ramazzini Institute,'' and had ``placed those
assessments on hold and will determine whether the questions raised by
NTP will require EPA to revise the assessments or take additional,
action to verify the data used in these assessments.'' The TCE
assessment relies substantially on Ramazzini data, both to support its
conclusion that TCE is a kidney carcinogen, the endpoint that drives
the cancer risk assessment, and to derive the cancer potency factor.
Has EPA verified the TCE Ramazzini data? If not, why has EPA not placed
the TCE assessment on hold along with the others?

A2. In EPA's 2009 draft Toxicological Review of Trichloroethylene
(TCE), cancer potency estimates are based on epidemiologic data
indicating that TCE increases the risk of cancer in humans. Human
studies (see references below) are also the primary basis for the
proposed conclusion in the draft assessment that TCE is a kidney
carcinogen. EPA does not use the animal studies [e.g., Ramazzini
Institute studies (Maltoni et al. 1986 and 1988)] as the primary basis
for concluding that TCE is a human kidney carcinogen, or to derive the
cancer potency factor in the draft assessment.
Multiple positive rodent bioassays, one of which is the ``Ramazzini
data,'' lend additional support for the human-based cancer
classification and cancer potency values. The results from each of the
independently run rodent bioassays are similar. In other words,
multiple independent studies produced similar results. Therefore,
removing one of these independent supporting studies (e.g., Ramazzini)
would have no effect on EPA's conclusions regarding the qualitative or
quantitative assessment of cancer. EPA is not considering removing any
study from the TCE assessment at this time.

References

Anttila, A; Pukkala, E; Sallmen, M; et al. (1995) Cancer incidence
among Finnish workers exposed to halogenated hydrocarbons. J Occup
Environ Med 37:797-806.

Axelson, O; Selden, A; Andersson, K; et al. (1994) Updated and
expanded Swedish cohort study on trichloroethylene and cancer risk. J
Occup Environ 36:556-562.

Boice, JD, Jr.; Marano, DE; Fryzek, JP; et al. (1999) Mortality
among aircraft manufacturing workers. Occup Environ Med 56:581-597.

Greenland, S; Salvan, A; Wegman, DH; et al. (1994) A case-control
study of cancer mortality at the transformer-assembly facility. Int
Arch Occup Environ Health 66:49-54.

Hansen, J; Raaschou-Nielsen, O; Christensen, JM; et al. (2001)
Cancer incidence among Danish workers exposed to trichloroethylene. J
Occup Environ Med 43:133-139.

Morgan, RW; Kelsh, MA; Zhao, K; et al. (1998) Mortality of
aerospace workers exposed to trichloroethylene. Epidemiology 9:424-431.

Raaschou-Nielsen, O; Hansen, J; McLaughlin, JK; et al. (2003)
Cancer risk among workers at Danish companies using trichloroethylene:
a cohort study. Am J Epidemiol 158(12):1182-1192.

Radican, L; Blair, A; Stewart, P; et al. (2008) Mortality of
aircraft maintenance workers exposed to trichloroethylene and other
hydrocarbons and chemicals: extended follow-up. J Occup Environ Med
50:1306-1319.

Zhao, Y; Krishnadasan, A; Kennedy, N; et al. (2005) Estimated
effects of solvents and mineral oils on cancer incidence and Mortality
in a cohort of aerospace workers. Am J Ind Med 48:249-258.

Bruning, T; Pesch, B; Wiesenhutter, B; et al. (2003) Renal cell
cancer risk and occupational exposure to trichloroethylene: results of
a consecutive case-control study in Arnsberg, Germany. Am J Ind Med
43:274-285.

Charbotel, B; Fevotte, J; Hours, M; et al. (2006) Case-control
study on renal cell cancer and occupational exposure to
trichloroethylene. Part II: Epidemiological aspects. Ann Occup Hyg
50(8):777-787.

Dosemeci, M; Cocco, P; Chow, WH. (1999) Gender differences in risk
of renal cell carcinoma and occupational exposures to chlorinated
aliphatic hydrocarbons. Am J Ind Med 36(1):54-59.

Moore LE, Boffetta P, Karami S, Brennan P, Stewart PS, Hung R,
Zaridze D, Matveev V, Janout V, Kollarova H, Bencko V et al. 2010.
Occupational trichloroethylene exposure and renal carcinoma risk:
evidence of genetic susceptibility by reductive metabolism gene
variants. Cancer Res 70:6527-6636.

Pesch, B; Haerting, J; Ranft, U; et al.. (2000) Occupational risk
factors for renal cell carcinoma: agent-specific results from a case-
control study in Germany. MURC Study Group. Multicenter urothelial and
renal cancer study. Int J Epidemiol 29(6):1014-1024.

Siemiatycki, J. (1991) Risk factors for cancer in the workplace.
Boca Raton: CRC Press.

HALOGENATED PLATINUM COMPOUNDS

Q3.  The IRIS program continues to be on the GAO High Risk list. Much,
but by no means all, of the GAO's stated concerns focus on the slow
pace of completion of IRIS assessments. The Committee believes the
Agency should improve the way it allocates its limited resources and
more effectively prioritize the candidates for assessment. Please
explain the process the Agency uses to prioritize candidate substances
for review. Why did EPA choose to initiate an IRIS assessment of
halogenated platinum compounds when there is no scientific information
to conclude that there is the risk of ambient exposure?

A3. In its solicitation for nomination of new chemicals, EPA asks the
public, interagency partners, and Agency programs and regions for
information to help prioritize the need for IRIS assessments. This
information includes:

potential public health impact,

EPA statutory, regulatory, or program-specific needs,

availability of new scientific information or methodology
that might significantly change the current IRIS information,

interest to other governmental agencies, the public or
other stakeholders outside of EPA (e.g., states, tribes, local
governments, environmental organizations, industries, or other IRIS
users),

availability of other scientific assessment documents
that could serve as the basis for an IRIS assessment, and

other factors such as widespread exposure or potential
susceptible groups that would make the substance a high priority for
assessment.

EPA then uses this information to inform the decisions on which
assessments to undertake. Two of the more important pieces of
information that are used to gauge whether an assessment will be placed
on the IRIS agenda are EPA program and regulatory needs and the
availability of Agency resources to complete an assessment.
EPA's Office of Research and Development (ORD) proceeded with an
IRIS assessment of halogenated platinum compounds because EPA needed
the assessment to inform its evaluation of platinum fuel additives for
diesel engines in EPA's diesel retrofit program. EPA has posted a
general statement regarding emissions from the use of platinum-based
fuel additives that can be found at: http://www.epa.gov/cleandiesel/
verification/verif-list.htm (PDF file is found at: http://www.epa.gov/
cleandiesel/documents/420b08014.pdf). The need for the assessment of
halogenated platinum salts and platinum compounds was not related to
any concerns regarding emissions from catalysts commonly used on
automobiles.

RELATIONSHIP OF FUTURE CSS WORK TO EXISTING IRIS WORK

Q4.  How will the new draft plan ``Framework for an EPA Chemical Safety
for Sustainability (CSS) Research Program'' inform existing or pending
IRIS assessments if the intent of the CSS research program is to look
at chemicals in a more holistic, sustainable framework?

A4. Once finalized, the draft CSS Framework will guide EPA's chemicals-
related research activities over an approximately five-year period
beginning October 2011, thus its impact on current IRIS assessments may
not be large in the short term for assessments being finalized and ones
which have already undergone peer review. Results from the CSS program
will be used as soon as they become available and are peer reviewed.
These early inputs of CSS research will inform IRIS assessments under
development by elucidating mode(s)-of-action and toxicity pathway
information that informs hazard and dose-response assessments. This
evidence is anticipated to strengthen weight of evidence determinations
in IRIS assessments under development. The CSS program will derive
information coming from alternative animal species testing, high-
throughput and high content data source and will be integrated with
other biological measurements to inform health assessments like those
contained in IRIS. We expect the CSS research program to play an
important role in informing IRIS assessments in the future. As defined
by an approximate 3-5 year time horizon, one of the key objectives of
the CSS program is getting stakeholder involvement and buy-in for the
application of these new data in assessments. The full impact of CSS on
IRIS must factor in this process and the routine inclusion into
assessments will realistically take a few years.

INORGANIC ARSENIC

Q5.  The Science Advisory Board recently concluded its review of the
IRIS assessment of inorganic arsenic. The SAB noted that it was not
asked to conduct a full peer review of the assessment, including EPA's
calculation of the cancer risk estimate, a critical element of EPA's
conclusions regarding arsenic. Why did ORD intentionally limit the
scope of the SAB peer review? Why has EPA never obtained independent
peer review of the cancer slope factor it asserts for arsenic?

A5. The SAB completed, in 2007, an independent peer review of the 2005
External Review Draft Toxicological Review of Ingested Inorganic
Arsenic. After revising the draft assessment and in response to
comments received from external stakeholders, EPA went well beyond the
normal peer review process and opted to conduct a second external peer
review focused on EPA's implementation of the recommendations received
from the 2007 SAB panel. In other words, the 2010 SAB panel review was
a second peer review of the revisions that were made as a result of the
2007 SAB panel review. The scope of the review was discussed at the SAB
face-to-face meeting on April 6-7, 2010, as well as during the
chartered SAB meetings on June 16, 2010, and November 22, 2010. The
following text was contained in the ChargeJune 16, 2010, and November
22, 2010. The following text was contained in the ChargeJune 16, 2010,
and November 22, 2010. The following text was contained in the Charge
\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://yosemite.epa.gov/sab/sabproduct.nsf/
C74350B789B646D4852576D900693B14/$File/ORD-
NCEA+Charge+Memo+for+ARSENIC-WG+Feb+26+2010.pdf

``The goal of this focused external peer review is to
evaluate EPA's implementation of the key SAB (2007) external
peer review recommendations. This focused review should
concentrate on EPA's Response to the SAB comments in Appendix A
and the corresponding revisions in the 2010 draft IRIS
assessment. Please provide specific response to the Charge
below. If there are recommendations for further changes or
additions to the assessment, please provide specific
information on how those changes could be implemented with the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
currently available scientific information.''

EPA completed an independent peer review of the EPA cancer modeling
approach including the derivation of the oral CSF for inorganic arsenic
through the Science Advisory Board (Advisory on EPA's Assessments of
Carcinogenic Effects of Organic and Inorganic Arsenic \3\) in 2007. The
charge (see Section A-1 of the Advisory report) presented to this 2007
SAB included five questions specific to the cancer modeling approach,
including the derivation of the oral CSF. The 2007 SAB responded with
several recommendations for revision and corrections to the derivation
of the oral CSF contained within the EPA's 2005 External Review Draft
Toxicological Review of Ingested Inorganic Arsenic. \4\ EPA considered
all of the conclusions and recommendations from the 2007 SAB report in
preparing the current 2010 External Review Draft ``Toxicological Review
of Inorganic Arsenic (cancer).'' We note that the oral CSF falls within
the range of risk estimates developed by the National Research Council
in 2001, as indicated on page 137 of the 2010 External Review Draft
``Toxicological Review of Inorganic Arsenic (cancer).''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ http://yosemite.epa.gov/sab/sabproduct.nsf/
EADABBF40DED2A0885257308006741EF/$File/sab-07-008.pdf
\4\ http://oaspub.epa.gov/eims/eimscomm.getfile?p_download--
id=494513

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ENDOCRINE DISRUPTION SCREENING PROGRAM

Q6.  The EPA has proposed a second list of 134 chemicals for testing
under the Endocrine Disruptor Screening Program (EDSP), which is
intended to screen chemicals for their potential to interact with the
human endocrine system. In publishing this list of chemicals, the EPA
failed to abide by a requirement from the Office of Management and
Budget that the Agency report on the actual costs and time companies
have invested in the first round of testing of 67 pesticides.

a.  With testing costs estimated to be as high as $1 million per
chemical, what is the EPA doing to ensure that experience gained from
the first round of testing is captured before requiring testing for the
second EDSP list?

A6. EPA is committed to producing a full review of the EDSP Tier 1
Screening Battery to ``ensure that experience gained from the first
round of testing is captured.'' EPA is currently reviewing the public
comments we received on the amendment to the original EDSP Information
Collection Request. A full review of the EDSP Tier 1 Battery cannot
occur until data from the first list of chemicals have been submitted
and reviewed. The first sets of data from EDSP List 1 are not due until
October of this year. The last due date for the submission of data from
EDSP List 1 is May 2013. After submission of the data, the individual
studies will be reviewed and integrated into decisions about the
potential of the chemical to interact with the endocrine system. Only
after completion of these chemical-by-chemical evaluations can EPA
scientists most effectively evaluate the battery and coordinate a
scientific peer review. The earliest timeframe for the completion of
the scientific peer review would be 2014.

ENDOCRINE DISRUPTION SCREENING PROGRAM UNDER THE SAFE WATER DRINKING
ACT

Q7.  In developing the list of chemicals for the second round of EDSP
screening test orders under the Safe Drinking Water Act, the Agency
must demonstrate that the chemicals ``may be a contaminant in drinking
water'' and/or that ``a substantial population must be exposed'' to the
chemicals. However, when it published the proposed second list of
chemicals the Agency simply used the unregulated contaminant list from
the third Containment Candidate List (CCL3) without conducting any
effort to see if each of the chemicals on the CCL3 met the critical
factors that the Agency is required to consider under the SDWA.

a.  What is the EPA doing to ensure that EDSP testing orders are only
given to the manufacturers and distributors of specific chemicals that
meet the criteria for EDSP testing established under the Safe Drinking
Water Act?

A7. Section 1457 of SDWA provides that ``in addition to the
substances'' referred to in FFDCA section 408(p)(3)(B), ``the
Administrator may provide for testing under the screening program
authorized by section 408(p) of such Act, in accordance with the
provisions of section 408(p) of such Act, of any other substance that
may be found in sources of drinking water if the Administrator
determines that a substantial population may be exposed to such
substance.'' (42 U.S.C. 300j-17). The Agency used the third Contaminant
Candidate List (CCL 3) and the list of regulated drinking water
contaminants as the starting point to develop the second EDSP list
because these compounds represent the priority chemicals for the Office
of Water and the chemicals that are most likely to meet the criteria
specified by SDWA 1457.
In developing the CCL 3, the Agency considered not only public
water system occurrence data but also the occurrence data for ambient
concentrations in surface and ground water, and release to the
environment. The Agency believes these data are sufficient to
anticipate contaminants that ``may'' occur in public water systems and
furthermore, also represent those substances that may be found in
sources of drinking water to which a substantial population may be
exposed.
When the Agency published the second EDSP list in November of 2010,
we encouraged the public to submit comments and information related to
the inclusion and exclusion of chemicals from the second list. The
Agency is in the process of reviewing the public comments and
information it received on the list and will consider this information
before finalizing the second list and the schedule for issuing test
orders. If our evaluation of the public comments and information
submitted by commenters indicate that we should reconsider the
inclusion of contaminants that may not meet the SDWA 1457 criteria, we
plan to make any necessary changes before finalizing the second EDSP
list.

STAR PROGRAM vs OTHER FEDERAL GRANT PROGRAMS

Q8.  Your testimony stated that ``EPA will enhance its outreach to the
broader scientific community through its STAR program, which funds
competitive research grants across a broad range of scientific and
engineering disciplines.'' Does this program overlap with other
scientific programs that offer research grants? If so, can you
distinguish the STAR program from other federal programs?

A8. EPA coordinates its research with other federal agencies and EPA
programs through all stages of the STAR grant process to ensure we are
funding unique research that meets the needs of the Agency. A number of
steps are built into EPA's grant solicitation and award process that
provide a high level of confidence that we are not funding research
that overlaps with the missions of other federal agencies in a
duplicative way:

First, EPA chooses research topics based on projected
future policy needs, current investments across the government, and
available resources. When EPA pursues research in areas where other
agencies have large investments, EPA consults these agencies during the
solicitation development process.

Second, EPA's collaboration with other federal agencies
supporting related research ensures that roles are clearly defined and
that EPA supports environmental research uniquely targeted to its
science needs. For example, EPA's membership on the OSTP
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) ensures that EPA's
research is coordinated with the larger federal efforts in global
change research.

Third, EPA frequently involves experts from other
agencies to serve on its external peer panels for reviewing grant
proposals. These rigorous peer-reviews are performed by panelists from
the National Science Foundation (NSF), the National Institutes of
Health (NIH), and the Department of Homeland Security, (DHS) among
others, and are a key part of the foundation on which excellence is
achieved in all research programs.

Finally, EPA coordinates scientific research with other
agencies through informal interactions at scientific meetings and
workshops and also works closely with other agencies to communicate
research progress and results. For example, EPA's Nanotechnology
Research Program has held research planning workshops with researchers
from government, industry and academia to identify gaps in society's
understanding of nanotechnology in relation to human and environmental
health, and to guide EPA's research planning. In addition, EPA's
Computational Toxicology Research Program has a Memorandum of
Understanding with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS), the National Institute of Health (NIH), the National Institutes
of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), the National Toxicology
Program (NTP) and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to study
high throughput screening, toxicity pathway profiling, and biological
interpretation of the research findings.

EPA's Science to Achieve Results (STAR) program was evaluated by
the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) who released its findings in a
report titled ``The Measure of STAR.'' According to the report, EPA's
STAR program fills a unique niche by supporting ``important research
that is not conducted or funded by other agencies'' and is ``directly
relevant'' to the EPA's mission to protect human health and the
environment \5\. The report goes on to say that ``the agency has taken
effective steps to ensure that the process does not suffer from
conflicts of interest'' by providing a ``firewall that shields the
peer-review process from the influence of the project officers and
staff who oversee the individual-investigator, fellowship, and center
awards.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ The Measure of STAR: Review of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency's Science to Achieve Results (STAR) Research Grants
Program
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Board of Scientific Counselors (BOSC) also reviewed EPA's STAR
program and claimed that STAR fellows have made ``excellent
contributions in environmental science and engineering. The BOSC's
review highlighted the STAR program's unique ability to perform
targeted and unduplicated research: ``Although other federal agencies
fund a number of fellowship programs, none are dedicated exclusively to
the environmental sciences and engineering.'' Based on this finding,
the Chair of the BOSC claimed that EPA's STAR program is ``clearly are
of value to the Agency and the nation in helping to educate the next
generation of environmental scientists and engineers.'' \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ James H. Johnson, BOSC Review--http://www.epa.gov/osp/bosc/pdf/
star0610ltr.pdf

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions submitted by Representative Judy Biggert

NATIONAL CONTINGENCY PLAN SCHEDULE

Q1.  I understand EPA plans to revise the National Contingency Plan
(NCP) Schedule for dispersants in 2012. Can you indicate what the
timeline and plans are around this revision?

A1. EPA plans to propose revisions to the National Contingency Plan
(NCP) Subpart J Product Schedule regulations by the end of this
calendar year. EPA projects a publication date (in the Federal
Register) of December 2011. Incorporating lessons learned from the BP
Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill, EPA is developing revisions to the Subpart
J regulations under the NCP that govern the Product Schedule. These
regulations identify the tests and information required of product
manufacturers to list dispersants and other chemical agents on the
Product Schedule for use on oil spills in U.S. waters. Additional
toxicity testing, toxicity thresholds, and more rigorous efficacy
testing parameters are some of the priority issues being examined.

HYDRAULIC FRACTURING

Q2.  As you know, natural gas development in the Marcellus shale, and
related debate around the process of hydraulic fracturing, have
received a lot of attention. There is a lot of support for this natural
gas development and making sure it is done in a manner that protects
the environment--specifically--water resources. How does EPA intend to
support innovative technologies that can responsibly develop this
resource?

A2. EPA fully supports the development of innovative, responsible
technologies for extracting natural gas deposits. We are working with
the Department of Energy (DOE), particularly the National Energy
Technology Laboratory (NETL), on this issue. NETL has both experience
and the lead at the Federal level to assess the efficacy and impacts of
technologies related to hydraulic fracturing. This joint research
includes wastewater treatment of produced and flowback waters. EPA and
DOE wish to identify and assess the performance of options for
wastewater treatment of produced and flowback waters.

Q3.  As an example, your testimony mentions ``green chemistry''
research. Are there potential green chemistry technologies that EPA is
considering for water treatment in fracturing?

A3. EPA's research efforts are currently focused on its hydraulic
fracture study. In addition to our research efforts, through the
voluntary Design for the Environment Program, EPA may work with
industry to evaluate alternative fracturing fluid systems. The goal is
to see if there are greener chemical combinations that are at least as
effective as current fracturing fluids.

EPA GUIDANCE ON SELECTIVE CATALYTIC REDUCTION

Q4.  On September 29, 2010, I joined several of my colleagues in a
letter to acknowledge the EPA's finding that SCR systems are vulnerable
to tampering and to encourage the Agency to review the rules governing
the operation of such systems.

On November 19, 2010, the Assistant Administrator for Air and
Radiation responded to our letter with a letter of her own. In that
correspondence, Ms. Gina McCarthy indicated that the EPA planned ``to
issue new [SCR] guidance by the end of the year.''

To date, EPA has not acted on any new guidance. Can EPA provide any
idea what their timeline might be for new SCR guidance?

A4. Since July 2010, EPA has been reviewing comments and information
submitted in response to the public workshop and drafting updated
guidance. We plan to publish the guidance in the Federal Register for
public comment within the next few months. Question for the Record by
Representative Neugebauer

ENSURING SCIENTIFIC INTEGRITY

Q5.  In my view the Environmental Protection Agency has recently
imposed multiple costly regulations that have been based on unsettled
science. Most notably, hundreds of scientists have opposed the science
upon which the EPA based its greenhouse gas regulations. Moving
forward, how will your agency ensure that research contains a variety
of scientific input, including views that may diverge from the
Administration's agenda?

A5. It is essential that the EPA's scientific and technical activities
are of the highest quality and credibility for the American people to
have trust and confidence in EPA decisions and actions. We welcome
differing views and opinions on scientific and technical matters as an
important, legitimate and necessary part of the process to provide the
best possible information to regulatory and policy decisions.

Regarding your specific reference to climate change science:

EPA Administrator made Lisa Jackson made the Greenhouse Gas
Endangerment Finding on the basis of the science in the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth Assessment
Report, the work of the United States Global Change Research Program
(USGCRP), and the work of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS)
National Research Council (NRC). The products from all three of these
groups were peer-reviewed. These reports and peer reviews involved
thousands of scientists.
Most recently, in 2010 the NAS/NRC published a report- Advancing
the Science of Climate Change--which stated that ``Climate change is
occurring, is caused largely by human activities, and poses significant
risks for-and in many cases is already affecting-a broad range of human
and natural systems.'' This is only the latest report by preeminent
scientists that come to the same conclusion.
The report further states: ``Most of the warming over the last
several decades can be attributed to human activities that release
carbon dioxide (CO
2
) and other heat-trapping greenhouse
gases (GHGs) into the atmosphere. The burning of fossil fuels-coal,
oil, and natural gas-for energy is the single largest human driver of
climate change, but agriculture, forest clearing, and certain
industrial activities also make significant contributions.''
Further, two recent publications, looking at both surveys of
scientists and the scientific literature, found that 97-98% of the
climate researchers most actively publishing in the field agreed on
anthropogenic climate change. \7\ \8\ EPA is charged with making its
decisions on science and in using that science for the good of the
public and the environment. As such, EPA relied on the vast scientific
literature, from a huge number and diversity of scientists, to develop
its assessment reports and ultimately inform its endangerment finding.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Anderegg, W.R.L., J.W. Prall, J. Harold, and S.H. Schneider,
2010: Expert credibility in climate change, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 107
(27), 12107-12109.
\8\ Doran, P.T., and M.K. Zimmerman, 2009: Examining the scientific
consensus on climate change, EOS Trans. AGU, 90 (3), 22-23.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, EPA's Technical Support Document (TSD) for the
Endangerment Finding was peer reviewed and the Endangerment Finding was
subject to public comment. The peer review was conducted by a panel of
federal experts, including one expert from EPA, to assure consistency
with the underlying assessment reports. There were two opportunities
for public comment on the Endangerment Finding, once during the
Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) process and once after
publication of the Proposed Finding. The public comment period for the
Proposed Finding, including formal public hearings, was held after the
proposal was issued but prior to the final action being developed.
Public engagement was significant: over 380,000 public comments were
received. EPA responded in depth to all the arguments raised within the
approximately 11,000 unique and substantive comments in a comprehensive
11-volume Response to Comments document. EPA reviewed individual
submitted studies that were not included in the major assessments, with
an overall conclusion that the studies did not change the judgments EPA
would draw based on the assessment reports. A limited number of
appropriate revisions were made to the TSD in response to the public
process, usually where public comments revealed that the TSD summary of
the underlying assessments could be improved. These activities
demonstrate that the development of EPA's Greenhouse Gas Endangerment
Finding included a broad variety of scientific input, including views
that were divergent from the ultimate conclusion of the Finding.

Questions submitted by Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson

E15

Q1.  Several U.S. ethanol associations submitted a waiver to the EPA to
increase the ethanol blend up to E15 from E10. (That is a blend of 15
percent ethanol and 85 percent gasoline.) EPA has partially granted a
waiver to allow manufacturers to introduce gasoline that contains
greater than ten percent ethanol and up to 15 percent ethanol (E15) for
use in motor vehicles newer than model year 2001, subject to several
conditions. It is the Committee's understanding that EPA is not
finished with its work on this issue. What kind of research went into
making the decision and what role did the Department of Energy play in
conducting this research?

A1. We based our decisions primarily on key data provided by the
Department of Energy's (DOE) Catalyst Study which was designed to
evaluate the long-term effects of gasoline-ethanol blends, including
E15, on the durability of emissions control systems, including
catalysts, used in passenger cars and light trucks to control
emissions. The test fleets were designed to be reasonably
representative of the national passenger vehicle fleet. They included
several high sales volume vehicle models and models selected for their
expected sensitivity to ethanol so that any potential problems would be
more likely to become apparent. The results of the DOE study coupled
with the results of other relevant test programs, including studies
conducted by the Coordinating Research Council (sustaining members
include the American Petroleum Institute and a group of automobile
manufacturers), confirmed the Agency's engineering assessment that the
changes in regulatory requirements for MY2001 and newer light-duty
motor vehicles led manufacturers to design and build vehicles able to
use E15 without a significant impact on the performance of light duty
vehicle emissions control systems. EPA believes that the available data
and information were sufficient to grant the waiver request for MY2001
and newer light-duty motor vehicles.

Q2.  Can you provide us with a timeline of the expected additional
studies underway or planned for ethanol blends?

A2. As discussed in the partial waiver decisions, it is our
understanding that the results of additional testing conducted by the
Coordinating Research Council on E10 and E20 are expected by the end of
2011. We did not believe it was necessary to await these program
results to decide the waiver request for MY2001 and newer light-duty
motor vehicles given the lack of documented problems in our motor
vehicle compliance program, the results of the DOE Catalyst Study and
other studies, and EPA's engineering assessment of vehicle emissions
systems compatibility with E15. Based on this combined body of
knowledge, we expect that MY2001 and newer light-duty motor vehicles
will be able to operate on E15 without experiencing long-term
deterioration.

Q3.  What is the long-term impact on our economic competitiveness?

A3. The increased use of renewable fuels required by the RFS2 standards
is expected to reduce dependence on foreign sources of crude oil and
increase domestic sources of energy. We expect that the increased use
of renewable fuels needed to reach the 36 billion gallons mandated by
2022 will displace a significant amount of petroleum-based gasoline and
diesel fuel relative to market projections of gasoline and diesel use
in the absence of the mandate. Furthermore, we expect the rule to
decrease oil imports and sustain the market for U.S. agricultural
products, including corn.

HYDRAULIC FRACTURING

Q4.  At the hearing in response to a question on the Hydraulic
Fracturing Study Plan, you mentioned EPA would ensure that strong and
thorough consideration would be given to all stakeholders concerns in
an objective and transparent manner? You further committed to providing
opportunities for input by stakeholders, including states, industry and
academia about concerns after the study has been initiated. a. Please
describe how you intend to do this while maintaining scientific
integrity and meeting tight time deadlines for the report.

A4. EPA has committed to conducting the study of the potential impacts
of hydraulic fracturing on drinking water resources in an objective and
transparent manner. The Agency's study will be conducted under EPA's
most rigorous quality assurance guidelines, which will ensure that all
of the study results will be reported objectively. EPA has encouraged
stakeholders to play an active role in the development of the study
plan and will continue to communicate with all interested stakeholders
regarding our progress.

EPA has already undertaken efforts to ensure stakeholder
engagement, as well as transparency in our deliberations and
implementation actions. These efforts include:

Public meetings held in Texas, Colorado, Pennsylvania,
and New York in 2010.

Webinars and meetings with federal, state, interstate,
and tribal partners during 2010.

An e-mail inbox dedicated to receiving comments from all
interested stakeholders.

Webinars regarding the release of the draft study plan in
February and March 2011

A period for stakeholders to comment on the draft study
plan to the Science Advisory Board in March 2011. We will continue to
engage interested stakeholders throughout the course of the study by:

Providing opportunities for public comment during the SAB
review process. The SAB Review Panel held public
teleconferences on May 19 and 25th to discuss their draft
report of the review of EPA's draft Hydraulic Fracturing Study
Plan. Stakeholders were provided an opportunity to submit oral
or written comments for consideration by the Panel.
Holding additional webinars-or other forms of
communication-to report on the progress of the study. Providing
the public with an opportunity to comment to the SAB during
their review of the 2012 and 2014 reports.

Summaries of all of these interactions can be found on EPA's
website at http://water.epa.gov/type/groundwater/uic/class2/
hydraulicfracturing/wells_hydroout.cfm, or on the SAB website at http:/
/yosemite.epa.gov/sab/sabproduct.nsf/MeetingCal/
153AC7DF8D2626F98525781000648075?OpenDocument.
Appendix II:

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Submitted Materials by Representative Dana Rohrabacher

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Submitted Materials by Representative Brad Miller

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Submitted Materials by Representative Brad Miller

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


