- AN EXAMINATION OF DOE'S CLEAN TECHNOLOGY PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN EXAMINATION OF DOE'S CLEAN TECHNOLOGY PROGRAMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND

ENVIRONMENT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 15, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-25

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-925                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DAVID WU, Oregon
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 PAUL D. TONKO, New York
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JERRY McNERNEY, California
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
Tennessee                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Energy and Environment

HON. ANDY HARRIS, Maryland, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               ZOE LOFGREN, California
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, June 15, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Andy Harris, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    18
Written Statement............................................    20

Statement by Representative Brad Miller, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    22
Written Statement............................................    24

Witnesses:

Dr. Arun Majumdar, Director, Advanced Research Projects Agency--
Energy, U.S. Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    27
Written Statement............................................    31

Dr. Henry Kelly, Acting Assistant Secretary, Office of Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy, U.S. Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    42
Written Statement............................................    44

David Frantz, Director, Loan Guarantee Program Office, U.S.
Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    54
Written Statement............................................    56

Discussion

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Arun Majumdar, Director, Advanced Research Projects Agency--
Energy, U.S. Department of Energy..............................    84

Dr. Henry Kelly, Acting Assistant Secretary, Office of Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy, U.S. Department of Energy.....   120

David Frantz, Director, Loan Guarantee Program Office, U.S.
Department of Energy...........................................   196

AN EXAMINATION OF DOE'S CLEAN TECHNOLOGY PROGRAMS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 15, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:01 p.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy
Harris [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

An Examination of DOE's Clean Technology Programs

wednesday, june 15, 2011
2:00-4:00 p.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

Purpose

On Wednesday, June 15, 2011, the Science, Space, and Technology
Subcommittee on Energy & Environment will hold a hearing entitled ``An
Examination of DOE's Clean Technology Programs.'' The purpose of the
hearing is to receive testimony from DOE's Office of Energy Efficiency
and Renewable Energy (EERE), Advanced Research Projects Agency--Energy
(ARPA-E), and Loan Guarantee Program Office (LPO) on DOE's Fiscal Year
(FY) 2012 budget request for clean energy technologies and the relative
prioritization therein.

Witnesses

Dr. Arun Majumdar, Acting Under Secretary for Energy, and
Director, Advanced Research Projects Agency--Energy, U.S. Department of
Energy

Dr. Henry Kelly, Acting Assistant Secretary, Office of
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, U.S. Department of Energy

Mr. David Frantz, Director, Loan Guarantee Program
Office, U.S. Department of Energy

Background

The Department of Energy manages a wide portfolio of activities
related to the development of clean energy technologies. DOE's programs
span the lifecycle of energy technology development, ranging from long-
term basic research supported by the Basic Energy Sciences program at
the Office of Science, through later-stage applied research,
development, demonstration and commercialization activities supported
primarily by EERE, ARPA-E, and LPO. In his 2011 State of the Union
address, President Obama made clean energy a centerpiece, calling on
Congress to mandate that 80 percent of America's electricity come from
clean energy sources by 2035 \1\ and committing to placing one million
``advanced technology vehicles'' on the road by 2015. In addition to
several tax and regulatory incentives to support this objective, the
President's FY 2012 budget request touts over $8 billion in spending on
clean energy technology development programs, representing an
approximate increase of 33 percent above current funding. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ While the Administration has not set forth a specific
definition of "clean energy" as part of this goal, the President stated
it would include "renewable, nuclear power, efficient natural gas, and
coal with carbon capture and sequestration."
\2\ http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2011/01/31/keeping-america-
competitive-innovation-and-clean-energy.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy

The mission of the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
(EERE) is to ``strengthen the United States' energy security,
environmental quality, and economic vitality in public-private
partnerships.'' EERE supports this mission statement by: ``Enhancing
energy efficiency and productivity; bringing clean, reliable and
affordable energy technologies to the marketplace; and making a
difference in the everyday lives of Americans by enhancing their energy
choices and their quality of life.'' \3\ EERE participates in many
crosscutting activities with other departments, as well as within DOE
offices, including collaborations with the Office of Science, the
Advanced Research Projects Agency--Energy, Office of Electricity,
Fossil Energy, Federal Energy Management Program, and the Loan
Guarantee Program Office.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ 1AAll mission statements taken from the relevant Department of
Energy website.

The Administration's budget request of $3.2 billion for EERE
represents a $1.365 billion (74.4 percent) increase over FY 2011
levels. In addition to the primary research, development,
demonstration, and commercialization activities conducted by EERE's ten
program areas, the Office supports cross-cutting activities. EERE's
Commercialization Team ``works to bridge the gap between research and
development, and venture capital funding and marketing,'' with a goal
to ``increase the rate and scale of energy efficiency and renewable
energy technology market penetration.'' \6\ Education and outreach is
also a significant component, with an $11 million budget to engage
stakeholders through new media and conduct public service advertising.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ http://www1.eere.energy.gov/commercialization
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
EERE also supports a multitude of international activities, both of
a multilateral and bilateral nature. \7\For example, EERE partners with
the government of Kazakhstan, through the Save Energy Now program, to
help improve Kazakh industry energy efficiency. EERE also participates
in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation to increase the development
and use of renewable energy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ http://www1.eere.energy.gov/international/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In FY 2010, EERE's $2.2 billion in funding was distributed
accordingly: 43 percent to industry, 30 percent to national
laboratories, 25 percent to city, state, and Federal (i.e. in-house
EERE R&D) governments, and three percent to universities.

EERE Primary Facilities

EERE's primary in-house facility is the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory (NREL), located in Golden, Colorado. NREL conducts focused
R&D activities aimed to develop renewable electricity, renewable fuels,
integrated energy system engineering and testing, and strategic energy
analysis. \8\ NREL hosts a robust commercialization and technology
transfer program to ``reduce private sector risk and enable investment
in the adoption of renewable energy and energy efficiency
technologies'' \9\ and transfer technologies to the marketplace. The FY
12 budget request includes $301.5 million for NREL, a $13 million (4.4
percent) increase over the FY 10 enacted levels. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ http://www.nrel.gov/overview/
\9\ http://www.nrel.gov/technologytransfer/about.html
\10\ NREL FY 2011 funding was not specified in DOE's Spend Plan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Located in conjunction with NREL is DOE's Golden Field Office. The
Golden Field Office ``builds partnerships to develop, commercialize and
encourage the use of [energy efficiency and renewable energy]
technologies'' \11\ in addition to managing NREL. The Administration
request for the Golden office is $550.4 million for FY 12, a $64.6
million (13.2 percent) increase from the FY 10 appropriated levels.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ http://www.eere.energy.gov/golden/

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Programs

The proposed funding for the Solar Energy program is $457 million,
an increase of $193 million (73.1 percent) over FY 2011 levels. This
request intends to fund the ``SunShot'' initiative recently proposed by
the Administration. As a part of this initiative, EERE is advancing a
``Dollar-a-Watt'' program to make solar energy cost-competitive with
fossil fuels without subsidies. To achieve this goal, solar generation
needs to reach a four to five cents/kWh equivalent installed price for
solar photovoltaics (PV) energy by 2020, or reduce the installed cost
of solar electricity by approximately 75 percent from current costs.
Accordingly, an overwhelming percentage of solar energy's increased
funding is directed to the PV subprogram. EERE will also continue to
fund the Concentrating Solar Power (CSP) subprogram for further
research in CSP development and thermal storage activities. As a means
to accelerate widespread market adoption of solar energy, the program
also seeks to improve applicable local codes, permitting, education and
training.
The FY 2012 funding request for the Wind Energy program is $126.9
million, an increase of $46.9 million (58.6 percent) over FY 2011
levels. The request continues funding a demonstration project to
develop offshore wind technology, and aims to address financial,
regulatory, technical, environmental, and social issues associated with
offshore wind.
The FY 2012 Biomass and Biorefinery Systems budget request is
$340.5 million, an increase of $157.5 million (86.1 percent) over the
FY 2011 level. This program aims to develop and transform domestic,
renewable, and abundant biomass resources into cost-competitive, high
performance biofuels, biopower, and bioproducts through targeted
planning, research, development and demonstration. In FY 2012, funding
for feedstock production trials will be eliminated. The elimination is
offset by a major increase of $150 million to expand the Cellulosic
Biofuels Reverse Auction with the intention of rapidly injecting money
into the emerging cellulosic biofuels industry. Support for integrated
biorefinery projects also notably decreases with increased focus on R&D
for downstream deployment efforts.
The proposed funding level for the Geothermal Technology program is
$101.5 million, an increase of $63.5 million (167.1 percent) over FY
2011. This program seeks to broaden its focus to include technologies
with a near-term impact by confirming undiscovered hydrothermal
resources with innovative exploration technologies. Additionally, the
Enhanced Geothermal Systems subprogram is aiming to advance new
technologies to use waste carbon dioxide to capture heat and make
electricity.
The Administration's budget request provides a total of $38.5
million for the Water Power program, which is an $8.5 million (28.3
percent) increase from FY 2011 enacted levels. The program funds
incremental hydropower development and demonstrates marine and
hydrokinetic (MHK) technologies. The funding will support full-scale
MHK open water demonstration projects to establish the baseline cost of
MHK generated electricity by 2013.
The Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technologies (HFCT) program requests
$100.5 million; a $2.5 million or 2.6 percent increase from FY 2011
levels. The program is refocusing on specific R&D on fuels cells for
stationary, transportation and portable power applications.
The budget request for the Buildings Technologies Program (BTP) is
$470.7 million, a $259.7 million (123.1 percent) increase over FY 2011
levels. BTP supports efforts to improve the energy efficiency of new
and existing homes and buildings primarily through advanced building
technologies, controls, systems, and whole-building design;
demonstration of integrated approaches for construction; bringing
transformational tools to the market place; supporting the ENERGY STAR
program; supporting the adoption, training, and enforcement of building
codes; and promulgating and finalizing efficiency standards as required
by law. The Energy Efficient Buildings Systems Design Hub is
administered by BTP.
BTP's FY 2012 request includes the President's new Better Buildings
Initiative, which aims to achieve a 20 percent improvement in
commercial building energy efficiency by 2020. In addition to increased
R&D funding for building technologies, the initiative includes new tax
incentives for commercial building energy efficiency projects and
financing opportunities for state and municipal governments through the
``Race to the Green'' competitive grant program. The initiative would
also receive funding from the Loan Guarantee Program Office.
The Vehicle Technologies Program (VTP) requests $588 million, an
increase of $288 million (96 percent) over the FY 2011 level. The
increase reflects an emphasis on the development and deployment of
plug-in hybrid vehicles (PHEVs). Specifically, in support of the
President's goal to place one million electric vehicles on the road by
2015, VTP is requesting $229 million to fund infrastructure development
for transportation electrification, including a major new program of
grants to communities for upgrading electric vehicle infrastructure.
The Industrial Technologies Program (ITP) request is $319.8
million, an increase of $211.8 million (196.1 percent) over FY 2011
levels. ITP seeks to revolutionize industry's energy and carbon
intensity by developing manufacturing technologies, materials, and
clean energy manufacturing capacity. The Next Generation Materials and
Next Generation Manufacturing Processes subprograms are both
drastically increased to assist in attaining this goal. Additionally,
the request proposes the creation of an Energy Innovation Hub on
critical materials. A new $50 million Energy Efficiency Partnership is
included to assist industry incorporation of energy efficient
technologies into existing facilities.

The Advanced Research Projects Agency--Energy (ARPA-E)

The Administration requests $650 million for the Advanced Research
Projects Agency--Energy (ARPA-E) and increase of $470 million (261
percent) over FY 2011 levels.

Established in 2007 by the America COMPETES Act (P.L. 110-69),
ARPA-E is statutorily charged with developing energy technologies that
result in ``(i) reductions of imports of energy from foreign sources;
(ii) reductions of energy-related emissions, including greenhouse
gases; and (iii) improvement in the energy efficiency of all economic
sectors.''
Of the $650 million request, $550 million would be provided through
discretionary funding for the purpose of sponsoring additional rounds
of project funding. Potential funding areas include stationary power,
electrical infrastructure, end use efficiency, embedded efficiency, and
transportation systems.
ARPA-E would also administer an additional $100 million Wireless
Innovation Fund (WIN) aimed at developing clean-energy wireless
technologies, paid for through a proposed transfer of wireless spectrum
auction revenues. The Administration proposes to establish WIN as a
mandatory program.

Current Technology Programs

Upon receiving $180 million in the FY 2011 Continuing Resolution,
ARPA-E announced $130 million in funding for five new Funding
Opportunity Announcements (FOA), the agency's fourth round of funding
opportunities. The round of FOA include:

Plants Engineered to Replace Oil (PETRO) to develop low-
cost production of advanced biofuels. ($30 million)

High Energy Advanced Thermal Storage (HEATS) to research
advancements in hot and cold thermal energy storage. The energy storage
technologies would assist storage necessary to deliver solar
electricity, produce fuel from the sun's heat, and improve driving
range of electric vehicles due to improvements in air conditioning
efficiency. ($30 million)

Rare Earth Alternatives in Critical Technologies (REACT)
to study technology alternatives to mitigate demand for rare earth
materials. ($30 million)

Green Electricity Network Integration (GENI) to advance
grid control technologies necessary to manage issues relating to
intermittent sources of electricity generation. ($30 million)

Solar Agile Delivery of Electrical Power Technology
(Solar ADEPT) to build on the SunShot Initiative. Solar ADEPT seeks to
reduce the total cost of utility-scale solar systems by 75 percent by
2017. ($10 million)

Each program was preceded by an ARPA-E sponsored workshop with
specific objectives to identify the technology space in which
advancements are necessary. \12\ The workshops inform the FOA and
resulting technology awards. The latest FOA include all program areas
proposed in the FY 2012 budget request.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\1A Workshop descriptions can be found at: http://arpa-
e.energy.gov/EventsWorkshops/PastWorkshops.aspx
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recently, ARPA-E hosted workshops on hybrid energy storage modules
and small-scale distributed generation. These technology areas are
likely the next programs to receive funding. ARPA-E currently does not
have any further workshops scheduled.
ARPA-E hosted the 2011 ARPA-E Energy Innovation Summit in March,
2011. The Summit included a Transformational Energy Technology Showcase
to highlight award winners, finalists, and other innovative energy
technologies which did not receive previous ARPA-E funding.

ARPA-E, Duke Energy, Electric Power Research Institute MOU

In March, DOE announced a partnership between ARPA-E, Duke Energy,
and the Electric Power Research Institute to ``identify opportunities
for testing and deploying ARPA-E funded projects.'' \13\ Duke Energy,
in partnership with ARPA-E, will have the opportunity to select
specific technologies funded by ARPA-E to deploy at Duke facilities to
test the viability of the technology's wide-scale deployment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\  http://arpa-e.energy.gov/media/news/tabid/83/vw/1/itemid/32/
Default.aspx

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Prior funding

First funded the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA), ARPA-E's initial tranche of funding resulted in 85 awards to
companies and universities to develop and commercialize technologies in
areas such as batteries, carbon capture, biofuels, and building
efficiency. A complete list of these awards is included in Appendix A.

Loan Guarantee Program Office

The President's FY 12 budget request for DOE's Loan Guarantee
Program Office (LPO) is $200 million, equal to the FY 11 funding. Funds
would be used as a credit subsidy to guarantee (i.e. agree to repay the
borrower's debt obligation in the event of default) loans authorized
under Section 1703 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005. This level of
requested funding would support an estimated $1 to $2 billion in loan
guarantees to support energy efficiency and renewable energy
activities.

According to DOE, the mission of LPO is to ``accelerate the
domestic commercial deployment of innovative and advanced clean energy
technologies at a scale sufficient to contribute meaningfully to the
achievement of our national clean energy objectives-including job
creation; reducing dependency on foreign oil; improving our
environmental legacy; and enhancing American competitiveness in the
global economy of the 21st century.'' \14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ https://lpo.energy.gov/?page_id=17
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Specifically, LPO endeavors to encourage commercial- and utility-
scale development and adoption of new or significantly improved energy
technologies.
Since its creation, the LPO has awarded over $30 billion for 28
projects, financing commercial- and utility-scale development of
technologies in the following areas:

Biomass

Hydrogen

Solar

Wind and Hydropower

Advanced Fossil Energy Coal

Carbon Sequestration practices and technologies

Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability

Alternative Fuel Vehicles

Industry Energy Efficiency Projects

Pollution Control Equipment

In addition to the President's request for Title 17 loan
guarantees, the budget asks for $105 million to create a Better
Building Pilot Loan Guarantee Initiative for Universities, Schools, and
Hospitals. This new program would fund loan guarantees to retrofit
commercial buildings and would subsidize up to $2 billion in total loan
principal.
On September 30, 2011, the Section 1705 loan guarantees, authorized
by the Stimulus, will expire. Due to the expiration of the Section 1705
program, LPO will not have the ability to fund projects in which an
application has been submitted. Accordingly, LPO notified companies
farthest along in the application process would be processed under the
Section 1705 terms, while the remaining companies will have to apply
for Section 1703 loan guarantees.A full list of loan guarantees issued
can be found in Appendix B.

ISSUES FOR COMMITTEE CONSIDERATION

Due to the wide range of clean technology initiatives underway at
the Department of Energy and the Administration's renewed push for the
development and deployment of those technologies, Committee examination
of DOE's clean technology programs warrant continued oversight. Issues
to be considered include:

How does DOE coordinate clean technologies programs
through various DOE offices?

What technology areas merit government funding and what
activities should be left to the private market?

How does DOE prioritize relative programs to gain the
most value for taxpayer funding?

How are programmatic activities being administered by
EERE, ARPA-E, and Loan Guarantee Program Office?

Appendix A

ARPA-E Awards Funding:

Funding Opportunity Announcement I--October 26, 2009

The Department of Energy announced major funding for 37 research
projects. $151 million in funding was awarded through the Department's
recently-formed Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy.

Funding Opportunity Announcement II--April 29, 2010

The second round of funding from ARPA-E was awarded to 37 research
projects and divided into three categories. $106 million was awarded to
projects that could produce advanced biofuels more efficiently from
renewable electricity instead of sunlight; design completely new types
of batteries to make electric vehicles more affordable; and remove the
carbon pollution from coal-fired power plants in a more cost-effective
way.

1.  Electrofuels-Biofuels from electricity (DE-FOA-0000206)

Electrofuels approaches will use organisms able to extract energy
from other sources, such as solar-derived electricity or hydrogen or
earth-abundant metal ions. Theoretically, such an approach could be
more than 10 times more efficient than current biomass approaches.

2.  Batteries for Electrical Energy Storage in Transportation (BEEST)
(DE-FOA-0000207)

This ARPA-E program seeks to develop a new generation of ultra-high
energy density, low-cost battery technologies for long range plug-in
hybrid and all-electric vehicles. If successful, the technologies
developed in this program will greatly improve U.S. energy securities,
spur economic growth, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

3.  Innovative Materials & Processes for Advanced Carbon Capture
Technologies (IMPACCT) (DE-FOA-0000208)

This ARPA-E program aims to support revolutionary technologies to
capture carbon dioxide from coal-fired power plants using a range of
approaches, including solvents, sorbents, catalysts, enzymes,
membranes, and gas-liquid-solid phase changes.

Funding Opportunity Announcement III--July 12, 2010

The third round of funding from ARPA-E was awarded to 43 research
projects and divided into three categories. Funded with $92 million,
the selections focused on accelerating innovation in green technology
while increasing America's competitiveness in grid scale energy
storage, power electronics and building efficiency.

1.  Agile Delivery of Electrical Power Technology (ADEPT) (DE-FOA-
0000288)

The ADEPT projects explore integrated circuits that incorporate
high-voltage transistors and high-performance magnetic materials in
applications. ADEPT is also focused on creating record-breaking, high-
voltage transistors that can allow the electricity grid to be used like
a large controllable circuit.

2.  Building Energy Efficiency Through Innovative Thermodevices (BEET-
IT) (DE-FOA-0000289)

The BEET-IT program is focused on developing new approaches and
technologies for cooling in buildings to dramatically improve energy
efficiency and reduce the use of refrigerants and their impact on
climate change.

3.  Grid-Scale Rampable Intermittent Dispatchable Storage (GRIDS)(DE-
FOA-0000290)

This program seeks to develop revolutionary new storage
technologies that exhibit energy, cost, and cycle life comparable to
pumped hydropower, but which are modular and can be widely implemented
at any location across the power grid.

Transformational Energy Research and Development Projects--September
10, 2010

ARPA-E awarded $9.6 million to six projects that could improve
energy efficiency in buildings by reducing loads on air conditioners;
reduce costs associated with generating electricity from solar power;
and improve efficiency and power density of electric machines.

Funding Opportunity Announcement IV--April 20, 2011

U.S. Department of Energy Secretary Steven Chu announced up to $130
million from ARPA-E will be made available to develop five new program
areas.

1) Plants Engineered To Replace Oil (PETRO)--PETRO aims
to create plants that capture more energy from sunlight and convert
that energy directly into fuels. ARPA-E seeks to fund technologies that
optimize the biochemical processes of energy capture and conversion to
develop robust, farm-ready crops that deliver more energy per acre with
less processing prior to the pump.

2) High Energy Advanced Thermal Storage (HEATS)--ARPA-E
seeks to develop revolutionary cost-effective thermal energy storage
technologies in three focus areas: 1) high temperature storage systems
to deliver solar electricity more efficiently around the clock and
allow nuclear and fossil baseload resources the flexibility to meet
peak demand, 2) fuel produced from the sun's heat, and 3) HVAC systems
that use thermal storage to improve the driving range of electric
vehicles by up to 40 percent.

3) Rare Earth Alternatives in Critical Technologies
(REACT)--ARPA-E seeks to fund early-stage technology alternatives that
reduce or eliminate the dependence on rare earth materials by
developing substitutes in two key areas: electric vehicle motors and
wind generators.

4) Green Electricity Network Integration (GENI)--ARPA-E
seeks to fund innovative control software and high-voltage hardware to
reliably control the grid, specifically: 1) controls able to manage 10
times more sporadically available wind and solar electricity than
currently on the grid, and 2) resilient power flow control hardware--or
the energy equivalent of an internet router--to enable significantly
more electricity through the existing network of transmission lines.

5) Solar Agile Delivery of Electrical Power Technology
(Solar ADEPT)--the Solar ADEPT program focuses on integrating advanced
power electronics into solar panels and solar farms to extract and
deliver energy more efficiently. Specifically, ARPA-E aims to invest in
key advances in magnetics, semiconductor switches, and charge storage,
which could reduce power conversion costs by up to 50 percent for
utilities and 80 percent for homeowners.

At this time no awards have been issued for Funding Opportunity
Announcement IV

Appendix B

Loan Guarantee Program Awards Funding:

Chairman Harris. The Subcommittee on Energy and Environment
will come to order. Good afternoon. Welcome to today's hearing
entitled An Examination of DOE's Clean Technology Programs. In
front of you are packets containing the written testimony,
biographies and truth-in-testimony disclosures for today's
witness panel.
I am now going to recognize myself for five minutes for an
opening statement.
I first want to thank our witnesses for being here today to
testify on the DOE's clean technology programs. I appreciate
you taking time from your busy schedules to appear before us
this afternoon.
But before discussing the substance of today's hearing, I
would like to take a moment to note my displeasure with the
DOE's lack of responsiveness to this Committee. Following
Secretary Chu's March appearance before the Committee on DOE's
2012 budget request, Members submitted written questions to be
answered for the hearing record. The questions were sent to DOE
on March 18, three months ago, but the Committee has yet to
receive a response.
Similarly, on May 4, I sent a letter to Secretary Chu
requesting information on many of the programs we are here
today to examine. Once more, DOE has yet to respond to my
letter, almost a month past the requested response date.
The Department's inability to answer fundamental and
straightforward questions about programs for which it is
requesting billions of dollars not only reflects poorly on the
Department but it hinders Congressional oversight and informed
budget and policy decision-making. The offices represented
today are an excellent case in point. The President is
requesting almost $2 billion in new spending for them. I would
suggest to DOE that if getting this new money is truly a
departmental priority, responding to Congress in a timely
fashion should be a priority as well.
The budget and policy context in which we consider DOE's
clean technology programs today is clear and sobering. The
United States is currently facing a budget deficit of $1.6
trillion, with a T, for the current fiscal year and our
government is borrowing more than 40 cents for every dollar we
spend. Budget projections for the next decade and beyond bleed
red ink. Yet, in spite of this dire fiscal reality, President
Obama is requesting massive spending, to the tune of $8
billion, for ``clean'' energy technologies. This request comes
on the heels of a 60 percent increase in EERE's base budget
over the last six years, over $16 billion worth of stimulus
spending provided to EERE alone.
While we have only begun to review this spending in detail,
indications of wasteful, duplicative and inappropriate spending
may abound and are cause for great concern. At a more
fundamental level, I believe the growing attention to and
importance of energy policy warrants more careful consideration
of the appropriate role of government in energy technology
development.
While there is broad agreement that economically feasible
alternative energy would be of great benefit to the country,
the Federal Government's increasing tendency to involve itself
in the energy marketplace is troubling and may even be
ultimately counterproductive.
America grows by unleashing its entrepreneurial spirit,
motivated by the rewards of success, not through the government
picking winners and losers and allocating capital through
politically-driven policies and programs. The U.S. economy
thrives on innovation and a free market, and I look forward to
hearing from witnesses today how DOE can better help unleash
this innovation by complementing, not supplanting, private
efforts.
In May, the economy experienced another month of anemic
growth and the unemployment rate remains above nine percent. It
may be counterintuitive to the Washington mindset, but the best
way to put American back to work may be to get the government
out of the way of the private sector. I believe this applies to
energy specifically as well as it does generally to the overall
economy.
Thank you again for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harris follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.035

Chairman Harris. And I now recognize Mr. Miller for five
minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Miller. Thank you. I appreciate Chairman Harris calling
today's hearing to examine the Administration's clean
technology programs.
Unfortunately, at a time when the United States needs
comprehensive energy policies, the Administration and the
American people are getting mixed messages from Congress about
our visions for energy in the future. There is a growing and
unnecessary divide on both the potential for clean energy
technologies and the appropriate role of government where
winners are supposed to be decided largely by the free market.
I say that winners are decided largely by the marketplace
because energy markets are really anything but free. The sector
has always been heavily regulated and heavily subsidized by
governments, and in many cases, prices are controlled by
cartels and manipulated by complex financial mechanisms--I
think we will be discussing that this week on the Floor--that
have little relation to simple supply and demand.
Classic economic models are insufficient for reflecting the
complexities of the energy marketplace. At best, consumer
choice is often limited to turning down a thermostat or buying
a more fuel efficient car. The sooner we can get beyond the
fallacy that free market forces alone can or will determine
which technologies are best for the public, the sooner we can
have a productive discussion about how to ensure an
environmentally and economically sustainable energy future.
That is the ultimate goal of what is expected of us as
leaders. We are not expected to block the progress of
innovation for the sake of standing guard over outdated
economic doctrine. Our global competitors are more than happy
to let us quibble over picking winners and losers while we sit
back assuming the United States will ultimately prevail in the
global free marketplace that we created. They are busy playing
an entirely different game. Other governments are very
aggressively investing in high technology and clean energy
sectors with enough money to ensure that even their weakest
players can beat the United States in those new markets. That
is reason enough to add a few new plays to our playbook.
The programs that we are discussing today are innovative
government approaches to this problem. Despite the usual
rhetoric surrounding energy R&D programs, the government
actually seldom picks winners or losers. Instead we place bets
on ground-breaking science, promising technologies, talented
researchers, and pioneering companies, all for the purpose of
promoting a more diverse and competitive marketplace where
cleaner and more efficient technologies stand a chance.
Sometimes they win, sometimes they lose, and often the benefits
are unforeseen or simply go unrecognized. But that is what we,
the government, are supposed to do in R&D programs. From basic
research on nanoscience materials to loan guarantees for
deployment of whole systems, the role of government should be
to take on technological and financial risk that industry and
academia alone are not equipped or inclined to do. We cannot
guarantee the success of any project or completely protect
against failure. If we could do either, the private sector
should do it.
So we cast a wide net, invest in a range of technologies
and projects, manage risk, accept that some disappointment and
failures are expected and necessary, hope for breakthroughs and
then translate scientific discoveries into practical solutions.
The programs today represent different variations on that
model with the end goals the same. It is a shame that increased
energy efficiency of the Nation and diversifying our energy
supply has become so politicized. Some in Congress would like
to paint the complex world of renewable energy with a single
brushstroke to make the public believe that it is all a big
farce. They want the American people to believe it is a zero-
sum game, conventional energy versus clean energy, with the
latter paving a path to economic ruin.
We hear them say that renewable energy technologies are a
waste of taxpayer money because they are not financially viable
without government support while at the same time arguing that
those technologies are too mature to warrant government R&D
funding and are better left to the private sector. Well, which
is it?
Stranger still, as my Republican colleagues lobbied to make
massive cuts or shut down DOE clean energy programs altogether,
they fail to acknowledge their own longstanding efforts to
subsidize through tax incentives, R&D programs, liability
indemnification and other means the oil, gas, nuclear and coal
sectors, some of the most mature and profitable industries in
the world. The subsidies for that industry to develop
technologies appears to be an economically and politically
powerful industry using their clout to have taxpayers simply
pick up some of their ordinary business expenses.
The appropriateness of continued taxpayer support of those
sectors may be best left to another conversation, but I am
highlighting the inconsistency in my colleagues' concerns over
interfering in the free market by picking winners and losers
and appealing for some even-handedness when determining which
sectors are deserving of increasingly scarce federal resources.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your attention to
this project. In contrast just a few years ago there was an
unfortunate and growing divide on clean energy with partisan
politics clouding our judgment on what is the best way for our
future. I believe that in the future we will all see that a
diverse and clean energy portfolio is worth the investment, and
luckily we have made a down payment through programs like ARPA-
E, EERE and the Loan Guarantee program.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.038

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Miller. If there
are Members who wish to submit additional opening statements,
your statements will be added to the record at this point.
At this time I would like to introduce our witness panel.
Dr. Arun Majumdar is the Director for the DOE's Advanced
Research Projects Agency-Energy, ARPA-E Office. Prior to
joining to ARPA-E, Dr. Majumdar was the Associate Laboratory
Director for Energy and Environment at Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory and a Professor of Mechanical Engineering
and Materials Science and Engineering at the University of
California, Berkeley. He received his Bachelor's Degree in
Mechanical Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology,
Bombay, in 1985 and his Ph.D. from Berkeley in 1989.
Dr. Henry Kelly is the Acting Assistant Secretary for the
Department of Energy's Office for Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy, EERE. Prior to his arrival at DOE, Dr. Kelly
served as the President of the Federation of American
Scientists. Dr. Kelly previously worked in the Clinton White
House as the Assistant Director for Technology for the Office
of Science and Technology Policy. He has a Ph.D. in physics
from Harvard University. I am impressed. And a Bachelor of
Science in Physics from Cornell University.
Mr. David Frantz serves as the Director of the Department
of Energy's Loan Guarantee Program, overseeing application
review, due diligence, negotiation, environmental compliance
and performance tracking. Prior to working at the DOE, Mr.
Frantz worked with Overseas Private Investment Corporation as
well as with Advanced Capital Markets, a Washington, D.C.,
based investment banking firm specializing in international
project and corporate finance. Mr. Frantz earned two Master's
Degrees in International Economics and International Business
respectively from the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at
Tufts University. He received a Bachelor of Arts and a
commission in the U.S. Navy from VMI. Mr. Frantz also completed
post-graduate work at the Harvard Business School.
And as our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is
limited to five minutes each, after which the Members of the
committee will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Arun Majumdar,
Director of the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy, ARPA-
E, at the Department of Energy. Doctor.

STATEMENT OF DR. ARUN MAJUMDAR, DIRECTOR, ADVANCED RESEARCH
PROJECTS AGENCY-ENERGY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Mr. Majumdar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I
would like to extend my thanks to the Chairman, the Ranking
Member and the esteemed Members of this Subcommittee for
inviting me here today to testify on behalf of ARPA-E about our
R&D activities.
As I have said before to many of you, I consider you all to
be my board of directors, and I am now here to report to you,
my board,on what we have done in the past and what we plan to
do in the future.
I want to start today on a historical note. ARPA-E was
created by this committee and is modeled after DARPA, which was
launched in 1958 in response to the launch of Sputnik when it
was felt the United States was losing its technological lead to
the Soviets and we needed some quantum leaps in technology. In
the next 30 years, DARPA helped catalyze innovations such as
the Internet, GPS, stealth-type technology and many others.
This has strengthened not only our national security but also
our economic prosperity.
We are now in a similar critical Sputnik-like moment. We
are falling behind in a global race of clean and sustainable
energy solutions. We import more than 50 percent of the oil we
use while sending over a billion dollars a day overseas. Our
gasoline prices rise because of instabilities around the world.
This in the long term is not sustainable. Our children and
grandchildren's secure future is at stake, and a secure future
is like a stool with three legs: national security, economic
security and environmental security. At the foundation of all
three securities are innovations and energy technology. ARPA-
E's goal is very simple: catalyze energy technology innovations
for a secure American future.
In a short existence in just over two years, what have we
done so far? We have stood up in organization with a philosophy
of excellence in everything we do. I would now like to share
with you five core values and some early successes.
Number one, people; Recruit the best talent possible. We
have recruited some of the best and the brightest from the
technical community. Our program directors stay for a maximum
of three years, and then they have to leave. This is not a
permanent job. Their future career depends on how they perform
at ARPA-E, and they have a three-year clock ticking. This has
led to incredible focus and outcomes.
Number two, speed and efficiency. To be globally
competitive, speed is of the essence. We have developed a
streamlined process where we can execute with a fierce sense of
urgency at unprecedented speed and efficiency. We have reduced
the contracting time to 2 months and taken other steps that
have led us to being called the urgency agency.
Number three, breakthrough technologies through
competition. ARPA-E is focused on identifying opportunities for
new energy technologies that are too risky for the private
sector. Let me give you an example. We created a program to
innovate future batteries that would give electric cars longer
range and make them cheaper than gasoline-based cars so that
electric cars could sell without subsidies. This battery does
not exist today. Under this program, we announced ambitious
targets for cost and performance, but we're agnostic on the
technology. There are now 15 different teams translating
science into 15 different competitive technologies. We create
the competition, and we let the market pick the winners. If one
of these batteries is successful, it will make today's lithium-
ion batteries obsolete and ensure U.S. technological lead.
Number four, stewardship and integrity; to be the best
possible stewards of the taxpayers' dollars. All projects in
ARPA-E are selected purely based on merit and input from a
panel of experts. Once selected, our program directors are
personally invested in each and every project they manage. That
is, they are essentially part of the team trying to help them
when they get stuck. But if a technology is not working, we put
the project on red alert and give them a finite time to
recover. If this does not work, we will terminate the project.
We would rather put that money back in the Treasury or fund
better ideas than continue down an unsuccessful path.
Number five, create value for secure future. In March we
announced a partnership with the Department of Defense to co-
develop energy storage systems so that forward operating bases
can reduce their fuel consumption by more than 30 percent. As
you know, energy is a national security issue, and nowhere is
this more vital than in terms of military consumption of
energy.
In parallel, we have started a consortium of utilities in
order to connect these breakthrough smart and clean energy
technologies to the commercial sector as well. Just like the
Internet and the GPS, we believe ARPA-E-funded technologies
will create whole new industries that do not exist today but
could potentially open up large markets as well.
Back in 2009 and early 2010, six of our 120 projects
received $24 million in ARPA-E funding which allowed these
teams to do their research and reach the milestones ahead of
schedule. Because of this derisking of technologies, they then
attracted more than $100 million in private-sector investment
this year, which is four times leveraging of the taxpayer
federal dollars.
Earlier this spring we organized a very successful ARPA-E
Energy Innovation Summit which was attended by more than 2,000
innovators, and we showcased not only the technologies that we
funded but also the technologies we could not fund.
Where will ARPA-E go in the future? ARPA-E will continue to
proactively seek out white space in energy technologies where
it can fill vital gaps in energy R&D with coordination with the
Department's basic science and applied energy programs. For
example, we in the United States have found the largest
reserves of natural gas in the world. Can we use that in the
transportation sector and reduce our oil use? Can we produce
high-efficiency, low-cost engines and fuel cells to maximize
the use of natural gas? Can we engineer new plants and crops
that are designed to directly produce oil with extremely high
yield? Can we store heat at high temperatures so that nuclear
and fossil resources have the flexibility to meet peak demand
in addition to basic resources? Can we create light materials
for high-energy density battery packs for electric vehicles?
These are some of the opportunities that we plan to address
should Congress provide the funding we are requesting in the
fiscal year 2012 budget.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today,
and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Majumdar follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Arun Majumdar, Director, Advanced Research
Projects Agency-Energy, U.S. Department of Energy
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.011

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Doctor. And I now
recognize our second witness, Dr. Henry Kelly, Acting Assistant
Secretary for the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy at the Department of Energy. Dr. Kelly.

STATEMENT OF DR. HENRY KELLY, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY,
OFFICE OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Mr. Kelly. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Miller and Members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to let me
talk about the U.S. Department of Energy's energy efficiency
and renewable resources activities.
EERE, as we are commonly known, supports research and
development, demonstration and deployment activities on
technologies and practices important for meeting national goals
to become more energy independent, reduce pollution and spark
innovation and entrepreneurship across America to help us win
the global competition for new jobs and new industries.
We shouldn't have any illusions that this is going to be an
easy job. We face determined and increasingly sophisticated
international competition. Nations such as China have carefully
crafted plans to acquire the capability to begin low-cost
manufacturing of innovative products developed principally by
the United States in order to take leadership in the clean
energy industry.
We have lost market share in key parts of the clean energy
industry including the production of solar devices, compact
fluorescent lights and many other areas. In fact, the U.S.
producers had a 40 percent market share in photovoltaics a
decade ago where now we are below a seven percent world market
share.
But even more troubling, losing the U.S. production risks
losing the incubators of innovation that begin to surround
production of technologies like these. We have seen this happen
in key areas like electronics, flat-panel displays, data
storage devices and cell phones. We simply can't afford to let
this happen in clean energy.
The EERE programs that I will be laying out for you today
are designed to ensure that we not only stem the loss in
production of these new technologies and reverse the loss in
market share but also return clean energy manufacturing to the
United States.
There is plenty of reason for optimism on this score. Many
observers were, for example, confident that the United States
had lost the lithium-ion battery industry overseas. It was
declared a complete defeat for the United States a few years
ago. But strategic investments made largely in the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act means that we are well on our way
to establishing capacity to produce enough batteries for
500,000 plug-in and hybrid vehicles by 2015, hoping for a very
large increase in global market share.
The U.S. industry has been clear that in order to compete
with determined foreign competitors who receive strong
financial support from their governments, they need the U.S.
Government to invest in advanced research, promote regulations
that encourage innovative solutions and, in some cases, provide
early stage financing for first of a kind production. Nearly
all the key technologies underlying today's clean energy
equipment are the direct result of federal research support
over the years, including EERE support. This includes batteries
being used in all new electric and hybrid vehicles; low
emissivity windows that reduce heat conductivity and solar heat
gain by at least 50 percent compared to standard windows and
now represent over half the market share in the United States;
new processes with the potential to turn cellulose into cost-
effective biofuels; and many more. And you will see in my
testimony there is a list of some of our other achievements.
Now, the challenges that we face mean that we have to build
on those successes of the past and move with unprecedented
speed and scale. Well-crafted federal programs are essential to
spurring private innovation and investment, and EERE works in
close collaboration with other DOE organizations that have the
distinct but related mission, including the Loan Programs
Office, the Advanced Research Projects Agency for Energy, and
the Office of Science. We also work very closely with other
federal agencies and state and local governments.
Our principal goal is to find ways to reduce the cost of
renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies to the
point where they can compete at current energy prices without
any subsidy. That would be success for us. But EERE also works
to identify barriers to the introduction of new clean
technologies, barriers that have blocked the introduction of
new energy efficiency and renewable technologies, even when
they are cost effective. We work to address these goals in
projects that include developing appliance standards;
developing model building codes; improving consumer information
by test methods that lead to labels like EnergyStar and the
Energy Guide labels; supporting the streamlining of regulatory
processes as well as streamlining permitting and helping
provide the funding for first-of-a-kind high-risk production
facilities. EERE has a mandate to help all federal agencies
meet these goals.
Because of the importance of EERE's technologies, the
President's fiscal year 2012 budget request includes a
significant increase for funding in this area, even as the
Administration seeks to reduce overall domestic discretionary
spending to the lowest levels in a generation. The technologies
supported by EERE will be in high demand worldwide in coming
years. If we do not move boldly and quickly to seize these
opportunities, it will be lost to foreign producers. We can
out-invent and out-compete any nation in the world, but only if
we are willing to sustain the kinds of private/public
partnerships that have driven so much American innovation in
the past, innovations that are now central to our economy.
Thank you very much, and I would be happy to answer any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kelly follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Henry Kelly, Acting Assistant Secretary,
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, U.S. Department of
Energy
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.022

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Dr. Kelly. I now
recognize our third witness, Mr. David Frantz of the Loan
Guarantee Program Office of the Department of Energy.

STATEMENT OF MR. DAVID FRANTZ, DIRECTOR, LOAN GUARANTEE PROGRAM
OFFICE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Mr. Frantz. Thank you, Chairman Harris, Ranking Member
Miller and Members of the Subcommittee. I again thank you for
the opportunity to testify today. I would note that I was the
first federal employee of the Loan Guarantee Program and stood
up the program in 2007 and 2008 prior to Jonathan Silver's
arrival as the Executive Director of the office. I welcome the
opportunity today to review with you the status of the
programs, the Department's successes achieved thus far and the
future plans to continue providing critical support to the
Nation's commercial deployment of clean energy and creating
jobs.
As you know, the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPACT 05)
created Section 1703 to address an urgent gap in financing for
clean energy technologies. This circumstance became even more
pronounced in the context of the recent economic recession. The
resistance of the markets to early financing of innovative
technologies has always been a challenge but became even more
acute during the recession. The urgent gap is called the valley
of death in the clean energy development cycle between
laboratory stage development and pilot facility stage operation
to ultimate commercial application. The LPO, particularly with
the advent of the Recovery Act for appropriated subsidies, has
become a crucially important tool to bridge not only the
financing gap but to do so on an accelerated basis.
The Loan Programs Office actually administers three
separate programs, the 1703 and 1705 programs as well as the
Advanced Technology Vehicles Manufacturing Incentive program.
The Section 1705 program was created as a part of the Recovery
Act to jumpstart the country's clean energy sector by
supporting commercially viable projects that had difficulty
securing financing given the tight credit markets. The 1705
program has different objectives than 1703's somewhat different
programmatic features. Most notable under 1705 is the
appropriated credit subsidy costs, which are paid through $2.4
billion in funds appropriated by Congress. Applicants must
still pay administrative fees. At this point I would emphasize
the fact that the program is required to be self-supporting
under the law by covering its administrative costs with earned
fees. Therefore, we operate the program at no cost to the U.S.
taxpayer.
Additionally, to qualify for 1705 funding, projects must
begin construction no later than September 30, 2011. DOE's
authority to enter into loan guarantee agreements under Section
1705 expires on that date as well.
I would like to take a minute to highlight some of the
successes of the program to date. Since March 2009, the
Department has issued conditional commitments for loans or loan
guarantees to 30 projects, 16 of which have reached financial
close with more to follow. The Department of Energy has
provided or conditionally committed nearly $31 billion in
financing to these 30 projects which have total project costs
of $48 billion. Spread across the country, they reflect an
array of clean energy technologies such as wind, solar,
advanced biofuels, nuclear and more including the world's
largest wind farm, two of the world's largest concentrated
solar power facilities, the first nuclear power plant in the
United States in the last 3 decades and the world's first
flywheel energy storage plant. Project sponsors estimate to us
that these projects will create or save nearly 62,000 jobs,
including construction and permanent assignments. To date DOE
has committed and closed five ATVM loans over $8.3 billion
supporting vehicle and component projects in eight states. We
anticipate making many more loans in this category as well.
It is important to remember that the loan program is not a
grant program. The Loan Programs Office expects that the loans
will be repaid. In fact, the law has as a statutory requirement
that each project have a reasonable prospect of repayment. We
review these projects under very rigorous evaluation exercise
before we grant any of the loans. Moreover, when the loan is
fully repaid, the Nation will benefit from the private sector's
investment at relatively little cost to the taxpayers. With the
passage of the continuing resolution of fiscal year 2011, we
have been provided an additional $170 million of appropriated
subsidy for 1703. The Department is currently working to
develop a process for implementing this new provision. The
President's proposed 2012 budget request outlays the policy and
priorities of the Administration and would support additional
clean energy development projects should Congress fund it to
the levels requested.
In just over two years, the Department's loan programs are
making a meaningful contribution to our national clean energy
goals. Through the extraordinary efforts from arguably one of
the most experienced and talented project finance staffs ever
assembled, public or private, a prodigious amount of work is
being accomplished in the program at an accelerated pace while
maintaining the best practices of our industry. We look forward
to continuing our progress and to working with Congress to
ensure that the programs continue spurring clean energy
deployment and job creation while appropriately protecting
taxpayer funds.
Thank you very much for inviting me today, and I look
forward to responding to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Frantz follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. David Frantz, Director, Loan Guarantee
Program Office, U.S. Department of Energy
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.033

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Frantz. I want to
remind Members of the committee rules limiting questions to
five minutes, and the Chair is first going to recognize the
Ranking Member for questions, Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. All right. That is an unusual procedure, but
that is fine. We often hear the phrase ``crowding out.'' What
the Federal Government is doing in this area is ``crowding
out'' private investment, but Mr. Frantz just spoke of the
valley of death, a phrase that I have frequently heard from
tech entrepreneurs in my district, the research triangle area
of North Carolina and also the triad as well where there are a
couple of research universities, A&T and UNCG. Dr. Majumdar.
Mr. Majumdar. Majumdar.
Mr. Miller. I am doing the best I can. Is the space for
funding for energy research really that small and how does the
research that is funded by ARPA-E fit in with private funding?
Mr. Majumdar. Well, thank you, Congressman. I think this is
a question that, you know, has been asked, and it is a very
important question that really ought to be addressed.
Actually, there are multiple valleys of death, and what
ARPA-E is trying to do is to fill the first valley. And what is
that valley? How to translate science into breakthrough
technologies that do not exist today, but if they did, they
would make today's technologies obsolete. And that is the
valley of death that we are trying to address.
One example that I gave in my oral testimony is about the
next generation battery technology that does not exist today,
and there is frankly a global race going on to develop that
battery that will make electric cars cheaper than gasoline-
based cars and have a longer range. That battery does not
exist. China is investing, Japan is investing and you know,
there is a global race. And I think we need to sort of go back
to one of the core competencies of our Nation, which is the
best science and engineering infrastructure in the world, and
empower them to innovate these new technologies.
Another example I would give is new ways of making oil, and
we had a conversation, Chairman Harris, about this in your
office, that all the technologies that are there to create
fuels in terms of using biology is using plants. And that is a
route that a lot of people in the industry and R&D
infrastructure are taking. We decided to take a completely
different route and call it electrofuels, and this is not using
plants. This is using electricity that is generated locally and
using non-photosynthetic microbes, and the biology is
different, to make fuels. And this turns out that it could be
potentially 10 times more efficient than creating biofuels.
Now, there is no industry creating electrofuels today. If this
is successful, we will create the industry. In fact, this is
too risky for the private sector investment. So I don't think
they are crowding out private-sector funding at all. There is
no field like that to start with.
And that is the kind of thing that we are trying to do
which is exactly what, if you were to go to 1968, when DARPA
started investing in Internet and what is now called TCP/IP
which is the routing and the protocols, et cetera, and at that
time, there was no Internet industry. In fact, the ARPANET did
not even exist. They created it. And that is the kind of
investment they made, and that, you know, led to huge
industries that were created. And ARPA-E is trying to fill that
first valley of death, and I don't think it is crowding out
investment.
What we do invest in are technologies that are too risky,
but if they are successful, they will be attractive to the
private sector, which is where we are seeing now, at least in
some of the cases, where we have invested let us say $24
million in six technologies, which has then with the R&D that
has been done, reduced the risk, shown the results ahead of
schedule, and that has led to more than $100 million in
private-sector investment. That is not crowding out. That is
actually unleashing the private-sector investment after the
federal dollars have gone in and allowed them to reduce the
risk.
Mr. Miller. Okay. We hear about disrupting market
mechanisms by government involvement, but it certainly doesn't
look like there are pure market forces at work in energy
pricing. We don't reflect what we are doing in very unstable
parts of the world with our military. That may be driven in
part by a concern about the stability of our energy supply.
That is not reflected in oil and gas prices. Obviously,
environmental damage is not really reflected in oil and gas
prices or other energy prices. The disruption, the 2003
blackout in the Northeast, was billions of dollars of economic
disruption. The cost of that, a stable grid isn't really
reflected either. How much of a lead time for innovations
before they get to the market is really the point at which the
government should invest versus when the private sector might
come in?
Mr. Majumdar. Well, I would say this is exactly the right
time to invest because we are not only looking at--you
mentioned the grid--about the acid wall that the utilities and
the grid industry, the ISOs and RTOs are going to face because
many of the things that are there, components on the grid, are
more than 40 years old. They are beyond their lifetime right
now. And once they start failing, as you mentioned in the
Northeast, more might happen. And so there is a security aspect
of the grid as well. So this is exactly the right time to
invest to modernize our grid.
In terms of our transportation sector, as I mentioned, we
are importing oil. We all know that, and it is a national
security issue. This is a national security issue not just for
the United States; it is the same for China and other nations
as well which are importing oil. So there is a global race to
figure out how to use domestic resources, like electricity, for
the transportation sector. And this global race is on right
now, and I think if you do not invest in it today, we are going
to fall back and fall behind just like we did for the Sputnik
era where for a moment, we had fallen behind, and that is when
the United States went ahead and created DARPA, created NASA,
other things, and won the space age, and many other things came
out of that. So I think this is exactly the right time to do
that.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. Thank you very much,
Mr. Miller.
I am going to recognize myself for five minutes. Thank you
very much again to the panel for being here.
Dr. Majumdar, let me ask you a little bit about ARPA-E
because as we talked about, I loved the idea of doing this, you
know, funding through this first valley of death. But you know,
when we look through the list of some of the awards that have
been made, they weren't in the valley of death, some of these
companies.
The idea I would think would be to invest in these ideas
before others have, but you know, in FloDesign, for instance,
which received an award I believe in the end of 2008 to develop
wind turbine technology, actually got $8 million investment
from venture capitalists 18 months before ARPA-E invested $8
million. Now, one difference we talked about yesterday is
because I guess of the Bayh-Dole rules, you know, the
difference is those venture capitalists actually are going to
make money when that technology yields, but the Federal
Government isn't, and yet we came in after venture capitalists
making the same size investment. And it goes on. FloDesign,
Planar Energy Devices which also got $4 million from the
Federal Government after $4 million from Battelle Ventures
which I am pretty sure is a fairly substantial venture capital.
Codexis actually got $4 million, and they actually went public
and raised $78 million. Well, the difference is those
shareholders are going to get a return. The Federal Government
isn't.
So my concern is that we are investing in really almost, it
appears to be, technologies and companies that have actually
demonstrated they can do something to people with real dollars,
yet our mission is supposed to be before that point. Could you
address that?
Mr. Majumdar. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me clarify
that. The policy that we have in ARPA-E is not to invest in any
ideas that have been invested in the private sector, not
companies, ideas. So if you look at the FloDesign or any of the
technologies, these companies may have been invested in before
for things that are short-term that give you returns for the
venture capital, you know, in five years, et cetera. But these
ideas that we invested in these companies are not the ones that
the venture capital invested in.
Chairman Harris. Let me just ask, because I only have five
minutes, let me just ask though, although that is true, if
those different technologies make money for that company, it is
going to go to the venture capitalists who were there before,
who invested in the initial idea. That is usually how venture
capital is set up, as you are aware of. Is that----
Mr. Majumdar. Sure.
Chairman Harris. I mean, that is what I suspect. Thanks for
confirming what I suspect.
Dr. Kelly, let me ask you some questions because you know,
I appreciate your testimony. One of the things it says in your
testimony that your key goal is put one million electric
vehicles on the road by 2015, so four years from now.
What are you doing to make sure there is actually
electricity at the other end of the socket when those cars get
plugged in? I mean, you know, we just had an announcement by
the EPA that they are issuing regulations on mercury emissions
in plants that are going to result in coal-fire plants actually
shutting down, actually being--this Administration directly
will cause the closing of electric capacity in the country, and
as you know, nuclear power is kind of on hold.
So what is EERE doing to make sure there is actually
something that comes out of the outlet when you plug in the
electric car that is actually affordable? So it has to be
something low cost.
Mr. Kelly. Well, as I pointed out, our main goal here is to
try to drive down the price of renewable electricity to the
point where it is fully competitive with traditional forms of
energy. We are getting very close to that. We have----
Chairman Harris. How close are we on photovoltaics in
something that is scalable?
Mr. Kelly. Well, we have a SunShot program whose goal it is
to make----
Chairman Harris. Dr. Kelly, not the goal. Something that is
scalable right now because your--well, they are going to plug
in electric cars now. Chevy Volt is out there, it is plugging
in. Is there any technology that you have invested in that is
actually scalable at a cost of five or six or seven cents a
kilowatt hour which is what coal is priced at?
Mr. Kelly. Wind is competitive in many parts of the
country.
Chairman Harris. Let me ask you about that because a little
further down in your testimony, you actually mentioned off-
shore wind as being competitive for a conventional source of
electricity without subsidy. Now, Dr. Kelly, everything I read
says that off-shore wind is absolutely not competitive with
conventional sources of technology because of the increased
infrastructure cost to bring that energy into the grid. Am I
reading the wrong things?
Mr. Kelly. It is way too expensive right now, I mean, way
more expensive.
Chairman Harris. So off-shore wind is not one of those?
Mr. Kelly. It is not----
Chairman Harris. So there really is nothing that EERE has
done that will make sure that when you plug in that electric
vehicle, that we actually can buy electricity for five or six
or seven cents a kilowatt hour?
Mr. Kelly. If something that is at that stage of technical
maturity, we should have been out of it a long time ago. We
should be at the cutting edge of technology.
Chairman Harris. Let me ask you one final question. My time
has run out. You actually mention clean energy sources. You are
promoting clean energy. Do you consider natural gas a clean
energy source as the President did in his State of the Union
Address?
Mr. Kelly. Yeah, the President has a definition of clean
energy that includes partial credit for natural gas, clean
coal----
Chairman Harris. What has EERE done to promote natural gas
as a clean energy source?
Mr. Kelly. Well, we have supported some natural gas powered
vehicles.
Chairman Harris. Oh. In the second round we are going to
get to that. Thank you very much.
I will recognize Ranking Member Johnson.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for holding this hearing, and let me thank the Ranking Member
as well.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to put a statement in
the record.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Johnson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson

I thank Chairman Harris for calling this important hearing today,
and I welcome all of our distinguished panelists to the Committee. In
particular, I would like to welcome Dr. Majumdar, who was chosen as the
first leader of a small and specialized program that saw its origins
here in this Committee. Dr. Majumdar has worked tirelessly to ensure
that ARPA-E exceeds our expectations while staying true to the
authorizing legislation. The President picked the right person for the
job, and I want to thank you for your work.
Investments in EERE, ARPA-E, and the Loan Guarantee program serve
to strengthen U.S. scientific and economic leadership as they advance
innovation in a wide range of technology areas, support the next
generation of scientists and technology leaders, seed the industries of
tomorrow, and ultimately lay the groundwork for a cleaner, more
sustainable energy future.
Unfortunately, these programs are seeing devastating cuts in the
Energy and Water Appropriations bill now moving to the House floor. I
understand the constraints the Appropriators were under. I commend them
for working together to protect DOE innovation programs given an
allocation that all but ensured that most of the programs would see
significant cuts, and that some could have been eliminated altogether.
However, I am deeply concerned that these and further efforts at cuts
will do lasting harm to our ability to meet our energy objectives and
compete in the global marketplace.
Every Member feels the pressure to act to bring down energy prices
now and insulate our economy from future price shocks. Unfortunately,
we are limited in the types of policies we have to achieve this, and
opening up new leases for domestic oil and gas production will not be
enough in the short or long term. However, Congress can continue to
support the development and demonstration of energy efficiency
technologies--an investment that is already paying dividends.
Unfortunately, while savings through efficiency are undoubtedly saving
money for families and businesses across the country, we know that this
is still not enough for the private sector to act alone. It is also
time to take seriously the need to modernize our energy infrastructure
and transition away from energy sources and technologies of the past.
We have extended the lifetimes and stretched the infrastructure's
capacity to the point where massive new investments will be needed in
the near future. The question is, do we kick the can down the road or
replace it with the same outdated technologies, or do we take this
opportunity and leverage our resources to transition to new, cleaner,
more efficient technologies, many of which can be made in the U.S? If
the nuclear and fossil energy sectors--some of the most profitable and
technologically advanced industries in the world--warrant continued
taxpayer investment, as some of my colleagues propose, then additional
funding could certainly be leveraged to exploit the full potential of
the less-commercially mature alternative energy technologies.
ARPA-E has been an undeniable success. If allowed the time and
resources to thrive, ARPA-E may well represent the first of a new
generation of smaller, more agile and efficient research programs. But,
for ARPA-E to be effective, it must continue to grow. Being temporary
hires, the initial team that started ARPA-E wil[ be leaving soon, and
new project managers must be recruited to take their place. To attract
the same caliber of managers away from the private sector, and often
away from their families, there must be some indication of consistent
and robust funding to support new fields of exploration. With the
current Energy and Water bill devoting $100 million for fiscal year
2012, while appreciated, ARPA-E gets perilously close to dying on the
vine.
I believe that our constituents understand that and still rely on
our collective wisdom to ensure the long-term welfare of our nation
through such strategic investments. They know that this country was
built on a foundation of innovation, hard work, and the willingness to
take big risks, and that government still plays an indispensible role
in filling the voids that the private sector is not structured to do.
In a rapidly changing global marketplace, facing new competitors that
do not play by the same free market rules, the only thing we can know
for sure is that the future of the U.S. economy will be dictated by our
willingness to push back the frontiers in all fields of science and
technology. The innovation programs at the Department of Energy, with
their unmatched talent, world-class facilities, and unique role in
taking on technology challenges that the private sector cannot do
alone, are some of our most effective tools in ensuring our long-term
economic growth.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Ms. Johnson. But I do have a question. It has been good to
hear so many accomplishments in such a short period of time
that you have had to achieve these, and I guess we all have to
work to reshape the Department and do all we can to eliminate
waste through collaboration, what have you.
Before the majority's budget cuts take effect, I am glad we
are having this hearing because I think that many of the
proposed cuts are irresponsible. They might not claim they pick
winners and losers, and it is clear, you know, what sector they
favor, and that is good except that I do think that we have a
very major role to play. After investing billions of dollars
from the stimulus a few years ago, we are finally beginning to
see that these new technologies do flourish, and when we run
into cuts, we really dismantle, we lose talent, and we end up
starting over.
So what will these additional cuts to clean energy do to
DOE because it is clear that we need ``all the above'' in
looking for alternative energies? I have a different take on
the White House pulling the plug on so much stuff. I think
that, as I understand, what we are trying to do is find some
alternative ways of getting ahead and trying to stay on the
world's playing field. So give me an idea as to how directly
any additional cuts will affect these programs?
Mr. Majumdar. Thank you, Congresswoman. I think this
President has made clean energy a priority. I believe, and he
has said in his State of the Union message, that we need to
out-innovate, out-build and out-educate the rest of the world.
As I mentioned in my oral statement, energy and innovations in
energy are the foundation of our national security, our
economic security, prosperity of our children and
grandchildren, as well as our environmental security.
So I think if you do not support clean energy at this
point, I believe our future, our children's future and
grandchildren's future are at stake because we are in a
globally competitive world which is focusing on this particular
issue.
Mr. Kelly. I certainly agree with what Dr. Majumdar has
just said. I think the President said that this is a Sputnik
moment and a Sputnik moment because like Sputnik, we have
gotten a wake-up call. We have gotten a wake-up call that the
technologies that are going to dominate world markets in the
future in clean energy may no longer be made in the United
States. So not only are we going to slow the rate of
introduction of things like the clean sources of electricity
that are competitive with conventional sources that also meet
environmental goals, we are not going to be able to take
advantage of world markets and efficient light bulbs, in the
next generation of heating/cooling equipment. We are not going
to be able to go in and retrofit the buildings that we work in
and live in so that we can save the people who live in them,
protect them from the exigencies of rising prices. We are going
to find ourselves facing constantly fluctuating prices in the
price of driving.
So the technologies and the businesses and the jobs that
are created by solving these problems are going to be abroad
and not here, and that is what we are risking.
Ms. Johnson. Continue.
Mr. Frantz. I would simply reiterate the point of my two
colleagues that our continued involvement and activity in this
space we believe is critically important and should continue at
a robust pace. We are very pleased that Congress has
appropriated in the continuing resolution the $170 million for
appropriated subsidy which will certainly help activity in the
renewable space for us, but that is just a small step. We are
very hopeful that the funding will continue for this program
because we are in a neutral taxpayer cost basis contributing
mightily now to job creation and employment of these new
technologies.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you. My time is expired.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Ms. Johnson. I
recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate both the subject that you have chosen for today and
also your leadership in this issue.
I would like to talk to--everybody is having trouble with
your name. I am sorry.
Mr. Majumdar. Majumdar.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. Got it. Thank you. Rohrabacher.
Everybody gets that all wrong as well.
Mr. Majumdar. I hope your question is easier than my last
name.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Listen, you were talking about battery
research that you have been funding. How much total is the
funding for battery research?
Mr. Majumdar. For the transportation sector? From ARPA-E--
--
Mr. Rohrabacher. From ARPA-E, yes, for battery research.
Mr. Majumdar. It is about on the order of about $40 or $50
million.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Forty or $50 million.
Mr. Majumdar. That has been invested so far.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. And are you aware of how much money
is being spent in the private sector to develop new battery
technology?
Mr. Majumdar. The next generation batteries that we are
investing in? I am not aware of--the ones that we have invested
in, for example, the all-electron battery which is going on at
Stanford University, for example. There is no all-electron
battery today, and so I don't think there is any investment in
that. In the lithium-ion flow battery that is being developed
at MIT, there was no lithium-ion flow battery.
Mr. Rohrabacher. You are unaware of private companies that
have invested large amounts of money in battery technology?
Mr. Majumdar. Oh, they are investing in lithium-ion battery
that is going into the Chevy Volts and things like that today
but not in the batteries that we have invested. Magnesium-ion
batteries----
Mr. Rohrabacher. You don't know of any companies that are
involved with developing new battery technology?
Mr. Majumdar. Not the high-risk ones that we are investing
in.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Not the high-risk ones that you are
investing in.
Mr. Majumdar. These are risky propositions, and you know,
many of them will fail. And you know, that is the kind of risk
that----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Now, if you succeed, those batteries
succeed, let us say, in the private sector, the people who are
investing their money will get their money back and actually
make a big profit on it. What will the American taxpayers get
out of this except of course a better society but are they
going to get a payback if this new battery technology actually
works?
Mr. Majumdar. Well, if it works, I certainly hope, and I
think you have shared your concern in the past that the
manufacturing of these technologies, if it is created out here,
remains in the United States, and I share your concern on that.
And the manufacturing is going to lead to jobs, just like if
you go back in the history----
Mr. Rohrabacher. But the actual profit from the technology,
what you are trying to get around is not telling me that the
American taxpayers won't get a penny back?
Mr. Majumdar. Well, we could create a different system, but
that is the system that we have been following so far.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I know. And would you like to see a system
or would you advocate a system where if you invest in a new
technology and it is the taxpayers who are paying for it, that
ownership of that technology isn't just passed on and profited
by people who haven't been doing the investing?
Mr. Majumdar. I will be happy to work with you on that.
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right. Let us do that. Mr. Chairman, I
think that is a very important and significant point.
Chairman Harris. Yes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let me ask our last witness. I noticed in
your testimony you talked about $31 billion in financing to 30
projects, they are loans, that you have given to these energy
projects. Are any of them nuclear projects?
Mr. Frantz. Well, yes, included in that project is the
Vogtle project in Georgia, and that project, as a matter of
fact, Congressman, will be the first to receive the nuclear
regulatory license expected in November, and we are already in
the closing process.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Can you describe that project for us?
Mr. Frantz. Well, it is the first nuclear project sponsored
by the Southern Company. There are three other investors.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Are these small modular reactors?
Mr. Frantz. No, they are not, sir.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Are they gas-cooled reactors?
Mr. Frantz. No, this is the Westinghouse 1000.
Mr. Rohrabacher. This is money that has been put into light
water reactors?
Mr. Frantz. I am not familiar with the specific technology.
Chairman Harris. I would like to note, Mr. Chairman, light
water reactors have been around for a long time, and this may
be a new approach----
Mr. Frantz. No, it is. It is.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. Why----
Mr. Frantz. This is a new technology.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, then why haven't we put money into,
instead of to new approaches, like the high-temperature gas-
cooled reactors or how about the small modular reactors? Have
we put money into those concepts?
Mr. Frantz. Our program has not. I don't know----
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right.
Mr. Frantz. [continuing]. If there are other programs
within the Department----
Mr. Rohrabacher. So we have a major expenditure into a
light water reactor with a new approach which is an old
concept, I might add, of how to produce nuclear energy. But the
modular reactors, which are being heralded as really
revolutionary, as well as the high-temperature gas-cooled
reactors, which are revolutionary as well, have not been
invested in. I would suggest that perhaps there should be a
second look. I notice your staff is giving you a little note
there if you would like to answer that.
Mr. Frantz. We can take this question for the record and
make a more fulsome response to your question, Congressman----
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right.
Mr. Frantz. [continuing]. Through our nuclear group.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. And we have been told
we can begin as early as 3:15, so I would ask the Members to
keep to the five-minute limit as much as you can. And I am
going to recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Majumdar, thank
you for coming here today, and I am glad to be from Northern
California where a lot of the innovation is happening, and I
think you are doing a great job there at ARPA-E.
Do you see that the private sector supports your mission of
investing in high-risk, high-reward projects? Do you see
evidence of that?
Mr. Majumdar. I think there is general support by the
private sector in our mission, in some of the things that we
invested because as I said before, these are too risky for the
private sector. No one is going to invest in an electrofuel
which is a completely different biological route for creating
fuel because it did not exist before. And when I talk about
this to the private sector, they feel that this is too risky
for them.
So I think there is a tremendous amount of support because
we don't know which one is going to win at the end, and we are
not going to pick the winners. But I think out of 15 or 16
technologies where the competition has been created, which is
what we did, some of them may succeed, and then we will let the
private sector pick the winners. But at this stage, at this
early, early stage, I don't think the private sector can
invest.
And so that is exactly where we are, filling that first
valley of death.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Mr. Frantz, is it fair to say that
the Loan Guarantee program which was first created by the
Republican Congress, or Republican-dominated Congress, will
help the private sector companies create jobs that are
maintained after the loans are repaid?
Mr. Frantz. Oh, certainly. The objective of our program--in
fact, our rule specifies that we are to only do three projects
in a specific sector operating for five years as an example, as
a precursor, to the investment in the private markets to follow
our lead on those projects.
So it is our absolute objective to set the path and then to
vacate to the private markets.
Mr. McNerney. And then those jobs are maintained. Do you
have any experience with jobs being maintained after the loans
are repaid?
Mr. Frantz. Well, no, all of our projects are long-term
projects. The shortest loan that I am familiar with is at least
ten years. So these are permanent assignments, particularly in
the manufacturing, in the new solar manufacturing and in the
generation space that are creating permanent jobs that will
last many years, after our loan is repaid.
Mr. McNerney. Okay. Thank you. Dr. Kelly, can you describe
how the work undertaken by your Department has translated into
financial benefits, real financial benefits for American
families?
Mr. Kelly. Well, it does this in two ways. First of all, it
is developing products that help save energy and money so you
can drive a vehicle that is more efficient, you can have a home
that is more comfortable that uses much less energy. So that
benefit directly translates into things that are useful to
Americans.
But at the same time it sets up an ability to produce the
technologies to achieve those goals which means setting up
factories that make lithium-ion batteries, that make next
generation lighting. And so this is recognized worldwide as one
of the areas of rapid growth, and it is a place where U.S.
investment can generate a lot of new business opportunities and
jobs.
Mr. McNerney. So not only will the products save money by
lowering consumption, but they will also create jobs in America
which will benefit the economy as a whole. That is basically
what you are saying?
Mr. Kelly. Exactly.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. From a policy perspective, then,
what are some of the biggest barriers to the more widespread
development of renewable energy technologies?
Mr. Kelly. Well, we of course, need to drive the price down
so that you don't have a price differential, and I think we are
well on the track to doing that in a number of different
technical areas.
But as I said in my statement, just because you have the
price down doesn't mean that you have a guaranteed market for
this. There are many places, for example, on siting wind or
photovoltaic fields, utility scale fields, the regulatory
problems are enormous. You have five or six different agencies
and lot of complexity. So we are part of an interagency team
that is going to greatly streamline them.
Mr. McNerney. Do you see transmission as an issue?
Mr. Kelly. Transmission is a major issue. There are a lot
of issues having to do with the way utilities communicate with
each other. There are a lot of contractual problems that you
run into, so we are trying to work with the Office of
Electricity to try to make sure that we have the most efficient
electricity market in the world but that is also compatible
with the introduction of intermittence.
Of course, one of the problems of some kinds of solar
lights is that it is variable, and you have to integrate this
variable input into a utility which is a complex process.
Mr. McNerney. Okay. Thank you. I will yield back.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. McNerney. I
recognize my colleague from Maryland, Dr. Bartlett.
Mr. Bartlett. Thank you very much. I wanted to spend a few
moments in putting our discussions in context. I think the
staff has been able to load a couple of slides for me, if they
can put the first one on the screen.
[Slide]
Mr. Bartlett. Okay. Yeah, this is a slide from World Energy
Outlook from '08, and note several significant things there.
The dark blue at the bottom is conventional oil. We have been
pumping more and more of that as we have used more and more of
it. Now, for the last five years, we have reached a plateau
that conventional oil plus the two bars above it, which is
unconventional oil and natural gas liquids, add up to 84
million barrels a day. That is where we are today, 84 million
barrels a day.
Note what is going to happen. When they run this out to
'30, note what happens. Conventional oil is going to go down,
down, down. That happened in our country in 1970. Now we
produce half the oil that we produced in 1970 in our country,
in spite of drilling more oil wells than all the rest of the
world put together.
Notice the really dark red slice there, the small one that
is enhanced oil recovery? The brighter red below that is oil
that they say we are going to find from fields we haven't even
found yet. These are fields yet to be discovered. And the light
blue wedge there is developing fuels they already discovered,
like one in the Gulf of Mexico under 7,000 feet of water,
30,000 of rock. Pretty tough to develop that field. So when oil
is more expensive than $100 a barrel, they may start doing
that.
Notice that by 2030 they thought that we would be producing
106 million barrels of oil a day. Just two years later, the
next slide, shows you what has happened just two years later.
[Slide]
Mr. Bartlett. Ah, there is the next slide, just two years
later. The two wedges on top have flipped, so you have to
notice that. They are different colors and they flipped those.
And they run this out to '35. Notice that by '35, little oil
they believe that we are going to be getting from conventional
oil. Notice that the little dark red one I mentioned, enhanced
oil recovery, that has disappeared. That is now incorporated
under conventional oil. They have huge slices there for oil to
be developed from fuels to be discovered, and the light blue up
there, fields yet to be discovered. Those two wedges will not
happen to that extent. They just won't happen. The world oil
output is going to follow the United States output, and we have
been going down, down, down since '70.
Notice, and maybe you can see it up there. It is too far
away for me to see. But already they are showing a dip down in
the total production of oil at the top. They are
prognosticating that that is going to go up. I do not think
that will go up.
The point I wanted to make with this was that the market
forces did not result in any clean or alternative energy
investments in anticipation of peak oil. Your government has
paid for four reports, two of them issued in '05, two of them
issued in '07. The big SAIC; the Hearst Report in '05; the
Corps of Engineers Report in '05; the Government Accountability
Office report, GAO report, in '07; and the National Petroleum
Council report in '07, all four reports saying the same thing,
a message your government did not want to hear, so they simply
turned a deaf ear and paid no attention to it. The reports all
said that the peaking of oil is either present or imminent with
potentially devastating consequences. The Hearst Report said
that the world has never faced a problem like this. You know,
the social and the economic consequences of this are
unprecedented, is what they said. Unless we anticipated it by a
decade, there would be very serious social and economic
consequences of this.
I put these slides up there to kind of put this in context.
You know, we should have started a couple of decades ago. We
knew very well. We knew of an absolute certainty 31 years ago
in 1980 when we looked back at 1970, and we could see very
clearly that M. King Hubbard was right about the United States.
We did peak in oil production in 1970. The United States has to
be a microcosm of the world. If it happened in the United
States, it should happen in the world. The only question was,
when was it going to happen in the world? So we now have blown
31 years we knew with absolute certainty we would be here today
peaking in conventional oil production with essentially no
possibility of making up for the fall off in conventional oil
production by oil from other sources. So we should have started
two or three decades ago with the technologies you are now
working on. It is desperately important, my hope is, my prayer
is, that ARPA-E can do for us what DARPA did for these other
programs because if it doesn't, we are in a heap of trouble and
the world is in a heap of trouble.
I think that once again we can become a manufacturing,
exporting Nation. We are clearly still the most creative,
innovative society in the world if we just get turned on and
our people know. But they haven't been told. They don't know
because your government has refused to tell the people the
truth.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Dr. Bartlett, and I
will recognize Mr. Lujan.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I almost want
to give Dr. Bartlett five more minutes. I really appreciate
that conversation and where he was going.
Chairman Harris. I am sure he had five more minutes.
Mr. Lujan. With that, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for
this hearing. Dr. Majumdar, I am a big supporter of technology
transfer, and we have had a chance to visit about this in this
committee as well as among our colleagues in many capacities.
And we have actually started a tech transfer caucus to talk
about these kinds of ideas.
Some view ARPA-E as a top-down technology transfer program.
That is technology transfers specific technologies that have
been identified or pushed from the top down. DOE has a
technology transfer coordinator; please describe how you are
working with Dr. Edmonds as we talk about DOE's application of
technology transfer as it impacts you in this area.
Mr. Majumdar. Thank you, Congressman. Let me just describe
first of all ARPA-E. I mean, ARPA-E is not a technology
transfer office; it is an innovation office. It is a technology
innovation office, as I said, to provide some top leadership
and get the community engaged in technology development,
creation, which does not exist today, and if it did, it is just
too risky for the private sector.
Mr. Lujan. And just in clarification, understanding the
role of ARPA-E, what are you doing to work with----
Mr. Majumdar. With Dr. Edmonds.
Mr. Lujan. [continuing]. With Dr. Edmonds to make sure that
we are pushing this technology out as well----
Mr. Majumdar. Right.
Mr. Lujan [continuing]. Understanding the constraints that
DOE has, unlike those with the intelligence community, DHS,
DOD, where they have that private-sector component that they
can match up.
Mr. Majumdar. We are working very closely with Dr. Edmonds
in terms of technology transfer. You know, after she joined the
Department of Energy, she has worked with all the national
labs, for example, to create this ``America's Next Top
Innovator'' Award. It is a challenge. It is a competition that
will be announced in our next ARPA-E energy innovation summit
which is going to be the end of February next year, just like
we had this year. And in this period she has reduced the cost
of licensing from all the national labs to $1,000 for a certain
period of time so that it takes the IP that has been created
and offers it up to the entrepreneurs and innovators, take that
IP and create businesses. And that is the kind of thing that
she has been doing, and we are working very closely with her.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that very much. Dr. Kelly, EERE
established the Efficiency and Renewables Advisory Committee to
ensure that EERE is focusing on transformative research to
achieve technological innovations that move quickly into the
marketplace and expedite job growth. Can you comment on the
effectiveness that ERAC has in helping to guide the
Department's investments in renewable energy technologies and
what do you envision the ERAC's role in promoting clean energy
job growth?
Mr. Kelly. Well, thank you for the question. As you know,
this is a new group we put together, and it has a number of
functions but one of them is to get advice from a very diverse
community, not only how we are choosing our research but also
how we are trying to transfer and get it adopted. One of the
great concerns we have got or a lot of the concerns that have
been expressed by this committee is to make sure that we are in
fact supporting innovation and not competing with other sources
of investments. So we have significant representation from the
venture capital community. The former head of research of
General Electric is on the committee. The former head of
technology at Honeywell is on the committee. So they have been
helping us work with the financial community to make sure we
can constructively engage the private sector.
They have also allowed us to make contacts with people who
weren't aware of our problems of the kinds of challenges,
research challenges we worked on, so we can broaden the scope
of the people that we work with. So they have been very
effective both in helping us open up and make our process more
transparent and helping us shape our program.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that. And Mr. Chairman, I would
like to ask unanimous consent to submit a few more questions
into the record if I can't get to them on that second round of
questioning, as well as some opening comments.
Chairman Harris. Without objection.

Mr. Lujan. Mr. Frantz, in order to take full advantage of
renewable capacity as we see across the country, I appreciate
the question by Congressman McNerney around transmission. If we
are going to be able to solve our Nation's constraints for
delivering power, when we talk about electrons being generated
from any fuel source, but especially where there are renewable
opportunities, can you talk about how the Guaranteed Loan
program can help accelerate that?
Mr. Frantz. Certainly. Thank you for the question,
Congressman, and for the entire committee's benefit, I think it
is important to realize that our program initiates through
applications on a competitive basis. So in the first instance
we have to issue a solicitation for specific sectors which we
have done for transmission. We have closed a transmission
project. Among the 16 we have closed, we have closed the
Southwest Intertie in the State of Nevada. We have three other
major projects presently in the due diligence that I can't
discuss right now publically.
So we are acutely aware of the need for upgrade and
financing in transmission and in particular among those new
solar generation projects that we are currently in the process
of financing. There are critical issues associated with
expansion of the transmission systems, particularly in the
Southwest.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, and I recognize our
colleague from Illinois, Mrs. Biggert.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for
holding this Subcommittee hearing. I have got a question for
Mr. Majumdar about ARPA-E. The fiscal year 2012 budget request
for ARPA-E includes $100 million in mandatory spending to be
spent to develop cutting-edge wireless technologies? My
question is why do innovative wireless companies, and it could
be Motorola or it could be Apple or there are a lot of various
companies, but why do they need an additional $100 million to
fund wireless technology development? Is there a concern that
there is a lack of incentive for innovation within the wireless
technology sector? Why is that singled out?
Mr. Majumdar. Well, first of all, Congresswoman, before I
answer that, let me just thank all of you for making such an
effort to pronounce my last name. I think my mother will be
very appreciative of that.
This fund is a mandatory fund, as you pointed out, and this
is for wireless technology. This is not for the Motorolas. This
is really for--let me just give you an example. If you look at
the grid today, it is a system that does not have feedback
control. It is what is called open loop which is why when--in
the Northeast there is an instability. The instability grows
and just breaks apart the whole grid, and you have failure. And
to be able to manage that, and it is what is called in
mathematical terms, a non-linear system, which goes into what
is called also chaotic behavior. This is a field of mathematics
and science that needs to be developed in what is called
distributive control, and for that, you need the wireless
communication. This is an area of science or wireless
technology that has not gone in--well, it has got technology in
iPhones and Blackberries, et cetera, but not for example in
controlling the grid because the technology that is needed for
that which will be developed in the universities and the
national labs, et cetera, around the country has to be
different and has to be integrated in the right----
Mrs. Biggert. Well, who makes that decision?
Mr. Majumdar. In terms of the technologies?
Mrs. Biggert. No, who makes the decision that we should
have the wireless technology, the $100 million?
Mr. Majumdar. Well, I think this has to go through Congress
in terms of which committee. It has to be approved through
that. And if should it be approved, then that is the fund, you
know.
Mrs. Biggert. But it comes from ARPA-E or it comes from
DOE?
Mr. Majumdar. No, it comes through ARPA-E through Congress'
approval.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay. All right. I guess I get it but it
seems like somebody has to have the idea that yes, we need to
do this, and I don't think--is it somebody in Energy and
Commerce that is deciding that or is it somebody that----
Mr. Majumdar. I can get back to you with the committee that
is responsible for that. I don't know exactly which committee
that is.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay, but it is a committee?
Mr. Majumdar. Yes.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay. That was my question. Then Mr. Frantz,
I understand that there are about 500 different companies that
have applied for loans, for the Loan Guarantee program, but
only about 30 awards have been made. Doesn't the reality of
limited funding for the program relative to qualified
applicants result in picking winners and losers among competing
companies?
Mr. Frantz. We do not pick winners and losers. As I
mentioned, our whole process is handled through a competitive
application process, and the driving factor, among all, is
readiness to proceed.
So we do not spend any time concerned about geographic
distributions or even the specific sectors. We look at the
applications purely from a very rigorous underwriting
perspective, and we work on those in a prioritized fashion on
fully the basis of a readiness to proceed with the transaction
itself.
Mrs. Biggert. So you don't think that the government
involvement would result in a crowding out of some of the
private investment that would rather not compete against the
government-backed companies?
Mr. Frantz. No, not at all. As a matter of fact, as I
indicated in my prepared testimony, by the allocation measure
that Congress has given us as well as the appropriated subsidy,
among those applications that we are now working on, we fully
expect to utilize all of the appropriated subsidy in the
allocation.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay. And I thank you. And I did miss your
testimony, so I am glad that you pointed that out. Thank you. I
yield back.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. We are going to be
called to vote, we believe, within the next 15 minutes. So we
are going to allocate five minutes to each side for one
additional set of questions, and I recognize Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. Thank you. Dr. Kelly, the investments in EERE
technologies, have there been similar investments in the past
to the kinds of things we are doing now through EERE?
Mr. Kelly. Oh, yes. We have what we think is a proud track
record of supporting energy and technologies. I mentioned a
few. Over half the windows now are extremely efficient because
of our investments. We have gone through several generations of
batteries. The batteries that were in the first generation of
hybrids, the nickel metal hydride batteries were the direct
result of what we have done. Our goal in all of this is to get
the heck out of the business and let the private sector take
over, and that is how we define success and that has happened
in many occasions.
Mr. Miller. In the testimony to this point, it sounds like
all these agencies are actually talking to each other which is
pretty refreshing, and also to the private sector. How do you
get suggestions or do you get suggestions and if so, how do you
get suggestions from the private sector on how to structure the
program for what the priorities ought to be? Mr. Majumdar or
Dr. Kelly.
Mr. Majumdar. Well, I mean, we spend a lot of time not only
talking to the industry and the businesses but also talking to
the academia, really the sort of intellectual horsepower of
this Nation in academia and national labs, et cetera, to
identify where are the white spaces, the big gaps, and that is
done in coordination with the Applied Energy offices, with the
EERE, for example, Fossil Energy and others as well as with the
Basic Energy Sciences in the Office of Science. And using that,
we identify the white spaces that is too risky again for the
private sector, that no one has created this technology but
should a technology be created, this would change the ballgame
and become a quantum leap in technology.
And that is how we identify the white space and then create
the technology just exactly the way DARPA created Internet,
GPS, et cetera.
Mr. Miller. Dr. Kelly, you don't have to add if you don't
want to, but you can.
Mr. Kelly. Just very briefly. We try very hard to get the
understanding of what industry is going to do and what they are
not going to do. Typically we hold a series of workshops. Many
of them have been jointly with ARPA-E and Science and sort of
triangulate on them. One of our flagship projects is SunShot,
and we have had a number of workshops with all parts of the
industry and regularly meet. These are shared with ARPA-E, and
they bring in venture people. They bring in companies, they
bring in academics. And we develop very precise roadmaps of
where we want to go and then have that reviewed by the
community.
Mr. Miller. Dr. Majumdar, you talked about intellectual
horsepower in this area a moment ago, and in your testimony you
said that one of the indicators of success would be the ability
to track the ``best minds'' to energy R&D. How is ARPA-E going
about that? Is that one of your goals and how do you do it?
Mr. Majumdar. Very actively. I think this is the time that
if you are to create a future of clean energy and provide the
security for our children and grandchildren, it is extremely
important to parallel what we did in information technology and
biotechnology, that is, to get the best minds in science and
engineering, the best biologists, the best anesthesiologists
perhaps, and the best computer scientists and the material
scientists, to say can you offer your knowledge and your
intellect and the creativity to address the problems so that we
can get off foreign oil so we can provide security for future
generations. So we are actively pursuing that. We are trying to
get people from the other fields as well. And it is not only
just me and my colleagues out here. Secretary Chu is trying to
do the same as well, to get the physicists and the chemists
involved and looking at the energy issues, not just the medical
issues for example. So this is a very active pursuit for us.
Mr. Miller. How will cuts to the ARPA-E budget affect your
ability to attract, to get the horses for the intellectual
horsepower, to bring in the best minds for energy?
Mr. Majumdar. I think this will, you know, severely hamper
our efforts. I mean, it is absolutely true. I have been an
academic myself in the past, and if you are trying to do
research, you want to see whether there is an assurance of
funding down the line. And you know, if that assurance is not
there, you are not going to get the best minds to solve the
energy problems of the future. So it is extremely important
that we have sustained funding, exactly as I said before.
ARPANET started in 1968 and it took sustained funding over 20
years to make it, to create ARPANET and to make it compatible
for creating businesses in the commercial world. That kind of
sustained funding is absolutely critical if you are to create
the clean energy of the future and address the issues that
Congressman Bartlett raised for our future.
Mr. Miller. My time is expired, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. In a second here when
Mr. Bartlett returns, I am going to yield 30 seconds to him. He
wants to show one more slide. Let me just start. Dr. Kelly, I
respect that we have to--you know, we want to spend this money,
we want to create American jobs, we want to make ourselves
efficient. But I have got a press release that had been sent
out that would suggest that EERE actually spends money, for
instance, ``engaged in multiple technology and policy efforts
to improve energy efficiency in the Chinese building sector.''
Now look, I am all for energy efficiency, but I got to believe
it should start here in the United States first.
Why is your shop spending money to improve energy
efficiency in the Chinese building sector? I mean, we are
literally borrowing money from them because every additional
dollar we spend is a dollar borrowed from China. Why would we,
as good policy, be borrowing money from China to spend it to
make their building sector energy efficient?
Mr. Kelly. I am not certain what that press release was
about, but as you know, the Chinese are building enormous
numbers of buildings. They are building the equivalent of----
Chairman Harris. Yeah, just to answer your question, it
says ``key EERE partnerships in the building sectors in China
include the code standards and labeling projects, software
design tools and training for energy efficient building design
projects.'' These are all from the website.
Mr. Kelly. Well, one of the things that we had started
recently is a joint research program with the Chinese that will
not move any of our money to China but will--we are setting up
a research program here in the United States funded partly by
us and partly by business. They have set up a parallel
operation in China. They are actually very sophisticated in
many of the areas that we are doing research in. So there are
areas where we can learn as much from them as they are learning
from us. In fact, we can learn a lot from them. And so we want
to make sure we take advantage of the areas where they do want
to collaborate partnerships on----
Chairman Harris. So you think we are going to get something
from China on this? You think we are that good bargainers with
the Chinese?
Mr. Kelly. Well, I hope. The good thing about research,
particularly on these sort of basic issues, is it really is a
win-win situation. We have to be careful we choose the right
areas, but there are places where, by collaborating, we both
end up further ahead.
Chairman Harris. But this isn't to improve energy
efficiency in general. It is to improve it in the Chinese
building sector, and we will probably go ahead and submit some
questions in writing that might follow up with that.
Now, Mr. Frantz, I did have one question because the loan
program worked, it changed a little bit over the last few years
because now there are federal dollars that are going to pay the
cost of these guarantees that flow. So your statement that it
doesn't cost, and I think I wrote it down, that the quote is
``no cost to the U.S. taxpayer.'' But in fact, the U.S.
taxpayer is paying the cost of that premium to guarantee the
loan.
Mr. Frantz. Well, my assertion in my testimony, Mr.
Chairman, was the fact that all of our admin, the overhead and
admin, is covered----
Chairman Harris. Beyond admin there is a cost to the U.S.
taxpayer with this program.
Mr. Frantz. That is right. But the point is it is in the
form of loan or loan guarantees which are repaid in
contradistinction to a grant. So we expect to be----
Chairman Harris. But----
Mr. Frantz. [continuing]. Fully repaid.
Chairman Harris. [continuing]. That premium, if it is not--
I don't understand. We are paying a premium to guarantee that
loan.
Mr. Frantz. You are probably referring to the credit
subsidy appropriated----
Chairman Harris. Yes, credit subsidy. I like that word
subsidy because for the oil companies it is bad, but here it is
good, I guess.
Mr. Frantz. That----
Chairman Harris. Yeah.
Mr. Frantz. The subsidy is what, under the Federal Credit
Reform Act of 1990, is a loan loss reserve which is required by
that law for all Federal Government loan programs. In most
Federal Government programs, that subsidy is appropriated by
Congress and the reason is it is such a terrific burden to all
the applicants.
In the original concept of the 1703 program designed to be
tax-cost neutral of the taxpayer, that is a self-paid subsidy
program. So all of our large projects are under the 1703
program, the nuclear program, the fossil program. That all has
to be paid by our applicants.
Chairman Harris. Right. So in fact, in the 1705 program,
there really is a cost to the U.S. taxpayer?
Mr. Frantz. There is.
Chairman Harris. It is not administrative but it is that
other cost?
Mr. Frantz. And of course, that program as I mentioned is
expiring on September 30.
Chairman Harris. Sure, no, I understand that. With regard
to the loan programs, you know, the only disconcerting thing I
think and one of the reasons why we hold the hearing is that
you know, we open up the paper and whether it is Politico
yesterday or ABC News, you know, we hear about loan guarantees
going to companies where people made very large contributions
to people in the Administrations, very large political
contributions. Large. How are you going to assure me that the
system is not biased? And I will tell you what. I am going to
submit that in writing, if you can submit that in writing to me
because I am going to recognize Dr. Bartlett for 30 seconds to
show his slide, and then we are going to adjourn.
[Slide]
Mr. Bartlett. This slide, is it the first one or second
one? Show the second slide. This slide goes out to '30, the
second one goes out to '35. This is the second one. It goes out
to '35, and it peaks out not at 106 million but at 96 million
barrels a day. So in just two years, they have lowered their
expectations.
I want to note, Mr. Chairman, that 4-1/2 years ago I led a
Codel to China to talk about energy. Nine of us went to China
to talk about energy, and I was stunned when they began their
discussion of energy by talking about post-oil. Of course there
will be a post-oil world. By the way, the first person that I
know to recognize that was Hyman Rickover, the father of our
nuclear submarines who gave a fantastic talk the 15th day of
May, I think it was, 1957, in St. Paul, Minnesota, to a group
of physicians. And he noted then that in the 8,000 year
recorded history of man, the age of oil would be but a blip.
And he called this its golden age. He had no idea how long the
golden age would last. He said how long it lasted was important
in only one regard. The longer it lasted the more time would we
have to plan an orderly transition to other sources of energy.
Of course, we have done none of that, and now we are up against
a real crisis here. I love crises, by the way, because they
challenge you. So I am exhilarated by this. This is a huge
challenge.
And if I think our government starts being honest with the
American people--the Chinese talked about post-oil. Of course
there will be a post-oil world. They think in terms of decades
and generations. You know, do anything you can to get yourself
elected two years and you will start to be responsible. And our
corporate people look at the next quarterly report. That has
got to look good or hell is going to break loose. So I will do
anything I have to make that look good. Who is looking down the
road in our country? I know ARPA-E is, thank you, but you know,
somebody else may need to be looking down the road, I think.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Harris. Thank you, Dr. Bartlett. Thank you for
your patience here. I will thank the witnesses for their
valuable testimony and the Members for their questions. The
Members of the Subcommittee may have additional questions for
the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to those in
writing.
Now, I hate to make an addition here, but given the fact
that I still am waiting for answers to my letter from months
ago, I am going to ask you to be timely if you can. I am going
to ask each of you to commit to me that you will be timely in
this so it will be included in the record. You have . . .
Mr. Majumdar. You have my commitment.
Chairman Harris. I am going to say Dr. M because I am not
going to pronounce his name anymore. The record will remain
open for two weeks for additional comments from Members. The
witnesses are excused. The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:30 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Arun Majumdar, Director,
Office of Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy

Questions Submitted by Mrs. Biggert

Q1.  Who makes the decision that we should have the wireless
technology, the $100 million?

A1. The House Energy and Commerce Committee and the Senate Commerce,
Science and Transportation Committee have jurisdiction over the
Wireless Innovation Fund and will be responsible for passing any
legislation that will determine where the money will go.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.074

Responses by Dr. Henry Kelly, Acting Assistant Secretary,
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy

Questions Submitted by Chairman Harris

Q1.  So there really is nothing that EERE has done that will make sure
that when you plug in that electric vehicle, that we actually can buy
electricity for five or six or seven cents a kilowatt hour?

A1.  Every renewable energy generation technology in EERE has been
making significant strides towards grid parity, and our energy
efficiency programs continue to help reduce our overall demand for
energy. Today, onshore wind power is one example of an EERE technology
that is competing with non-renewable fossil fuels like coal and natural
gas. Currently 25% of 695 patents in the commercial wind market cite
one or more of the 112 EERE-funded patents or papers relating to
onshore wind electricity generation.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.150

Responses by Mr. David Frantz, Director,
Loan Programs Office

Questions Submitted by Chairman Harris

Q1.  With regard to the loan programs, the only disconcerting thing I
think and one of the reasons why we hold the hearing is that we open up
the paper and whether it is Politico yesterday or ABC News, we hear
about loan guarantees going to companies where people made very large
contributions to people in the Administrations, very large political
contributions. Large. How are you going to assure me that the system is
not biased?

A1.  The process by which loan guarantee applications are reviewed and
loan guarantees awarded is not biased in favor of any individuals,
entities, locations, or technologies. Every application is subject to a
rigorous, comprehensive, fair, and transparent review process, and
decisions arebased solely on the project's financial and technical
attributes and merit.

Questions Submitted by Mr. Rohrabacher

Q2.  We have a major expenditure into a light water reactor with a new
approach which is an old concept of how to produce nuclear energy. But
the modular reactors, which are being heralded as really revolutionary,
as well as the high-temperature gas-cooled reactors, which are
revolutionary as well, have not been invested in. I would suggest that
perhaps there should be a second look. I notice your staff is giving
you a little note there if you would like to answer that.

A2.  The Department of Energy (DOE) is very supportive of modular
nuclear reactor technology.To date, however, no such projects have
applied for DOE loan guarantees, and the program currently has no open
solicitations and insufficient authority to support even the projects
in its active pipeline. Should the Loan Programs have sufficient
authority in the future, DOE would welcome applications from eligible,
creditworthy projects employing modular reactor technologies.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 66925.165


