- HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS: ACTION PLANS FOR SCIENTIFIC SOLUTIONS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS: ACTION PLANS FOR SCIENTIFIC SOLUTIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND

ENVIRONMENT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 1, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-21

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-562                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DAVID WU, Oregon
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 PAUL D. TONKO, New York
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JERRY McNERNEY, California
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
Tennessee                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Energy and Environment

HON. ANDY HARRIS, Maryland, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               ZOE LOFGREN, California
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texasn

C O N T E N T S

Date of Hearing

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Andy Harris, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................     8
Written Statement............................................     9

Statement by Representative Brad Miller, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........     9
Written Statement............................................    11

Witnesses:

Dr. Robert Magnien, Director of the Center for Sponsored Coastal
Ocean Research, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA)
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Dr. Richard Greene, Chief, Ecosystems Dynamics and Effects
Branch, Gulf Ecology Division, Office of Research and
Development, U.S. Envirionmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Oral Statement...............................................    24
Written Statement............................................    26

Dr. Donald Anderson, Senior Scientist and Director of the Coastal
Ocean Institute, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Oral Statement...............................................    30
Written Statement............................................    32

Dr. Kevin Sellner, Executive Director, Chesapeake Research
Consortium
Oral Statement...............................................    41
Written Statement............................................    43

Dr. Stephanie Smith, Chief Scientist, Algaeventure Systems
Oral Statement...............................................    45
Written Statement............................................    47

Dr. Beth McGee, Senior Water Quality Scientist, Chesapeake Bay
Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    60
Written Statement............................................    61

HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS:

ACTION PLANS FOR SCIENTIFIC SOLUTIONS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 1, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:05 p.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy
Harris [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Harmful Algal Blooms: Action Plans for Scientific Solutions

wednesday, june 1, 2011

2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.

2318 rayburn house office building

Purpose

On Wednesday, June 1, 2011, the Subcommittee on Energy and
Environment of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology will
hold a legislative hearing to examine harmful algal blooms (HABs) and
hypoxia research and response needs to develop and implement action
plans to monitor, prevent, mitigate and control both marine and fresh
water bloom and hypoxia events. The Subcommittee will also receive
testimony on draft legislation entitled ``The Harmful Algal Blooms and
Hypoxia Research and Control Act of 2011.'' Witnesses have been asked
to provide comments on, and suggestions to, the bill.

Witnesses

Dr. Robert Magnien, Director of the Center for Sponsored
Coastal Ocean Research, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA).

Dr. Richard Greene, Chief, Ecosystems Dynamics and Effects
Branch, Gulf Ecology Division, Office of Research and Development, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

Dr. Donald Anderson, Senior Scientist and Director of the
Coastal Ocean Institute, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.

Dr. Kevin Sellner, Executive Director, Chesapeake Research
Consortium

Dr. Stephanie Smith, Chief Scientist, Algaeventure Systems

Dr. Beth McGee, Senior Water Quality Scientist, Chesapeake
Bay Foundation

Background

Harmful Algal Blooms and Related Impacts
A harmful algal bloom (HAB) is a bloom, or rapid overproduction of
algal cells, that produces toxins which are detrimental to plants and
animals. These outbreaks are commonly referred to as ``red'' or
``brown'' tides. Blooms can kill fish and other aquatic life by
decreasing sunlight available to the water and by depleting the
available oxygen in the water, causing hypoxia. The produced toxins
accumulate in shellfish, fish, or through the accumulation of biomass
that in turn affect other organisms and alter food webs. In recent
years, many of the nation's coastlines, near shore marine waters, and
freshwaters have experienced an increase in the number, frequency,
duration and type of HABs. Blooms can be caused by several factors; for
example, an increase in nutrients can cause algae growth and
reproduction to increase dramatically. In other instances, HABs may
result from naturally occurring environmental changes in water quality,
temperature, sunlight, or other factors allowing certain algae to out-
compete other microorganisms for nutrients.
Harmful algal blooms are one of the most scientifically complex and
economically significant coastal management issues facing the nation.
In the past, only a few regions of the U.S. were affected by HABs, but
now almost all U.S. States have reported blooms. In severe cases, these
phenomena can have serious environmental, economic, and human health
impacts. Such impacts include human illness and mortality following
direct consumption or indirect exposure to toxic shellfish or toxins in
the environment; economic hardship for coastal economies, many of which
are highly dependent on tourism or harvest of local seafood; as well as
fish, bird, and mammal mortalities. Broader ecosystem impacts are also
a concern, wherein environmental damage may reduce the ability of those
systems to sustain species due to habitat degradation and increase
susceptibility to disease..
The Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and Control Act
and Current Federal Research
In 1998, Congress passed the Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia
Research and Control Act (HABHRCA, Public Law 105-83), which
established an Interagency Task Force to develop a national HABs
assessment and authorized funding for existing and new research
programs on HABs. The Interagency Task Force includes:

Department of Commerce

Environmental Protection Agency

Department of Agriculture

Department of the Interior

Department of the Navy

Department of Health and Human Services

National Science Foundation

National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Food and Drug Administration

Office of Science and Technology Policy

Council on Environmental Quality

Other federal agencies as the President considers
appropriate

The funding went to support two multi-year research programs at the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) that focus on
HABs- the Ecology and Oceanography of Harmful Algal Blooms (ECOHAB)
program and the Monitoring and Event Response for Harmful Algal Blooms
(MERHAB) program. These programs involve federal, state, and academic
partners and support interdisciplinary extramural research studies to
address the issues of HABs in an ecosystem context.
In 2004, HABHRCA was reauthorized by Public Law 108-456, which
required assessments of HABs in different coastal regions and in the
Great Lakes and included plans to expand research to address the
impacts of HABs. The law also authorized research, education, and
monitoring activities related to the prevention, reduction, and control
of harmful algal blooms and hypoxia and reconstituted the Interagency
Task Force on HABs and Hypoxia. The reauthorization expired in 2008,
however, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2008 (P.L. 110-161)
provided authorizations through 2010.
The 2004 reauthorization also directed NOAA to produce several
reports and assessments, which have since been completed:

The Prediction and Response Report (September 2007)
addresses both the state of research and methods for HAB
prediction and response, especially at the federal level.

The 2008 National Scientific Research, Development,
Demonstration, and Technology Transfer Plan for Reducing
Impacts from Harmful Algal Blooms (RDDTT Plan) establishes
research priorities to develop and demonstrate prevention,
control and mitigation methods to advance current prediction
and response capabilities.

The Scientific Assessment of Marine Harmful Algal
Blooms (December 2008) described the state of the science with
respect to understanding HABs causes and controls and
developing predictive models; developing detection methods for
cells and toxins; characterizing toxins and impacts; HAB
impacts on food webs and fisheries; and, assessing public
health, economic and sociocultural impacts.

The 2008 Scientific Assessment of Freshwater Harmful
Algal Blooms released in 2008 that describes the state of the
knowledge of HABs in U.S inland and freshwaters and presents a
plan to advance research and reduce the impacts on humans and
the environment.

The Scientific Assessment of Hypoxia in U.S. Coastal
Waters (September 2010) assesses the prevalence of low-oxygen
``dead-zones'', or hypoxic zones, in U.S. coastal waters and
outlines a series of research steps needed to address these
occurrences.

Additionally, the 2004 reauthorization directed NOAA, in
coordination with the Task Force, to conduct local and regional
scientific assessments if requested by state, tribal, or local
governments or for affected areas identified by NOAA. Funding was also
authorized for ongoing and new programs and activities such as:
competitive, peer-reviewed research through the ECOHAB program;
freshwater harmful algal blooms added to the research priorities of
ECOHAB; a competitive, peer-reviewed research program on management
measures to prevent, reduce, control, and mitigate harmful algal blooms
supported by the MERHAB program; and activities related to research and
monitoring of hypoxia supported by the competitive, peer-reviewed
Northern Gulf of Mexico program and Coastal Hypoxia Research Program
administered by NOAAs National Ocean Service.
The HABHRCA authorized funds to conduct research and reduce HABs
and hypoxia in U.S. marine waters, estuaries and the Great Lakes. In
its role as a task force participant, the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) has signed memorandums of understanding to fund
competitive research in these areas. However, since the completion of
the freshwater report in 2008, EPA has ceased participation in
freshwater HAB research and mitigation activities, asserting that its
obligations regarding implementation of the report recommendations have
been addressed. As a result, although EPA oversees a wide array of
programs specifically designed to protect and preserve the coastal and
marine waters of the United States, including watershed protection
programs working through partnerships and an array of regulatory
programs, the agency currently has no research and development effort
that directly addresses freshwater harmful algal blooms.
Other Interagency Efforts
EPA and NOAA are co-leads of a Federal Workgroup of thirteen
federal agencies committed to supporting the Gulf of Mexico Alliance, a
partnership formed by the five Gulf State Governors. In addition, EPA
is also the lead agency of the Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico
Watershed Nutrient Task Force.

Reauthorization of the Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and

Control Act

The first national plan to outline a roadmap for the scientific
community was the National Plan for Marine Biotoxins and Harmful Algae.
\1\ This plan served as the foundation for the development of national,
regional, state and local programs and the advancement of scientific
knowledge on HABs and their impacts. In the years that followed, HABs
have increased in type, frequency, location, duration and severity,
while decision-making and management systems did not change. Thus, the
national plan was updated to reflect the current state of the HAB
problem, needs, priorities and approaches. The revised plan, Harmful
Algal Research and Response: A National Environmental Science Strategy
2005-2015 \2\ (HARRNESS) is composed of views from the research and
management community and outlines a framework for actions over a ten-
year period.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Anderson, D., Galloway, S.B., Joseph, J.D. A National Plan for
Marine Biotoxins and Harmful Algae. 1993. http://hdl.handle.net/1912/
614; https://darchive.mblwholibrary.org/bitstream/1912/614/1/WHOI-93-
02.pdf.
\2\  HARNESS, Harmful Algal Research and Response: A National
Environmental Science Strategy 2005-2015. National Plan for Algal
Toxins and Harmful Algal Blooms. http://www.esa.org/HARNESS/.

Discussion Draft: the Harmful Algal Blooms and Hypoxia Research

and Control Amendments Act of 2011

Section-by-Section Analysis

Purpose: To establish a National Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia
Program, to develop and coordinate a comprehensive strategy to address
harmful algal blooms and hypoxia, and to provide for the development
and implementation of comprehensive regional action plans to reduce
harmful algal blooms and hypoxia.

Section 1: Short Title
The Harmful Algal Blooms and Hypoxia Research and Control
Amendments Act of 2011

Section 2: Amendment of Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and
Control Act of 1998

Section 2 explains that the text the bill modifies is the Harmful
Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and Control Act of 1998, unless
otherwise expressly stated.

Section 3: Definitions

Section 3 provides definitions for the Act, including:
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; the National
Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Program; State; and the Under Secretary
of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere.

Section 4: National Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Program
Section 4 directs the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and
Atmosphere, through the Interagency Task Force, to maintain a National
Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Program. The bill outlines tasks for
the Under Secretary to ensure through the Program: 1) to develop a
national strategy to address both marine and freshwater HABs and
hypoxia; 2) to ensure the coordination of all Federal programs related
to HABs and hypoxia; 3) to work with regional, State, tribal, and local
government agencies; 4) to identify additional research needs and
priorities; 5) to ensure the development and implementation of methods
and technologies to protect ecosystems damaged by HABs; 6) to
coordinate education programs; 7) to facilitate regional, State,
tribal, and local efforts to implement response plans, strategies, and
tools; 8) to provide resources for training of regional, State, tribal
and local coastal and water resource managers; 9) to oversee the
updating of the Regional Research and Action Plans; and 10) to
administer peer-reviewed, merit-based competitive grant funding.
In addition, Section 4 directs the Under Secretary to work
cooperatively with other offices, centers, and programs within NOAA, as
well as, with States, tribes, nongovernmental organizations, and other
agencies represented on the Task Force to avoid duplication.
This bill also requires the Under Secretary to maintain an existing
competitive grant program at NOAA; conduct marine and freshwater HAB
and hypoxia event response activities; and facilitate and coordinate
among Federal agencies and increase the availability of analytical
facilities and technologies, operational forecasts, and reference and
research materials.
Section 4 requires that all monitoring and observation data
collected shall conform to standards and protocols developed pursuant
to the National Integrated Coastal and Ocean Observation System Act of
2009.
The bill requires the Under Secretary to transmit to Congress an
action strategy that outlines the specific activities to be carried out
by the Program, a timeline for such activities, and the programmatic
roles of each federal agency in the Task Force. The action strategy
shall be published in the Federal Register and be periodically revised
by the Under Secretary. Section 4 also requires the Under Secretary to
prepare a report to Congress describing the budget, activities,
progress of the Program, and the need to revise or terminate activities
under the Program.

Section 5: Regional Research and Action Plans

Section 5 directs the Under Secretary, through the Task Force, to
oversee the development of Regional Research and Action Plans by
identifying the appropriate regions and sub-regions to be addressed by
each Plan. It directs the Under Secretary, through the Task Force, to
oversee the implementation of the Regional Research and Action Plans
only at the request of the State. The bill outlines some contents the
Plans should identify: 1) regional priorities for ecological, economic,
and social research related to the impacts of HABs and hypoxia; 2)
research, development, and demonstration activities to advance
technologies to address the impacts of HABs and hypoxia; 3) ways to
reduce the duration and intensity of HABs events; 4) research and
methods to address the impacts of HABs on human health; 5) mechanisms
to protect vulnerable ecosystems that could be or have been affected by
HABs; 6) mechanisms by which data is transferred between the Program
and State, tribal, and local governments and relevant research
entities; 7) communication and dissemination methods used to educate
and inform the public; and 8) the roles that Federal agencies can play
to assist implementation of the Plan.
Section 5 directs the utilization of existing research,
assessments, and reports in the development of the Plans. Section 5
also provides a list of individuals and entities that the Under
Secretary may work with to develop the Plans. The bill also requires
that the Plans be completed within 24 months of the date of enactment
and updated once every five years.

Section 6: Northern Gulf of Mexico Hypoxia

Section 6 directs the Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico Watershed
Nutrient Task Force to transmit a report to Congress and the President
on the progress made toward attainment of the coastal goals of the 2008
Gulf Hypoxia Action Plan. The initial report is required no later than
two years after the date of enactment and every two years thereafter.
The reports are required to assess progress made toward nutrient load
reductions, the response of the hypoxia zone and water quality
throughout the Mississippi/Atchafalaya River Basin and the economic and
social effects. The reports shall include an evaluation of current
policies and programs and lessons learned. In addition, Section 6
requires the reports to recommend appropriate actions to continue to
implement or, if necessary, revise the strategy set forth in the 2008
Gulf Hypoxia Action Plan.

Section 7: Authorization of Appropriations

The discussion draft does not propose specific funding levels for
the program. However, the bill specifies that the Under Secretary shall
ensure a substantial portion of appropriated funds go toward extramural
research activities.

Section 8: Unfunded Mandates

The draft states that the neither the Act nor the amendments made
by the Act shall constitute a financial burden to State, tribal, or
local governments.
Chairman Harris. The Subcommittee on Energy and Environment
will come to order. Good afternoon, everyone. Before we start,
we are going to be taking votes, probably in the next half-
hour, 20 minutes or half-an-hour, so we will have to have a
break and come back and continue. But we are going to go ahead
and get started.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``Harmful Algal Blooms:
Action Plans for Scientific Solutions''. In front of you are
packets containing the written testimony, biographies and
truth-in-testimony disclosures for today's witness panel.
I now recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement.
Good afternoon. Harmful algal blooms, or HABs, and hypoxia,
are issues that this Committee is very familiar with, as this
is the third hearing on this topic in three years. HABs are an
abundance of freshwater or marine algae that can produce toxins
or are produced in large enough numbers to harm the surrounding
environment.
Virtually every state has been affected by HABs, making
this a national problem. However, the different types of algae,
the causes of their explosive growth, and the effect they have
on the ecosystem varies so greatly that there is no single,
national solution to deal with HABs.
While this is an important environmental issue, HABs and
hypoxia can also have a direct detrimental effect on human
society. The bodies of water that are affected by HABs are the
same as the ones we use for drinking water, for recreational
purposes and as the source of livelihoods such as commercial
fishing.
Like all Marylanders, my family and I cherish a clean and
healthy Chesapeake Bay. We are privileged to live so close to
this remarkable resource and share a commitment to caring for
it and its wildlife. Harmful algal blooms cause oxygen depleted
dead zones that can kill fish and other marine life in the Bay,
and the collaborative efforts reauthorized in legislation I
will introduce help harness the ingenuity and resources
available from the private sector, academia, local governments
and non-profits, as well as the Federal Government.
In today's hearing, we will be discussing not only the
current state of research in HABs and hypoxia, we will be
discussing draft legislation to reauthorize the Harmful Algal
Bloom and Hypoxia Research and Control Act. This statute was
first authorized in 1998 and again in 2004. As of the current
fiscal year, the programs authorized under this law have now
expired. The reports required under the law have provided us
with a great deal of information on the research needed to not
only try to prevent HABs and hypoxia, but to control, mitigate,
protect and respond to these events. Although there is a great
need for it, the technology to address HABs and hypoxia does
not seem to be advancing as quickly as the rest of the research
areas.
Now, in a utopian world, we would prevent these incidents
from occurring entirely. However, in the world we live in, some
of these events are naturally occurring and therefore could not
be prevented, and other events are exacerbated by human
activities. We need to make sure that the research in
prevention does not hinder or eclipse the parallel research
path of control and mitigation through technology solutions.
Given the importance of these issues to human health,
economic prosperity and the environment, I think it is
important for us to ensure that these research programs
continue and work on providing multiple ways of addressing HABs
and hypoxia in the future. The legislation I have asked all our
witnesses to comment on is in draft form in order to provide
structure for our discussion today. I look forward to hearing
from our witnesses on their thoughts on how we might improve
the language and I look forward to working with the minority as
we move along this process.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harris follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Andy Harris
Good afternoon. The title of today's hearing is Harmful Algal
Blooms: Action Plans for Scientific Solutions. Harmful algal blooms, or
HABs, and hypoxia, are issues that this Committee is very familiar
with, as this is the third hearing on this topic in three years. HABs
are an abundance of freshwater or marine algae that can produce toxins
or are produced in large enough numbers to harm the surrounding
environment. Virtually every State has been affected by HABs, making
this a national problem. However, the different types of algae, the
causes of their explosive growth, and the effect they have on the
ecosystem varies so greatly that there is no single, national solution
to deal with HABs.
While this is an important environmental issue, HABs and hypoxia
can also have a direct detrimental effect on human society. The bodies
of water that are affected by HABs are the same as the ones we use for
drinking water, for recreational purposes, and as the source of
livelihoods such as commercial fishing.
Like all Marylanders, my family and I cherish a clean and healthy
Chesapeake Bay. We are privileged to live so close to this remarkable
resource and share a commitment to caring for it and its wildlife.
Harmful algal blooms cause oxygen depleted dead zones that can kill
fish and other marine life in the Bay. The collaborative efforts
reauthorized in legislation I will introduce help harness the ingenuity
and resources available from the private sector, academia, local
governments and non-profits, as well as the federal government.
In today's hearing, we will be discussing not only the current
state of research in HABs and hypoxia, we will be discussing draft
legislation to reauthorize the Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research
and Control Act. This statute was first authorized in 1998 and again in
2004. As of the current fiscal year, the programs authorized under this
law have now expired. The reports required under the law have provided
us a great deal of information on the research needed to not only to
try to prevent HABs and hypoxia, but to control, mitigate, predict, and
respond to these events. Although there is a great need for it, the
technology to address HABs and hypoxia does not seem to be advancing as
quickly as the rest of the research areas.
In a utopian world, we would prevent these incidents from occurring
entirely. However, in the world we do live in, some of these events are
naturally occurring and therefore could not be prevented, and other
events are exacerbated by human activities. We need to make sure that
the research in prevention does not hinder or eclipse the parallel
research path of control and mitigation through technology solutions.
Given the importance of these issues to human health, economic
prosperity and the environment, I think it is important for us to
ensure that these research programs continue and work on providing
multiple ways of addressing HABs and hypoxia in the future. The
legislation I have asked all our witnesses to comment on is in draft
form in order to provide structure for our discussion today. I look
forward to hearing from our witnesses on their thoughts on how we might
improve the language and I look forward to working with the minority as
we move along this process.

Chairman Harris. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Miller for an
opening statement.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Chairman Harris. I also want to
welcome the witnesses to today's hearing. Harmful algal blooms
and their hypoxic effects may not be something that most of us
think about every day, the exception obviously being the
witnesses for today's hearing, but it is an important issue
that affects most of our districts, in fact, all of our
districts.
For the past two years, this Subcommittee and the Full
Committee have discussed the effects of harmful algal blooms
and the resulting hypoxia on our coastlines and in fresh water.
HABs pose a serious threat because of toxins they can produce
and because they reduce oxygen and sunlight in the water. Those
threats alter the ocean's food web, affect human health, and
create economic losses for communities and commercial
fisheries.
In addition to hearing about the effects of HABs, we will
also discuss the draft legislation for the reauthorization of
the Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and Control Act.
Because of the 1998 Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research
and Control Act--we really need to shorten that--and the 2004
reauthorization, we have made significant advances in our
research findings and have taken important steps to solve some
of the problems associated with HABs. However, numerous reports
and assessments required by the law have revealed an increase
in the number, frequency, and type of blooms in recent years.
We need to continue this valuable research and implement
strategic national and regional plans. The 2010 Harmful Algal
Bloom and Hypoxia Research and Control Act authorization
expired--you know, if we turn the military loose on that, they
can come up with an acronym for that act. We passed a
reauthorization in the House in 2010, and I want to commend
Brian Baird, a former Member of this Committee, for his good
work on that legislation, but the Senate did not act on it as
was true with many other issues. It appears that there remains
some interest in ensuring that HAB research continues with the
draft legislation we are discussing today, which does appear
very similar in many respects to the legislation that Brian
Baird worked on in the last Congress. But I am a little
disappointed that we are holding a legislative hearing on this
new draft HABs reauthorization without the witnesses having had
sufficient time to review and to comment on the draft. I
understand the witnesses did not receive the discussion draft
until last Tuesday night, and especially for those witnesses
speaking on behalf of government agencies, it is very hard to
turn around written testimony in that period of time. But I
hope that the two agency witnesses whose written testimony did
not include official comments may be able to comment in their
testimony today, at least in response to our questions.
Witness testimony was invaluable in developing the 2010
version of the bill, and I understand that the draft is almost
the same as the previous legislation but contains a number of
word changes and in its current form does not include the
freshwater HABs and authorization level section. While I
understand you intend to add, Mr. Chairman, those sections
later in the process, it would be very helpful if our witnesses
could review that and provide comments so we can create the
best bill possible. The excluded sections could affect the
results and success of the program, and while there may be an
opportunity for technical comments later from these witnesses
and from those with whom they consult, a primary purpose of
legislative hearings like this one is to discuss technical
questions. It is to get into the weeds.
I hope as we move forward that we can work together and
with more consideration for everyone's time. Reducing HABs can
and should be a bipartisan effort. It was in the last Congress,
it should be again, and I hope that will be the case this time.
We must continue to invest in a way that will move this
research forward and advance our understanding of these blooms
and their hypoxic effects. We need to monitor, mitigate, and
control these occurrences better and to prevent them, if
possible.
We have a very distinguished panel of witnesses here today
who do think about harmful algal blooms every day of their
lives, and I hope they will offer us their best testimony
possible that we can move forward in responding to the problem.
Again, I want to thank all the witnesses for being here
today, and thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back 15 seconds of
time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Brad Miller
Thank you Chairman Harris. I want to also welcome the witnesses to
today's hearing. Harmful algal blooms (HAB) and their hypoxic effects
may not be something that most of us think about every day, but it is
an important issue that affects many of our districts.
For the past two years this Subcommittee and Committee has
discussed the effect of harmful algal blooms and the resulting hypoxia
on our coastlines and in freshwater. HABs pose a serious threat because
of toxins they can produce and because they reduce oxygen and sunlight
in the water. These threats alter the ocean's food web, affect human
health, and create economic losses for communities and commercial
fisheries.
In addition to hearing about the effects of Harmful Algal Blooms,
we will also discuss the draft legislation for the reauthorization of
the Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and Control Act.
Because of the 1998 Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and
Control Act and the 2004 reauthorization, we have made significant
advances in our research findings and have taken important steps to
solve some of the problems created by harmful algae blooms. However,
numerous reports and assessments, required by this law, have revealed
an increase in the number, frequency, and type of hypoxic events and
blooms in recent years. We need to continue this valuable research and
implement strategic national and regional plans.
In 2010 Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and Control Act
authorization expired. We passed a reauthorization in the House last
year but the Senate did not act on it. It appears that there remains
some interest in ensuring that HAB research continues with the draft
legislation we are discussing today.
I am a little disappointed, however, that we are holding a
legislative hearing on this new draft HABs reauthorization without the
witnesses having sufficient time to review and comment on the draft. I
understand that the witnesses did not receive the discussion draft
until last Tuesday night. Therefore, the two agency witnesses' written
testimonies do not include official comments on the bill.
Witness testimony was invaluable in developing the 2010 version of
this bill. I understand that your draft is almost the same as the
previous version, but contains a number of word changes, and in its
current form does not include the freshwater HABs and authorization
levels sections. While I understand you intend to add these sections
later in the process, it would be very helpful if our expert witnesses
could review them and provide comments so that we can create the best
bill possible. These excluded sections could affect the results and
success this program has seen in the past. While there will be
opportunity for technical comments later from these folks, a primary
purpose of legislative hearings like this one is to discuss technical
questions. I hope as we move forward with this bill that we can work
together better and with more consideration for everyone's time.
Reducing HABs can and should be a bipartisan effort, as it has been in
the past; and I hope that will be the case this time around.
We must continue to invest in a way that will move this research
forward and advance our understanding ofthese blooms and the hypoxic
events they cause. We need to monitor, mitigate, and control these
occurrences better and to prevent them, if possible.
We have a distinguished panel of witnesses here today, and
considering the circumstances, I hope they will offer us their best
testimony possible on how we can move forward together in responding to
this problem.
Again, I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today.
And, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Miller, and
obviously I am new around here, but I think we gave the same
eight days to the witnesses to see the legislation, that they
got last year, before last year's legislation. So hopefully we
are welcome to the comments.
If there are other Members who wish to submit additional
opening statements, your statements will be added to the record
at this point.
At this time I would like to introduce our witness panel.
Our first witness will be Dr. Robert Magnien, the Director of
the Center for Sponsored Coastal Ocean Research at NOAA. He
serves on the Interagency Working Group on Harmful Agal Blooms,
Hypoxia, and Human Health and is the U.S. representative in
care of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Panel on
HABs. Before joining NOAA, he spent 20 years in the Chesapeake
Bay Program for the State of Maryland.
Dr. Richard Greene, our second witness, is the Chief of
Ecosystem Dynamics and Effects Branch at the Environmental
Protection Agency's Gulf Breeze Laboratory. He also serves as
the EPA's representative on the Interagency Mississippi River/
Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrients Task Force Coordinating
Committee.
Dr. Don Anderson is a Senior Scientist in the Biology
Department of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute. He also
serves as the Director of the U.S. National Office for Harmful
Algal Blooms. In addition to active field and lab research, Dr.
Anderson is very involved in national and international program
development for research, monitoring, and training on marine
biotoxins and harmful algal blooms.
Dr. Kevin Sellner is the Executive Director of the
Chesapeake Research Consortium, encouraging active research
programs across six consortium member institutions and their
extended partners. In addition to being a plankton ecologist
for the last 30 years, Dr. Sellner also serves as the Executive
Secretary of the Chesapeake Bay Program's Scientific and
Technical Advisory Committee, is a member of the USGS
Chesapeake Bay Science Advisory Team, member of the Maryland
Harmful Algae Task Force and organizer for the Chesapeake
Community Modeling Program.
Dr. Stephanie Smith is the Chief Scientist for the private
technology firm Algaeventure Systems. Prior to her current
work, Dr. Smith served as the Senior Scientist in the applied
biology and aerosol technology product line at Battelle and
also built an extramural research program at Wright State
University in Dayton, Ohio.
Finally, Dr. Beth McGee is the Senior Water Quality
Scientist at the Chesapeake Bay Foundation, the largest non-
profit organization dedicated to protecting and restoring the
Chesapeake Bay. Prior to her work at the Foundation, Dr. McGee
has worked on water quality issues, conducted research, and
served on several technical Subcommittees and advisory groups.
Dr. McGee has also worked for a variety of state and federal
agencies including the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the U.S.
EPA, and the Maryland Department of the Environment.
I welcome all our witnesses. As the witnesses should know,
spoken testimony is limited to five minutes each, after which
the Members of the Committee will have five minutes each to ask
questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Robert Magnien,
Director, Center for Sponsored Coastal Ocean Research at NOAA.

STATEMENT OF DR. ROBERT MAGNIEN, DIRECTOR OF

THE CENTER FOR SPONSORED COASTAL OCEAN

RESEARCH, NATIONAL OCEANIC AND

ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION (NOAA)

Dr. Magnien. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, and Members of
the Subcommittee. As noted, my name is Robert Magnien, and I am
Director for NOAA's Center for Sponsored Coastal Ocean
Research. In this capacity, I have managed the only national
research program focused solely on harmful algal blooms and
hypoxia. These five programs are authorized under the Harmful
Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and Control Act. We fondly
refer to it as HABHRCA. That is our short name for it.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Dr. Magnien.
Dr. Magnien. HABs and hypoxia represent significant threats
to the health of the American public and the U.S. economy.
Algae are simple microscopic plants that are normally
beneficial because they provide the primary source of energy to
sustain aquatic life. However, during harmful blooms which
occur in all U.S. States, algae threaten human health through
toxins that can enter seafood or drinking water supplies.
Harmful blooms also threaten economically and recreationally
important coastal resources such as fish, shellfish, sea birds,
and marine mammals.
Hypoxia, or more commonly known as dead zones, refer to
critically low levels of light-sustaining oxygen in water
bodies. These zones occur in over 300 coastal systems,
including the Great Lakes. There has been a 30-fold increase in
coastal systems affected by hypoxia since 1960.
HAB and hypoxia management are particularly challenging
because of the complex underlying causes as well as the great
difficulties in detecting and predicting these threats. Giving
the growing threat of HABs and hypoxia, along with different
challenges in different regions, there is a compelling need to
strategically target and coordinate research.
HABHRCA has required NOAA to lead federal agencies in
preparing five reports that assess the causes and impacts of
HABs and hypoxia and plans to improve management and response.
These reports were submitted to Congress between 2007 and 2010
and provide guidance for NOAA's HABs and hypoxia programs as
well as other federal- or state-supported research.
A major part of NOAA's responsibility is its leadership of
the Nation's only competitive research programs that focus
solely on HABs and hypoxia. In addition to the competitive
programs, NOAA supports a diverse portfolio of internal
research.
I will spend the remainder of my time reviewing just a few
of the important advances we have made in the management and
mitigation of HABs and hypoxia impacts. From years of focused
HABHRCA research, we are seeing the expansion of HAB
forecasting capabilities that are nearing or actually in an
operational status in the Gulf of Mexico, Lake Erie, New
England, Chesapeake Bay, and the Pacific Northwest. Similar to
severe weather forecasts, these early warnings allow coastal
managers and other resource users to take precautionary and
proactive measures that minimize risks to human health and
coastal economies.
Detection of HABs is a critical first step in protecting
human health. HABHRCA research has developed new molecular
technologies for rapid and inexpensive detection of HABs and
their toxins. These are now being adopted for routine use in a
number of states.
In order to manage hypoxia, alternative management options
must be generated using models that synthesize complex
ecosystem phenomena that cause this program. HABHRCA authorized
research has provided this predictive capability for the
Nation's largest hypoxic zone, the northern Gulf of Mexico,
providing the scientific foundation for the action plan of the
Interagency Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrient
Task Force. Similar prediction tools are nearing completion to
support management decisions in Narragansett Bay and Lake Erie.
Our hypoxia research is also yielding important findings of
widespread chronic reproductive impairments in Gulf of Mexico
fish. In Chesapeake Bay, innovative modeling tools are being
developed to more quantitatively document the impacts of
hypoxia on living resources in order to better tailor our
management plans.
So those are just the very few of the accomplishments that
are bringing practical, science-based solutions to bear on
these serious problems. This has led to direct and significant
improvements in HAB and hypoxia management and new capabilities
in states who are often on the front lines of protecting public
health and vital economic interests.
NOAA strongly supports the reauthorization of HABHRCA and
its specific programs so that we, along with our scientific and
management partners, can continue to build on this strong
record of accomplishment.
Thank you for this opportunity to update you on NOAA's HAB
and hypoxia programs.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Magnien follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Robert Magnien, Director of the Center for
Sponsored Coastal Ocean Research, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA)

Introduction

Good morning Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee. My name
is Robert Magnien and I am the Director of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) Center for Sponsored Coastal Ocean
Research (CSCOR). CSCOR, as one Center of the National Centers for
Coastal Ocean Science, provides competitive funding for regional-scale,
multi-disciplinary research on understanding and predicting the impacts
of major stressors on coastal ecosystems, communities, and economies in
order to support informed, ecosystem-based management. In this
capacity, I administer the five national programs solely focused on
harmful algal blooms (HAB) and hypoxia that were authorized by the
Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and Control Act of 1998
(HABHRCA) and reauthorized in 2004. I serve on the Interagency Working
Group on Harmful Algal Blooms, Hypoxia, and Human Health of the
Subcommittee on Ocean Science and Technology to coordinate NOAA's
programs with other federal agencies. I also serve as NOAA's
representative to the Coordinating Committee for the Mississippi River/
Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task Force, which is addressing the
Nation's largest hypoxic zone in the northern Gulf of Mexico.
Additionally, I serve as the U.S. representative and Chair of the
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission panel on HABs to maximize
international opportunities for exchange of relevant research and
management information. Though I am the Director of CSCOR, this
testimony speaks about programs across NOAA, where multiple offices
work together to achieve mission goals.
NOAA's mandate includes protecting the lives and livelihoods of
Americans, and providing products and services that benefit the
economy, environment, and public safety of the Nation. By improving our
understanding of, and ability to predict changes in, the Earth's
environment, and by conserving and managing ocean and coastal
resources, NOAA generates tremendous value for the Nation. NOAA's role
is all the more important given the profound economic, environmental,
and societal challenges currently facing the country. Two of these
challenges are HABs and hypoxia, which cause significant adverse human
health and economic impacts.
HABs, which now occur in all U.S. states, \1\ \2\ are a growing
problem worldwide. HABs threaten human and ecosystem health, and the
vitality of fish and shellfish, protected species, and coastal
economies. Similarly, hypoxia occurs in over 300 U.S. coastal
ecosystems, \3\ including the Great Lakes. There has been a 30-fold
increase in hypoxia events since 1960, signaling severe degradation of
water quality and aquatic habitats nation-wide. HABs and hypoxia are
two of the most complex phenomena currently challenging management of
aquatic ecosystems. Given the profound, pervasive, complex and growing
impacts of HABs and hypoxia, these are important issues NOAA will
continue to address in the coming years.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Lopez, C.B., Dortch, Q., Jewett, E.B., Garrison, D. 2008.
Scientific Assessment of Marine Harmful Algal Blooms. Interagency
Working Group on Harmful Algal Blooms, Hypoxia, an dHuman Health of the
Joint Subcommittee on Ocean Science and Technology. Washington, D.C.,
62 pp.
\2\  Lopez, C.B., Jewett, E.B., Dortch, Q., Walton, B.T., Hudnell,
H.K. 2008. Scientific Assessment of Freshwater Harmful Algal Blooms.
Hypoxia, and Human Health of the Harmful Algal Blooms. Interagency
Working Group on Harmful Algal Blooms, Hypoxia, and Human Health of the
Joint Subcommittee on Ocean Science and Technology. Washington, D.C.,
65 pp.
\3\  Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. 2010.
Scientific Assessment of Hypoxia in U.S. Coastal Waters. Interagency
Working Group on Harmful Algal Blooms, Hypoxia, and Human Health of the
Joint Subcommittee on Ocean Science and Technology. Washington, D.C.,
164 pp.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At this very time, with unprecedented amounts of freshwater and
associated nutrients and other chemicals entering the Gulf of Mexico
from the Mississippi River Basin, we are witnessing some of these
complex factors that drive HABs and hypoxia. NOAA's longstanding
HABHRCA research has demonstrated the relationship between nutrient
inputs and hypoxia and provided the ability to forecast the size of the
hypoxic zone both in the short-term and for long-term management
purposes. In addition, NOAA's spring flood outlook, issued in mid-
February, indicated a ``high risk'' for flooding along the Mississippi.
Based on the high flows and expected high nutrient loads which will be
measured by the U.S. Geological Survey, this year's zone will likely be
one of the largest ever. NOAA will issue its annual forecast for the
size of the hypoxic zone in June. There is also the potential for toxic
algal blooms to develop in Lake Pontchartrain as has been the case in
the past when floodwaters have been diverted into the lake. NOAA is
moving on a number of fronts to assist in the response to the flooding,
including adding capabilities onto its existing HABHRCA research,
monitoring, and response projects in the Gulf region in order to
provide local, state, and federal officials with the latest and most
scientifically accurate information on these coastal impacts.
I appreciate the opportunity to update the Subcommittee on major
accomplishments in NOAA's HAB and hypoxia programs. I will first
describe the nature of the problem in more detail, then discuss NOAA's
role in addressing HABs and hypoxia in our coastal and Great Lakes
waters, and conclude with some of the significant advances that NOAA
has made as a result of HABHRCA.

Harmful Algal Blooms in the United States

Algae are simple plants that, in general, are beneficial because
they provide the main source of energy that sustains aquatic life.
However, some algae cause harm to humans, animals, and the environment
by producing toxins or by growing in excessively large numbers. When
this occurs they are referred to as ``harmful algal blooms'' or HABs.
Sometimes, certain algal species accumulate in such high numbers that
they discolor the water, and are commonly referred to as ``red tides''
or ``brown tides.'' Figure 1 lists some of the major HAB-causing
organisms in the United States.
Some algae produce potent toxins that cause illness or death in
humans and other organisms. Fish, seabirds, manatees, sea lions,
turtles, and dolphins are some of the animals commonly affected by
harmful algae. Humans and other animals can be exposed to algal toxins
through the food they eat, the water they drink or swim in, or the air
they breathe. Other algae species, although nontoxic to humans and
wildlife, form such large blooms that they degrade habitat quality
through massive overgrowth, shading, and oxygen depletion (hypoxia),
which occurs after the bloom ends and the algae decay. These high
biomass blooms can also be a nuisance to humans when masses of algae
accumulate along beaches and subsequently decay.
HABs can have major negative impacts on local economies when, for
example, shellfish harvesting is restricted to protect human health or
when tourism declines due to degradation of recreational resources.
HABs can also result in significant public health costs when humans
become ill. A recent estimate 1A\4\ suggests that HABs occurring in
marine waters alone have an average annual impact of $82 million in the
United States. This is a conservative estimate since comprehensive data
that includes the various economic impacts of all major blooms is not
available. In 2005, a single HAB event in New England resulted in a
loss of $18 million in shellfish sales in Massachusetts alone. \5\
Economic impacts can be difficult to calculate as they vary from region
to region and event to event, but they are a primary concern of coastal
communities that experience HAB events.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\  Hoagland, P., and Scatasta, S. 2006. The Economic Effects of
Harmful Algal Blooms. In E Graneli and J Turner, eds., Ecology of
Harmful Algae. Ecology Studies Series. Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
Springer-Verlag, Chap. 29.
\5\  Jin, D., Thunberg, E., and Hoagland, P. 2008. Economic Impact
of the 2005 Red Tide Event on Commercial Shellfish Fisheries in New
England. Ocean and Coastal Management. 51(5): 420-429.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to impacting public health, ecosystems, and local
economies, HABs can also have significant social and cultural
consequences. For example, along the Washington and Oregon coasts, tens
of thousands of people visit annually to participate in the
recreational harvest of razor clams. However, a series of beach
closures in recent years due to high levels of the HAB toxin domoic
acid prevented access to this recreational fishery. These harvesting
closures have not only caused economic losses, they have also resulted
in an erosion of community identity, community recreation, and a
traditional way of living for native coastal cultures.
As mentioned above, the geographic distribution of HAB events in
the United States is broad. All coastal states have experienced HAB
events in marine waters in the last decade, and freshwater HABs occur
in the Great Lakes and in many inland waters. Evidence indicates the
frequency and distribution of HAB events and their associated impacts
have increased considerably in recent years in the United States and
globally. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  GEOHAB, 2006. Globabl Ecology and Oceanography of Harmful
Algal Blooms, Harmful Algagl Blooms in Eutrophic Systems. P. Gilbert
(ed.). IOC and SCOR, Paris and Baltimore, 74 pp.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although all coastal states experience HABs, the specific organisms
responsible for the HABs differ among regions of the country (see
Figure 1). As a result, the harmful impacts experienced vary in their
type, scope and severity, which led to the need for specific management
approaches for each region and species and region-specific scientific
understanding to support an effective and efficient management
response. Some species need to be present in very high abundances
before harmful effects occur, which makes it easier to detect and track
the HAB. However, other species cause problems at very low
concentrations, essentially being hidden among other benign algae,
making them difficult to detect and track. The factors that cause and
control HABs, from their initiation to their decline vary, not only by
species, but also by region due to differences in local factors such as
the shape of the coastline, runoff patterns, oceanography, nutrient
regime, other organisms present in the water, etc. Consequently, the
development of HAB management strategies requires a regional approach.

As noted above, the causes of HABs are complex and are controlled
by a variety of factors. While we know that the underlying causes
leading to HAB development vary between species and locations, we do
not have a full understanding of all the factors involved, including
the interplay of different contributing factors. In general, algal
species grow best when environmental conditions (such as temperature,
salinity, and availability of nutrients and light) are optimal for cell
growth. Other biological and physical processes (such as predation,
disease, toxins and water currents) determine whether enhanced cell
growth will result in biomass accumulation (or what we call a ``bloom
''). The challenge for understanding the causes of HABs stems from the
complexity and interrelationship of these processes for individual
species and among different HAB species. The complexity of interactions
between HABs, the environment, and other plankton further complicates
the predictions of when and where HAB events will occur. Knowledge of
how these factors control the initiation, sustainment, and decline of a
bloom is a critical precursor for advancing HAB management.
Human activities are thought to contribute to the increased
frequency of some HABs. For example, increased nutrient pollution has
been acknowledged as a factor contributing to increased occurrence of
several high biomass HABs. \7\ Other human-induced environmental
changes that may foster development of certain HABs include changes in
the types of nutrients entering coastal waters, alteration of food webs
by overfishing, introductions of non-indigenous species that change
food web structure, introduction of HAB cells to new areas via ballast
water or other mechanisms, and modifications to water flow. It should
also be noted that climate change will almost certainly influence HAB
dynamics in some way since many critical processes governing HAB
dynamics--such as temperature, water column stratification, upwelling
and ocean circulation patterns, and freshwater and land-derived
nutrient inputs--are influenced by climate. The interactive role of
climate change with the other factors driving the frequency and
severity of HABs is in the early stages of research, but climate change
is expected to exacerbate the HAB problem in some regions and shift
species distributions geographically. (http://www.cop.noaa.gov/
stressors/extremeevents/hab/current/CC--habs.aspx).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\  Heisler, J., Glibert, P.M., Burkhold3er, J.M., Anderson, D.M.,
Cochlan, W., Dennison, W.C., Dortch, Q., Gobler, C.J., Heil, C.A.,
Humphries, E., Lewitus, A., Magnien, R., Marshall, H.G., Sellner, K.,
Stockwell, D.A., Stoecker, D.K., and Suddleson, M. 2008. Eutrophication
and Harmful Algal Blooms: A Scientific Consensus. Harmful Algae 8(1):
3-13.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hypoxia in the U.S.

Hypoxia means ``low oxygen.'' In aquatic systems, low oxygen
generally refers to a dissolved oxygen concentration less than 2 to 3
milligrams of oxygen per liter of water (mg/L), but sensitive organisms
can be affected at higher thresholds (e.g. 4.5 mg/L). A complete lack
of oxygen is called anoxia. Hypoxic waters generally do not have enough
oxygen to support fish and other aquatic animals, and are sometimes
called dead zones because the only organisms that can live there are
tolerant microbes.
The incidence of hypoxia has increased 10-fold globally in the past
50 years and almost 30-fold in the U.S. since 1960, with over 300
coastal ecosystems3 now experiencing hypoxia (see Fig. 2). The
increasing occurrence of hypoxia in coastal waters represents a
significant threat to the health and economy of our Nation's coasts and
Great Lakes. This trend is exemplified most dramatically off the coast
of Louisiana and Texas, where the second largest eutrophication-related
hypoxic zone in the world is associated with the nutrient pollutant
load discharged by the Mississippi and Atchafalaya Rivers.
Although coastal hypoxia can be caused by natural processes, the
dramatic increase in the incidence of hypoxia in U.S. waters is linked
to eutrophication due to nutrient (nitrogen and phosphorus) and organic
matter enrichment, which has been accelerated by human activities.
Sources of enrichment include point source discharges of wastewater,
nonpoint source atmospheric deposition, and nonpoint source runoff from
croplands, lands used for animal agriculture, and urban and suburban
areas.
The difficulty of reducing nutrient inputs to coastal waters
results from the close association between nutrient loading and a broad
array of human activities in watersheds and explains the growth in the
number and size of hypoxic zones. While nutrients leaving water
treatment facilities can often be controlled through improvements in
technology and facility upgrades, diffuse runoff from nonpoint sources,
such as agriculture, is more difficult to control. Conservation
programs, such as those administered by USDA's Natural Resources
Conservation Service, play an important part in helping to reduce edge
of field runoff from agricultural operations. Although progress has
been made in recent years to better optimize nutrient application
through the development of nutrient management plans and best
practices, agriculture remains a leading source of nutrient pollution
in many watersheds due in part to the high demand for nitrogen
intensive crops. Another exacerbating factor is the short-circuiting of
water flow due to drainage practices, including tile drainage and
ditching, that have been used to convert wetlands to croplands. The
USDA Agricultural Research Service has led recent efforts to design
drainage control structures to increase retention time and
denitrification in drainage systems. Wetlands serve as filters and can
reduce the transport of nitrogen and phosphorus into local waterways
and ultimately coastal waters. Atmospheric nitrogen deposition from
fossil fuel combustion remains an important source of diffuse nutrient
pollution for rivers and coastal waters.
Unfortunately, hypoxia is not the only stressor impacting coastal
ecosystems. Overfishing, HABs, toxic contaminants, and physical
alteration of coastal habitats associated with coastal development are
several problems that co-occur with hypoxia and interact to decrease
the ecological health of coastal waters and reduce the ecological
services they can provide.

HABHRCA Today

HABHRCA authorizes NOAA to take action to address the growing
problem of HABs and hypoxia in the United States. The existing statute:

1.  Establishes a mechanism for interagency coordination through an
interagency Task Force;

2.  Requires reports assessing the causes and impacts of HABs and
hypoxia and plans to improve management and response; and

3.  Authorizes funding for HAB and hypoxia research through
national competitive research programs, and for research and assessment
within NOAA.

Since 2005, the Interagency Working Group on HABs, Hypoxia and
Human Health within the National Ocean Council has been meeting
regularly to coordinate interagency efforts with regard to HABs and
hypoxia. A major focus for the group has been developing the five
reports mandated by the 2004 reauthorization of HABHRCA. The reports
were submitted to Congress between 2007 and 2010 (http://
www.cop.noaa.gov/stressors/extremeevents/hab/habhrca/Report--
Plans.aspx). These reports provide guidance for NOAA HAB and hypoxia
programs as well as other federal or state-supported research that may
address aspects of these topics. Specifically, the HAB Management and
Response: Assessment and Plan \8\ recommended the formation of the
Prevention, Control, and Mitigation of HABs Program, which NOAA
established in 2009. The Plan also highlights the need for an enhanced
HAB event response program and a new infrastructure program, which were
incorporated into legislation to reauthorize HABHRCA in the 111th
Congress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\  Jewett, E.B., Lopez, C.B., Dortch, Q., Etheridge, S.M.,
Backer, L.C. 2008. Harmful Algal Bloom Management and Response:
Assessment and Plan. Interagency Working Group on Harmful Algal Blooms,
Hypoxia, an Human Health of the Joint Subcommittee on Ocean Science and
Technology. Washington, DC., 76 pp.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOAA HAB and Hypoxia Programs

The goal of NOAA's programs is to prevent or reduce the occurrence
of HABs and hypoxia and/or to minimize their impacts. Developing useful
products for HAB and hypoxia management is a multi-step process that
requires a variety of approaches, and must be based on a strong
scientific understanding of the causes and impacts of HABs and hypoxia.
NOAA leads the Nation's three competitive research programs solely
focused on HABs and authorized by HABHRCA:

1.  The Ecology and Oceanography of Harmful Algal Blooms (ECOHAB)
Program is focused on research to determine the causes and impacts of
HABs. The ECOHAB Program provides information and tools necessary for
developing technologies for, and approaches to, predicting, preventing,
monitoring and controlling HABs.

2.  The Monitoring and Event Response for Harmful Algal Blooms
(MERHAB) Program focuses on incorporating tools, approaches, and
technologies from HAB research programs into existing HAB monitoring
programs. MERHAB also establishes partnerships to enhance existing, and
initiate new, HAB monitoring capabilities to provide managers with
timely information needed to mitigate HAB impacts on coastal
communities.

3.  The newer Prevention, Control, and Mitigation of HABs (PCM HAB)
Program, transitions promising prevention, control, and mitigation
technologies and strategies to end users. The PCM HAB Program also
assesses the social and economic costs of HAB events, and strategies to
prevent, control and mitigate those events, which will aid managers in
devising the most cost-effective management approaches.

HABHRCA also authorizes research on hypoxia to assess the causes
and impacts of this serious problem in order to guide scientifically
sound management programs to reduce hypoxic zones and thereby protect
valuable marine resources, their habitats and coastal economies. NOAA
leads the Nation's two competitive research programs solely focused on
hypoxia and authorized by HABHRCA.

1.  The Northern Gulf of Mexico Ecosystem and Hypoxia Assessment
Program (NGOMEX) supports multiyear, interdisciplinary research
projects to inform management in ecosystems affected by Mississippi/
Atchafalaya River inputs. NGOMEX supports research with a focus on
understanding the causes and effects of the hypoxic zone over the
Louisiana-Texas-Mississippi continental shelf and the prediction of
hypoxia's future extent and impacts.

2.  The Coastal Hypoxia Research Program (CHRP) supports multiyear,
interdisciplinary research projects to inform management of hypoxic
zones in all of the Nation's coastal waters except those covered by
NGOMEX. The objective of CHRP is to provide research results and
modeling tools, which will be used by coastal resource managers to
assess alternative management strategies for preventing or mitigating
the impacts of hypoxia on coastal ecosystems, and to make informed
decisions regarding this important environmental stressor.

HABHRCA authorizes NOAA to carry out research and assessment
activities, which has led to a world-class intramural research program
on HABs. Much of this research is conducted by scientists from the
National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science in collaboration with
external partners, including academic researchers, state and federal
resource and public health managers, and private enterprises. Active
areas of research include HAB and hypoxia forecasting, development of
new methods of HAB cell and toxin detection, and understanding the
impacts of HAB toxins on higher levels in the food web, including fish,
mammals, and humans.
NOAA's extramural and intramural research is leading to the
development of a number of operational activities that provide valuable
products and assistance. For example, NOAA currently provides HAB
forecasts for Florida and Texas coastal waters (http://
tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/hab/) and has developed plans for a National
HAB Forecasting System, which will make routine forecasts in any areas
where HABs are a major threat. Forecasts in the Great Lakes, the Gulf
of Maine, and the Pacific Northwest are in various stages of
development and transition to operations through a combination of
extra- and intramural research efforts.
NOAA scientists have been instrumental in developing citizen HAB
monitoring networks around the country. Additionally, the NOAA
Analytical Response Team (http://www.chbr.noaa.gov/habar/eroart.aspx)
and the Wildlife and Algal Toxin Research and Response Network (WARRN-
West, http://www.nwfsc.noaa.gov/warrnwest/) provide state-of-the-art
toxin analyses during HAB events, especially events that involve
unusual animal mortality.
NOAA coordinates and collaborates across the agency on HABHRCA-
authorized HAB and hypoxia programs and related efforts to address high
priority needs for research, observations, and forecasting. Many of
NOAA's HAB and hypoxia accomplishments have resulted from these
coordinated efforts and through external partnerships.

Major Accomplishments

Since the original HABHRCA legislation in 1998, several significant
advances have greatly improved management. Many of these
accomplishments are described in the five HABHRCA reports that were
submitted to Congress. Rather than list every accomplishment, I will
focus on recent outstanding achievements.

Harmful Algal Blooms

In the last few years, HAB prediction and forecasting has been
extended to new areas and shown great promise in providing early
warning to public health and resource managers. In most cases, the
ability to provide HAB forecasts is the outcome of years of research
efforts focused on the causes of HABs. Examples of regional HAB
forecasting include:

In Florida, the operational forecast system has issued
over 500 forecasts since September 2004. These include the critical
2005 year, when Karenia brevis blooms (Florida red tide) struck three
regions of Florida, on both the east and west coast, and produced
anoxia on the Florida shelf for the first time in over 30 years. This
forecast was made operational by strong NOAA-wide coordination,
particularly between the National Ocean Service and National
Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service, which processes
and analyzes NASA MODIS satellite data through its Coast Watch Program.

In Texas, an operational forecast began in September 2010
(following a several year demonstration). This system added new
modeling capabilities which increase the adaptability of the forecasts.
Previously, managers could respond only in a bay with a reported
problem, and had no information as to which other bays were at greatest
risk. The new forecasts provide this information to better target
sampling and response. This is particularly important given the
appearance in 2008 and 2010 of toxic blooms of Dinophysis, which were
previously unknown in this area.

In the Gulf of Maine, NOAA-funded researchers have issued
seasonal advisories every year since 2008. Each spring they predict the
severity and extent of blooms of Alexandrium fundyense, the New England
HAB organism that produces a potent neurotoxin, which accumulates in
shellfish and can cause human illness and death. That prediction
provides state resource and public health managers time to prepare for
the intensive monitoring required to protect public health and assists
shellfish harvesters and processors in making business decisions.
Weekly forecasts of Alexandrium distributions, based on models and
weather forecasts, are also provided to state and local shellfish and
public health managers around the Gulf of Maine via a listserv.

In western Lake Erie, NOAA scientists have developed a
Forecast System for cyanobacterial blooms starting in 2008. These
blooms of the cyanobacterial HAB Microcystis have been recurring each
summer for over 10 years, with particularly severe blooms in 2003,
2009, and 2010. The blooms are a significant expense for public water
suppliers, and a potential human health risk through recreational use.
In 2010, over 150 resource managers and local decision makers received
the weekly demonstration forecasts of bloom location and intensity
based on a sophisticated combination of satellite imagery from the
European Space Agency (ENVISAT-1), circulation models, water analysis
and meteorological data. In early October, NOAA determined that the
bloom had ended, allowing Ohio to safely end sampling and analysis of
water. (http://www.glerl.noaa.gov/res/Centers/HABS/lake_erie_hab/
lake_erie_hab.html)

In Chesapeake Bay, a novel forecasting technique using a
hybrid approach of water quality modeling and statistical techniques to
predict HABs is nearing operational status. This forecasting tool also
holds promise for other important applications such as pathogens and
fish habitat which have been difficult to predict using other
methodologies.

Along the Washington coast, a toxic diatom, Pseudo-
nitzschia, sometimes blooms and is transported to beaches where razor
clams are harvested recreationally and by tribes. When exposed to such
blooms, the clams accumulate the toxin, which can result in illness and
death if the clams are eaten by humans. NOAA-funded scientists have
improved early warning of Pseudo-nitzschia blooms by determining how
winds move HABs from their source region to coastal beaches. Since
2008, these scientists have issued an interactive HAB Bulletin that
managers from the Washington state Departments of Health and Fish and
Wildlife use to determine, well in advance of openings, whether
shellfish toxin levels will require closures. Managers can communicate
this knowledge to harvesters and owners of coastal businesses catering
to harvesters to minimize impacts.

Detection is a critical first step in protecting human health, as
it is not possible to predict and respond to a problem that cannot be
easily quantified or tracked. Many new methods of detecting HAB cells
and toxins have been developed, tested, and in some cases put into
routine use for a variety of purposes.

State, local, and tribal shellfish and public health
managers need quick tests that can be used for cheap and rapid
screening for toxicity in many shellfish samples. NOAA- sponsored
state, federal, and academic partnerships have demonstrated that new
quick tests are reliable for screening large numbers of samples to
rapidly assess the presence of HAB toxins in both shellfish and
seawater and helped incorporate the new protocols into existing
shellfish monitoring programs. States that routinely employ advanced
HAB toxin screening tools include Washington, Oregon California,
Florida, and Maine, and it is part of the screening method for the
Shipboard/Dockside Screening Protocol for shellfish harvesting in
Federal waters of Georges Bank.

In Chesapeake Bay, new molecular techniques for detection
of harmful algal species developed through the competitive HABHRCA
programs are now in routine use by state agencies responsible for
protecting resources and public health. These programs also allowed the
state of Maryland to develop a unique and highly successful ``Eyes on
the Bay'' website to display and communicate the latest information on
HABs, hypoxia, and other observations in Chesapeake Bay. (http://
mddnr.chesapeakebay.net/eyesonthebay/habs.cfm)

For the last three years, a new instrument, developed and
maintained with NOAA funding and located at Port Aransas Pass in Texas,
has provided early warning of HAB outbreaks, resulting in closures of
oyster harvesting before there were any human health impacts. One of
the species detected has never before caused problems in the U.S.,
although it is common in Europe and there was no routine monitoring in
place for that organism.

NOAA is addressing gaps in our understanding of the causes of HABs
and responding to emerging HAB issues.

Ciguatera fish poisoning (CFP) is the most common HAB-
caused seafood illness in tropical and subtropical areas of the world.
The incidence is increasing, perhaps linked to anthropogenic causes,
such as overfishing, eutrophication and global warming. Economic
impacts in the U.S. due to human illness, which are believed to be
hugely under-reported, are estimated to be $21M/yr. \9\ The causative
toxins were thought to come from one HAB species but NOAA scientists
have determined that the difficulty in predicting CFP outbreaks is
because there are multiple species of varying toxicity. Studies are
underway to understand what controls the distribution and toxicity of
these species in order to allow public health managers to minimize the
incidence of this illness.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\  Anderson, D.M., Hoagland, P., Kaoru, Y., and White, A.W. 2000.
Estimated Annual Economic Impacts from Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs) in
the United States. Technical Report WHOI 2000-11. Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, 99pp.

Fish-killing algae in the Pacific Northwest have been
shown to have severe economic impacts on mariculture. In addition,
these algae might be a major factor in controlling the size of some
wild salmon runs. NOAA scientists and NOAA-funded scientists are trying
to identify the very ephemeral toxin and determine the causes of the
blooms in order to develop protocols to minimize impacts on
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
mariculture.

NOAA has always funded research on novel HAB mitigation and control
measures through its existing HAB research programs. However, as our
understanding of the causes of HABs has improved, more opportunities
for preventing and controlling HABs have become available. In 2009,
NOAA announced the establishment of a new Prevention, Control, and
Mitigation of HABs Program, which is described above. The first
projects were funded in 2010, and involve a diverse array of approaches
on which we will be reporting at a later date.

Hypoxia

Through its HABHRCA-authorized hypoxia programs, NOAA has provided
the research foundation upon which management of the ``dead zone'' in
the Gulf of Mexico is based as described in the Mississippi River/Gulf
of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task Force Action Plan. \10\ Ongoing
targeted regional research is furthering our understanding of impacts
on fisheries and local economies and filling gaps in our understanding
of the factors driving the size and location of the hypoxic zone,
including climate change. NOAA also forecasts and tracks the extent of
hypoxia each year utilizing a number of internal and external programs
and in concert with other federal agencies. This information is vital
to support the Task Force's adaptive management approach to addressing
this major coastal problem.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\  Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task
Force. 2008. Gulf Hypoxia Action Plan 2008 for Reducing, Mitigating,
and Controlling Hypoxia in the Northern Gulf of Mexico and Improving
Water Quality in the Mississippi River Basin. Washington, DC.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOAA has collaborated closely with the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, the U. S. Department of Agriculture, and other
federal and state agencies in developing science-based management
strategies to reduce nutrient pollution contributing to the Gulf of
Mexico hypoxic zone. The Assistant Secretary of Commerce for
Conservation and Management, Dr. Larry Robinson, sits on the
interagency Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task
Force, and NOAA also plays a leading role on the Task Force's
Coordinating Committee. The Task Force released the 2008 Gulf Hypoxia
Action Plan, which reaffirmed the goal of reducing the hypoxic zone and
suggested 45 percent reductions of both total nitrogen and phosphorus.
NOAA-funded research through the NGOMEX program has demonstrated
that widespread reproductive impairment (reduced ovarian and testicular
growth in adults, and decrease in hatching success and larval survival)
occurs in a common marine fish, Atlantic croaker, in the hypoxic zone
west of the Mississippi River. More recently, the actual molecular
mechanism behind the reproductive impairments in fish was identified,
adding to a growing body of evidence that non-lethal hypoxia impacts
pose long-term threats to living resource populations in hypoxic zones.
Other studies are determining the impacts of hypoxic zones on the
economics of shrimp fisheries, and on populations of other ecologically
and commercially valuable fisheries.
NOAA-funded researchers are providing predictive modeling tools to
resource and water quality managers in Narragansett Bay in Rhode Island
to help mitigate hypoxia events, which have led to major fish kills and
resulted in State nutrient reduction criteria \11\ for waste water
treatment plants (WWTPs). These predictive modeling tools will provide
alternative management options for WWTPs (such as relocation of outfall
pipes to locations where outward currents would speed nutrients out of
the ecosystem) and will generate ecological impact scenarios for
various nutrient loading estimates, thereby helping to determine
allowable nutrient loadings for WWTPs into local rivers that drain into
Narragansett Bay.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\  RIDEM. 2005. Plan for managing nutrient loadings to Rhode
Island waters (http://www.dem.ri.gov/pubs/nutrient.pdf). 17 pp. and
RIDEM. 2006. Water quality regulations. Office of Water Resources,
Department of Environmental Management, State of Rhode Island and
Providence Plantations. [http://www.dem.ri.gov/programs/benviron/water/
quality/surfwq/index.htm]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONCLUSION

Thank you for this opportunity to update you on NOAA's HAB and
hypoxia programs. Over the last twelve years, we have made enormous
progress in understanding the causes and consequences of HABs and
hypoxia. This has led to direct and significant improvements in HAB and
hypoxia management which have, in turn, protected public health and
vital economic interests. The Administration supported reauthorization
of HABHRCA in the last Congress and continues to support
reauthorization in the 112th Congress. We just recently received the
draft legislation. We will review it, along with other interested
Departments and agencies. We would appreciate an opportunity to comment
before the Subcommittee considers the legislation.

Table 1. Major HAB organisms causing problems in U.S. marine
systems, their major toxins (if characterized), their direct acute
impacts to humans and ecosystem health, and regions of the U.S. that
have been impacted by these HAB organisms. `Not characterized'
indicates that toxins have been implicated but not characterized.

*This table only captures the major acute human illnesses
associated with these HAB species. Other, less severe acute health
effects, such as skin irritation, may occur with some of these HAB
groups. Chronic effects, such as tumor promotion, can also occur. A
table of short- and long-term health effects is given in \12\.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\  Ramsell, J.S., Anderson, D.M., and P.M. Glibert (eds.). 2005.
Harmful Algal Research and Response: A National Envirionmental Science
Strategy 2005-2015. Ecological Society of America, Washington, D.C., 96
pp.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some high biomass bloom formers may produce toxins.
=Some macroalgae have been shown to produce bioactive compounds,
such as dopamine and dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP), which may have
direct ecosystem effects (Van Alstyne et al. 2001)

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. I now recognize our
second witness, Dr. Richard Greene, Chief of Ecosystems Dynamic
and Effects Branch, Gulf Breeze Laboratory at the EPA. Dr.
Greene?

STATEMENT OF DR. RICHARD GREENE, CHIEF, ECOSYSTEMS

DYNAMICS AND EFFECTS BRANCH, GULF ECOLOGY

DIVISION, OFFICE OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT,

U.S. ENVIRIONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)

Dr. Greene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Harris,
Ranking Member Miller, and other Members of the Subcommittee.
It is a pleasure to be here with you today to discuss EPA's
research relating to HABs and hypoxia.
As you know, I am Richard Greene, with EPA's Office of
Research and Development. For the last 13 years, I have been
the Chief at the Gulf Ecology Division. I have a Ph.D. in
Oceanography, and for the last ten years have been the ORD lead
for Gulf hypoxia and estuarine nutrient research. Although I
serve in an ecology research division along the Gulf, this
testimony addresses programs across EPA offices and
laboratories relevant to the focus of this hearing.
Toxic or otherwise harmful algal blooms, or HABs, and
hypoxia, which is low dissolved oxygen, represent significant
and continuing threats to freshwater, estuarine and coastal
ecosystems, aquatic life, and to human health. Scientific
understanding of the causes and impacts of HABs and hypoxia on
aquatic resources and human health has progressed over the last
five to ten years. However, there is still much to be learned
to improve our ability to predict when and where those events
will occur, the specific impacts they will have on human health
and aquatic ecosystems and how best to prevent, control or
mitigate those problems.
We know that by and large many HAB and hypoxia events are
inextricably linked to nitrogen and phosphorus pollution. We
need to improve the science supporting the development of
sustainable solutions for controlling and reducing nutrient
pollution, HABs and hypoxia, to protect water resources and
human health. EPA, working with NOAA and other federal, state
and private-sector partners is committed to that goal.
In the area of freshwater HABs, EPA's National Aquatic
Resource Surveys are contributing important information
necessary to evaluate the extent and impact of harmful algae,
nutrients and other key indicators on ecological condition and
potential human health risks.
The 2009 report on the national lakes assessment included
three indicators with respect to the condition and safety of
recreational water use. The study reported the microcystin, a
cyanotoxin, and one of the indicators measured was present in
about 30 percent of lakes and at levels of concern in about one
percent of lakes based on World Health Organization thresholds
of risks.
While the survey results are a good start in our
understanding, much more needs to be learned about algal toxins
in lakes. For example, it is currently unknown how microcystin
occurrence correlates with the occurrence of other classes of
cyanotoxins that were not measured or the associated human
health risks. There are relatively few documented cases of
severe human health effects in this country associated with
exposure to cyanobacteria or their toxins. However, EPA is
conducting research to assess human exposure and effects in
drinking water systems in certain parts of the United States.
EPA coordinates and collaborates with NOAA and other
federal agencies, as well as state and academic institutions on
research in the northern Gulf hypoxic zone. EPA has ongoing
research in the northern Gulf to assess and predict the
relationships between nutrient loads and hypoxia; the physical,
chemical and biological processes regulating dissolved oxygen;
and the effects of nutrient load reduction scenarios on
hypoxia.
The research and modeling efforts under way fill important
research gaps identified in 2007 by EPA's Science Advisory
Board, State of the Science Evaluation, regarding Gulf hypoxia
and are critical to information needs and goals of the Gulf
Hypoxia Task Force.
HABHRCA identifies two interagency task groups, the HABs
and Hypoxia Task Force which is chaired by NOAA, and the
Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task Force,
also known as the Gulf Hypoxia Task Force which is co-chaired
by EPA.
EPA is an active participant in the HABs and Hypoxia Task
Force  which,  among  other  responsibilities,  implements
HABHRCA's reporting requirements. The Gulf Hypoxia Task Force
is comprised of 17 State and federal agencies. It provides a
forum for State water quality and agriculture agencies to
partner on the best means to prevent, control or--sorry, state,
local and regional efforts to address nutrient loading,
encouraging a holistic approach that takes into account
upstream sources and downstream impacts. Its federal and State
members, including EPA, have assisted in organizing and
providing technical and funding support for two nutrient
reduction strategy workshops, the second of which will occur in
Columbus, Ohio, in mid-June.
The Task Force Working Group is developing a proposed set
of indicators of progress to measure progress towards
addressing nitrogen and phosphorus pollution in the Mississippi
River Basin and reducing the size of the hypoxic zone.
In conclusion, EPA has made progress in understanding and
addressing harmful algal blooms, hypoxia and the broader issues
of nutrient pollution in the United States. However, there is
much more to be done.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today, and I will
be happy to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Greene follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Richard Greene, Chief, Ecosystems Dynamics
and Effects Branch, Gulf Ecology Division, Office of Research and
Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
Good afternoon Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, and other
members of the Subcommittee. My name is Richard Greene, with EPA's
Office of Research and Development (ORD). For the last 13 years, I've
served as Chief of the Ecosystem Dynamics and Effects Branch at the
Gulf Ecology Division, within the National Health and Environmental
Effects Research Laboratory. I have a Ph.D. in Oceanography and over
the last 10 years have been the ORD lead for Gulf of Mexico hypoxia
research and estuarine nutrient research in the Gulf. Although I serve
in an ecology research Division along the Gulf of Mexico, this
testimony addresses programs across EPA offices and laboratories
relevant to the focus of this hearing. It is a pleasure to be here with
you today to discuss the EPA's research relating to harmful algal
blooms and hypoxia.

HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS AND HYPOXIA--THREATS

TO HUMAN HEALTH AND ECOSYSTEMS

Toxic or otherwise harmful algal blooms and hypoxia, or low
dissolved oxygen, represent significant and continuing threats to
freshwater, estuarine and coastal ecosystems, aquatic life and human
health. Scientific understanding of the causes and impacts of harmful
algal blooms and hypoxia on aquatic ecosystems and human health has
progressed over the last 5-10 years. However, there is still much to be
learned to improve our ability to predict when and where those events
will occur, the specific impacts they will have on human health and
aquatic ecosystems, and how best to prevent, control or mitigate those
problems. We know that by-and-large many HAB and hypoxia events are
inextricably linked to nitrogen and phosphorus pollution. However, we
need to improve the science supporting the development of sustainable
solutions for controlling and reducing nutrient pollution, HABs and
hypoxia, and protecting water resources and human health. EPA, working
with NOAA, and other federal, state, and private sector partners, is
committed to that goal.
Nationally, nitrogen and phosphorus pollution is one of the top
causes of water quality impairments. EPA's National Aquatic Resource
Surveys (NARS) show that of the stressors assessed, nitrogen and
phosphorus are the most pervasive in the nation's wadeable streams,
with more than 200,000 stream miles showing high concentrations (those
greater than 95 percent of the regionally-relevant least-disturbed
reference condition). \1\ The NARS also report that an estimated four
million lake acres showed high concentrations of phosphorus, and 1.9
million acres showed high concentrations of nitrogen. \2\ Streams and
lakes with high levels of nitrogen and phosphorus were about two times
more likely to have poor biological health. \3\ For streams, biological
health was determined by evaluating the health of macroinvertebrate
communities compared with least-disturbed, regionally-relevant,
reference conditions. In lakes, biological condition was determined by
analyzing the condition of zooplankton and phytoplankton communities
using an observed/expected model. The ecological impacts of excess
nutrients on our waters includes harmful algal blooms. The recent NARS
lakes assessment found microcystin (an algal toxin that can harm
humans, pets, and wildlife) present in about one-third of lakes and at
levels of concern in one percent of lakes based on World Health
Organization recreational exposure guidelines. \4\ Although there are
relatively few documented cases of severe human health effects,
exposure to cyanobacteria or their toxins may produce allergic
reactions such as skin rashes, eye irritations, respiratory symptoms,
and in some cases gastroenteritis, liver and kidney failure, or death.
The most likely exposure route for humans is through accidental
ingestion or inhalation during recreational activities, though
cyanotoxins are also potentially a cause for concern in drinking water.
\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Wadeable Streams Assessment: A Collaborative Survey of the
Nation's Streams EPA 841-B-06-002 December 2006. Chapter 2--see page
35--http://water.epa.gov/type/rsl/monitoring/streamsurvey/upload/
2007_5_9_streamsurvey_05_chap2a_5-2-07.pdf
\2\  Note--The NLA reported information as the number and/or
percent of lakes. See--U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA).
2009. National Lakes Assessment: A Collaborative Survey of the Nation's
Lakes. EPA 841-R-09-001. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office
of Water and Office of Research and Development, Washington, D.C. See
Chapter 3--http://water.epa.gov/type/lakes/upload/nla-newchapter3.pdf.
To make the lake statement more consistent with the streams statement
(e.g., using miles and acres rather than miles and percent of lakes),
ORD-Corvallis calculated the area associated with the % of lakes
presented in the NLA document on page 26. The area figures were emailed
by Steve Paulsen, EPA-ORD to Sarah Lehmann, EPA-OW on 2-16-2011.
\3\  Wadeable Streams Assessment: A Collaborative Survey of the
Nation's Streams EPA 841u-06-002 December 2006. See Chapter 2--page 49.
http://water.epa.gov/type/rsl/monitoring/streamsurvey/upload/
2007_5_14_streamsurvey_06_chap2b_5-2-07.pdf
\4\  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2009. National
Lakes Assessment: A Collaborative Survey of the Nation's Lakes. EPA
841-R-09-001. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water and
Office of Research and Development, Washington, D.C. See Chapter 4--
http://water.epa.gov/type/lakes/upload/nla_newchapter4.pdf
\5\  IBID
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act, states develop lists
of impaired waters every two years and are then required to develop
clean-up plans, also known as Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs), for
those waters. A TMDL is a calculation of the maximum amount of a
pollutant that a waterbody can receive and still safely meet water
quality standards. Currently, more than 15,800 waters have nitrogen- or
phosphorus-related impairments. States or EPA has developed more than
8,000 nitrogen- or phosphorus-related TMDLs for more than 5,000 of
these waters.
Grand Lake St. Marys stands out as one recent example of the
potentially significant and far-reaching costs associated with the
human health, economic, recreational and ecosystem impacts of nitrogen-
and phosphorus-contaminated waters. Grand Lake St. Marys, Ohio's
largest inland water body, has suffered from increasing nitrogen and
phosphorus loading from farm runoff, failing septic systems, and
fertilizer applied to lawns. As a result, the lake has experienced
massive blooms of toxic cyanobacteria, which have led to the death of
fish, birds, and dogs, and illnesses of at least seven people. The
State of Ohio has issued fish consumption, recreational use, and health
warnings, including ``no contact'' and ``algal bloom'' advisories. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  Spencer Hunt, New Tests find Grand Lake St. Marys Safe, The
Columbus Dispatch, 30 Oct. 2010. One Algal Toxin Advisory Removed;
Others Continue, Ohio EPA. 29 Oct. 2010. Ohio EPA http://
www.epa.state.oh.us/pic/glsm_algae.aspx
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to Grand Lake St. Marys, freshwater HABs or the
cyanoHABs have now been documented in at least 35 states and at least
18 states now have some type of CyanoHAB research or response program.
EPA continues to evaluate the human health implications of
cyanoHABs and the toxins they produce in drinking water. Cyanotoxins
have been included in all three Candidate Contaminant Lists (CCL)
published so far pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act. EPA must
periodically publish this list of contaminants and decide whether to
regulate at least five or more contaminants on the list. A drinking
water CCL is the primary source of priority contaminants from which EPA
makes decisions about whether regulations are needed. The contaminants
on the list are known or suspected to occur in public water systems but
are currently unregulated by existing drinking water standards. The
Agency included cyanotoxins as a group in the most recent CCL (CCL 3,
October 8, 2009) and focuses research and data collection on three
algal toxins: Anatoxin-a; Microcystin-LR; and Cylindrospermopsin.

EPA RESEARCH

Freshwater HABs

EPA's National Aquatic Resource Surveys are beginning to contribute
significant information necessary to evaluate the extent and impact of
harmful algae, nutrients, and other key indicators on ecological
condition and potential human health risks. The 2009 report on the
National Lakes Assessment included three indicators with respect to the
condition and safety of recreational water use: 1) microcystin--a
common algal toxin, 2) cyanobacteria--the group of unicellular or
filamentous algae, some of which produce algal toxins, and 3)
chlorophyll-a--a measure of all algae present. The study reported that
microcystin was present in about 30% of lakes and at levels of concern
in about 1% of lakes, based on World Health Organization thresholds of
risk. While the survey results are a good start in our understanding,
much more is to be learned about algal toxins in lakes. For example, it
is currently unknown how well microcystin occurrence correlates with
the occurrence of other classes of cyanotoxins that were not measured,
or the associated human health risks. In addition, there are relatively
few documented cases of severe human health effects associated with
exposure to cyanobacteria or their toxins. In addition, ORD is
conducting a pilot study to assess human exposure and effects, and
potential developmental toxicity associated with the cyanotoxins
microcystin, cylindrospermopsin and anatoxin-a in drinking water
systems in the southeastern United States. The pilot study is to
determine whether a new blood serum assay for microcystin exposure can
reliably detect low levels of human exposure to the toxin. A second
study of developmental toxicity uses human placenta cells in culture to
determine whether microcystins disrupt normal placental formation for
pregnancy maintenance.

Gulf of Mexico Hypoxia

ORD coordinates and collaborates research in the northern Gulf
hypoxia zone with NOAA and other federal, state and academic
organizations. ORD has ongoing research and modeling efforts in the
northern Gulf of Mexico to assess and predict: the relationships
between nutrient loads and hypoxia; the physical, chemical, and
biological processes regulating dissolved oxygen dynamics in the Gulf;
and the effects of nutrient load reduction scenarios on hypoxia. ORD
has partnered with Naval Research Laboratory modelers to develop
integrated water quality simulation modeling tools that will improve
our ability to evaluate the effectiveness of nutrient load reductions
on Gulf hypoxia. The research and modeling efforts underway fill
important research gaps identified in 2007 by EPA's Science Advisory
Board state-of-the science evaluation regarding Gulf hypoxia and are
critical to the information needs and goals of the Mississippi River/
Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrients Task Force (Gulf Hypoxia Task
Force).
In 2009, ORD published research on multiple regression models that
described the size of the Gulf hypoxic zone based on river discharge
and nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations. Those results supported the
need for a dual nutrient management strategy--reductions in both
nitrogen and phosphorus loads--to achieve the goal of reducing Gulf
hypoxia. Equally significant were results of model predictions
demonstrating that substantial and sustained nitrogen and phosphorus
reductions will be needed before it will possible to discern
statistically significant reductions in hypoxic area against the
background of natural variability.
ORD scientists, as well as NOAA and NOAA-funded academic groups are
working on parallel efforts to develop multiple 3D numerical simulation
models for the northern Gulf system that link nutrient inputs, physical
circulation processes, and ecological and water quality responses. EPA,
NOAA and the scientific community consider the development of multiple
models and modeling approaches as offering many advantages compared to
a single model or modeling approach for addressing complex problems
like the Gulf of Mexico hypoxia. All the research groups met recently
in Mississippi at a NOAA-sponsored workshop to report on progress of
the modeling efforts. The groups are about a year or two away from
being able to run 3D model simulations and examine the effects of
nutrient load reduction scenarios on dissolved oxygen dynamics and
ultimately, the size, frequency, and duration of hypoxia in the
northern Gulf.

EPA PARTICIPATION IN INTERAGENCY TASK FORCES AND

WORKGROUPS

Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Task Force

ORD is an active participant in the Interagency Working Group on
HABs, Hypoxia, and Human Health (IWG-4H) within the National Ocean
Council, which is led by NOAA and which, among other responsibilities,
implements the reporting requirements of the Harmful Algal Bloom and
Hypoxia Research and Control Act (HABHRCA) of 2004. In these efforts,
ORD staff were co-authors on the Scientific Assessment of Hypoxia in
U.S. Coastal Waters, released in 2010, and the Scientific Assessment of
Freshwater Harmful Algal Blooms, released in 2008, through IWG-4H.
EPA has had a long-standing collaboration with NOAA through the
Interagency Ecology and Oceanography of Harmful Algal Blooms Program,
authorized by HABHRCA in 1998 and 2004. A Memorandum of Understanding
allowed the participating agencies, EPA, NOAA, NSF, NASA, and ONR, to
fund competitive research on the causes and impacts of HABs and to
develop methods of detection, prevention and control. EPA funded nearly
30 projects between 1997 and 2006 several of them joint efforts with
NOAA.
Harmful algal blooms are of concern in the Great Lakes and other
waters because of their toxicity and impact on human and ecosystem
health. A particularly toxic species is present in Western Lake Erie
and Saginaw Bay (Lake Huron)--two areas of the Great Lakes that
typically have significant cyanobacterial blooms. These blooms cause
fouling of the beaches and shoreline, economic and aesthetic losses,
taste and odor problems in drinking water, and direct risks to human,
fish and animal health. EPA's Great Lakes National Program Office funds
research on harmful algal blooms research and coordinates with NOAA's
Center of Excellence for Great Lakes and Human Health (CEGLHH). Grants
associated with nutrient related controls, management, and restoration
have been a significant area of emphasis in the Great Lakes Restoration
Initiative. Restoration related activities are under way as part of
grant-funded projects at several sites across the Great Lakes.

Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrients Task Force

In addition to EPA's participation in the Federal interagency Task
Force on HABs and Hypoxia, EPA OW co-chairs the Mississippi River/Gulf
of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task Force (Gulf Hypoxia Task Force) which
is comprised of 17 state and federal agencies. The Gulf Hypoxia Task
Force provides a forum for state water quality and agriculture agencies
to partner on local, state, and regional efforts to mitigate nutrient
loading, encouraging a holistic approach that takes into account
upstream sources and downstream impacts. The Task Force's goal of
reducing the size of the Gulf hypoxic zone to a five-year running
average of 5,000 km
2
is a very challenging commitment.
In its most recent Gulf Hypoxia Action Plan (2008), the Gulf
Hypoxia Task Force emphasized its commitment to work with states to
develop nutrient reduction strategies and increase accountability, and
both remain top priorities of the current Gulf Hypoxia Task Force
leadership. To facilitate nutrient strategy development, the Gulf
Hypoxia Task Force produced a State Nutrient Reduction Strategy Report
in September 2010 that identifies essential strategy components and
potential federal funding sources. As recommended in that report, Gulf
Hypoxia Task Force federal and state members, including EPA, have
assisted in organizing and providing technical and funding support for
two nutrient reduction strategy workshops, the second of which is
occurring in mid-June in Columbus, Ohio. A Gulf Hypoxia Task Force
working group is developing a proposed set of ``indicators of
progress'' to measure progress towards addressing nitrogen and
phosphorus pollution in the Mississippi and Atchafalaya River Basin
(MARB) and reducing the size of the Gulf hypoxic zone.
More broadly, EPA has asked interested and willing states to join
the Agency, other federal partners, and stakeholders and work
collaboratively to achieve substantial near-term reductions of nitrogen
and phosphorus pollution, using a transparent and accountable action
framework, while some states continue to develop numeric criteria for
nitrogen and phosphorus pollution to provide a clearly measureable and
objective basis for longer-term reduction strategies.while some states
continue to develop numeric criteria for nitrogen and phosphorus
pollution to provide a clearly measureable and objective basis for
longer-term reduction strategies.while some states continue to develop
numeric criteria for nitrogen and phosphorus pollution to provide a
clearly measureable and objective basis for longer-term reduction
strategies. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\  N. Stoner, March 16, 2011. Working in Partnership with States
to Address Phosphorus and Nitrogen Pollution through Use of a Framework
for State Nutreint Reductions. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Washington D.C. See http://water.epa.gov/scitech/swguidance/standards/
criteria/nutrients/upload/memo_nitrogen_framework.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ORD provides technical support to OW for Gulf Hypoxia Task Force
activities and also participates in the Task Force Coordinating
Committee. ORD collaborates and coordinates with NOAA and other
organizations thru the Gulf of Mexico Hypoxia Research Coordination
Workshop series (sponsored by NOAA) which seeks to coordinate
monitoring and modeling activities in the Gulf hypoxic zone.

CONCLUSION

In conclusion, EPA has made progress in understanding and
addressing harmful algal blooms, hypoxia, and the broader issues of
nutrient pollution in the U.S., and there is much more to do. EPA
programs are targeting the causes and their impacts, working with
states and federal partners to identify and protect healthy watersheds
and their receiving waters and restore impaired waters. These efforts
will improve management of nutrients, HABs and hypoxia, and help create
safe and sustainable water resources for the future generations. We
look forward to working with the Committee in the future.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today, and I will be happy
to answer your questions.

Chairman Harris. Thank you, Dr. Greene. I now recognize our
third witness, Dr. Don Anderson, Senior Scientist and Director
at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute. Dr. Anderson?

STATEMENT OF DR. DONALD ANDERSON, SENIOR SCIENTIST

AND DIRECTOR OF THE COASTAL OCEAN INSTITUTE,

WOODS HOLE OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTITUTION

Dr. Anderson. Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee,
my name is Don Anderson, and I am a Senior Scientist at the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution where I have studied
harmful algal blooms, or HABs, for over 30 years. I have also
been very actively involved in the formulation of the programs
and legislation that we are talking about today.
For the purposes of this discussion, it is important to
emphasize that HABs occur in both marine and fresh waters as
you are hearing. Marine HABs, as you can see here, sometimes
discolor the water. They also then can cause illness and death
of human consumers, of contaminated fish or shellfish, through
mass mortalities of fish, sea birds, marine mammals and
sometimes through irritating aerosols that drive tourists and
residents from beaches. Seaweeds can also cause harm as seen in
these extraordinary images from China just before the 2008
Olympics.
Now, freshwater HABs are primarily caused by cyanobacteria
or blue-green algae. These create serious problems, first due
to the reduction of light and oxygen in water, and second,
through the production of some of the most potent natural
toxins known to man. These affect humans through recreational
exposure and drinking water and also affect fish, wildlife, and
domestic animals.
Marine HABs affect virtually every coastal State in the
United States, and many of them must contend with multiple
toxins or HAB impacts. For freshwater HABs, at least 36 States
report human or animal poisonings, and a number of them have
action plans or monitoring programs for HABs as well. Now, it
is also worth mentioning that golden algae blooms as you see
here are a different type of a freshwater HAB that have killed
millions of fish in Texas year after year, also affecting
Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, Wyoming, North Carolina, South
Carolina, Oklahoma, and Nebraska.
Now, conservative estimates of the economic impact of
marine HABs are nearly $100 million per year or over a billion
dollars over the last decade. There is, however, no national
estimate for freshwater HAB costs, but impacts of individual
outbreaks can be in the same range or even higher than those
for marine HABs.
Now, turning to programmatic issues, our National Marine
HAB Program, is viewed by many as a model program that has
succeeded because of its organization, structure, and planning.
We have two national plans that have guided program development
and research activities for nearly 20 years. However, the
breadth of the problem exceeded the mandated resources of any
single agency, and thus we took the plan and divided it into a
series of complementary programs. This led to ECOHAB, the
Ecology and Oceanography of Harmful Algal Blooms, followed by
MERHAB or Monitoring and Event Response of HABs, and then to
two ocean and human health programs, or OHH programs, one
within NOAA and one funded by NSF and NIEHS. With encouragement
from Congress, the PCMHAB program was recently formulated to
support research to prevent, control and mitigate HABs.
Programs in event response and infrastructure were also
encouraged and had been formulated and proposed.
So this is a very strong and diverse program, but its
coverage of HABs in fresh waters is limited. The
reauthorization of HABHRCA in 2004 expanded the Act to include
blooms in all U.S. fresh waters, but the Act did not include a
mandate or funding authorization for the EPA which is the
appropriate agency to establish and maintain such a program.
NOAA's support for fresh water HABs only includes the Great
Lakes, not inland lakes, ponds, rivers, and reservoirs.
Now, given the foregoing comments and the details of the
HABHRCA discussion draft, I offer the following
recommendations. First, sustain support for ECOHAB, MERHAB and
OHH programs, and authorize programs on the practical aspects
of HAB prevention, control and mitigation, or PCMHAB and of
that response and infrastructure.
Second, EPA and freshwater HABs should be included in the
HABHRCA legislation and clear direction provided to move that
program element forward such as by requiring EPA to participate
in established or anticipated NOAA programs like ECOHAB,
MERHAB, PCMHAB and so forth.
Third, there are significant benefits to have a formally
recognized and congressionally mandated HABs and hypoxia
program within NOAA. Currently this does not formally exist,
and wording to create such a program should be included in the
legislation.
Fourth and finally, the schedule for reports for program
implementation, status updates and regional research action
plans is tight and demanding on NOAA's limited staff. This will
also drain considerable resources from the research budget. The
schedule I think should be relaxed, possibly reverting to the
five-year cycle of status reports required in the original
HABHRCA.
Let me close by saying that it is vitally important to
reauthorize HABHRCA so that we can maintain the momentum that
we have built up for addressing HABs. We have a strong and
highly respected program, and from the perspective of one that
has worked in this field for over three decades, I can see a
clear acceleration of benefits from that sustained research
support. It is leading to many practical tools to assist State
and federal managers and others on the front lines trying to
protect public health, fisheries, tourism and other economic
and social interests.
That concludes my testimony, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Anderson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Donald Anderson, Senior Scientist and
Director of the Coastal Ocean Institute, Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution
Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee. I am Donald M.
Anderson, a Senior Scientist in the Biology Department of the Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution, where I have been active in the study
of red tides and harmful algal blooms (HABs) for over 30 years. I am
here to provide the perspective of an experienced scientist who has
investigated many of the harmful algal bloom (HAB) phenomena that
affect coastal waters of the United States and the world. I am also
Director of the U.S. National Office for Harmful Algal Blooms, co-Chair
of the National HAB Committee, and have been actively involved in
formulating the scientific framework and agency partnerships that
support and guide our national program on HABs. Today my testimony will
briefly summarize HABs, their impacts and trends. I will also provide
my perspective on the research, programmatic, and legislative needs for
the reauthorization of the Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and
Control Act (HABHRCA), and will offer some specific comments on the
Discussion Draft of the bill.

BACKGROUND

An excellent background on marine HABs has been provided by Rob
Magnien in his written testimony for this hearing, so I will be brief
and cover aspects that I feel need to be emphasized or included.

Marine HABs. HABs are caused by algae--many of them microscopic. In
the ocean, these species sometimes make their presence known through
massive ``blooms'' of cells that discolor the water (hence the common
use of the term ``red tide ''), sometimes through illness and death of
humans who have consumed contaminated shellfish or fish, sometimes
through mass mortalities of fish, seabirds, and marine mammals, and
sometimes through irritating aerosolized toxins that drive tourists and
coastal residents from beaches. Macroalgal or seaweed blooms also fall
under the HAB umbrella. Excessive seaweed growth, often linked to
pollution inputs, can displace natural underwater vegetation, cover
coral reefs, and wash up on beaches, where the odor of masses of
decaying material is a serious deterrent to tourism.
With regard to human health, one major category of HAB impact
occurs when toxic phytoplankton are filtered from the water as food by
shellfish which then accumulate the algal toxins to levels that can be
lethal or cause serious illness in humans and marine animals. These
poisoning syndromes have been given the names paralytic, diarrhetic,
neurotoxic, azaspiracid, and amnesic shellfish poisoning (PSP, DSP,
NSP, AZP, and ASP). All have serious effects, and some can be fatal. A
sixth human illness, ciguatera fish poisoning (CFP) is caused by
biotoxins produced by dinoflagellates that grow on seaweeds and other
surfaces in coral reef communities. Ciguatera toxins are transferred
through the food chain from herbivorous reef fishes to larger
carnivorous, commercially valuable finfish. Yet another human health
impact from HABs occurs when a class of algal toxins called the
brevetoxins becomes airborne in sea spray, causing respiratory
irritation and asthma-like symptoms in beachgoers and coastal
residents, typically along the Florida and Texas shores of the Gulf of
Mexico.
With the exception of AZP, all of the poisoning syndromes described
above are known problems within the U.S. and its territories, affecting
large expanses of coastline. PSP occurs in all coastal New England
states as well as New York, extending to offshore areas in the
northeast such as Georges Bank, and along much of the west coast from
Alaska to northern California. Overall, PSP affects more U.S. coastline
than any other algal bloom problem. NSP occurs annually along Gulf of
Mexico coasts, with the most frequent outbreaks along western Florida
and Texas. Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina and Alabama have also
been affected intermittently, causing extensive losses to the oyster
industry and killing birds and marine mammals. ASP has been a problem
for all of the U.S. Pacific coast states. The ASP toxin has been
detected in shellfish on the east coast as well, and in plankton from
Gulf of Mexico waters. Until recently, DSP was virtually unknown in the
U.S., but a major outbreak was recently reported along the Texas coast,
resulting in an extensive closure of shellfish beds in that area. CFP
is the most frequently reported non-bacterial illness associated with
eating fish in the U.S. and its territories, but the number of cases is
probably far higher, because reporting to the U.S. Center for Disease
Control is voluntary and there is no confirmatory laboratory test. In
the U.S. Virgin Islands, it is estimated that nearly 50% of the adults
have been poisoned at least once, and some estimate that 20,000-40,000
individuals are poisoned by ciguatera annually in Puerto Rico and the
U.S. Virgin Islands alone. CFP occurs in virtually all sub-tropical to
tropical U.S. waters (i.e., Florida, Texas, Hawaii, Guam, Virgin
Islands, Puerto Rico, and many Pacific Territories). As tropical fish
are increasingly exported to distant markets, ciguatera has become a
problem for consumers far from the tropics. For example, poisonings of
restaurant patrons in the Washington DC area and elsewhere were linked
to fish caught in the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary in
the Gulf of Mexico south of Texas. The FDA subsequently issued a letter
of guidance to seafood processors that recommends that certain fish
species caught around that sanctuary should be avoided.

Freshwater HABs. Freshwater HABs are primarily caused by
cyanobacteria (blue-green algae), although other organisms such as
golden algae also cause destructive and dangerous freshwater blooms in
many midwestern states. Cyanobacteria are found in virtually all
ecosystems, but are primarily a problem (termed cyanoHABs) in fresh to
brackish waters. Their blooms generally consist of dense mats or
aggregations of cells floating on the water surface or suspended in the
water column. These huge masses of organic material create serious
problems for humans and aquatic ecosystems in two ways. The first is
that the biomass of the blooms reduces water transparency, resulting in
light limitation that can inhibit the growth of suspended and bottom-
dwelling plants. As blooms collapse, decomposition processes deplete
oxygen in the water column, killing fish and other organisms that are
unable to escape to oxygenated waters. Repeated bloom cycles may
irrevocably alter aquatic ecosystems, extinguishing biota that
contribute to healthy ecosystems, while creating conditions for
continued cyanoHAB bloom dominance.
The second and more serious problem is that many cyanobacteria
produce cyanotoxins, some of the most potent natural toxins known to
man. Freshwater HABs thus pose serious risks for human and animal
health, aquatic-ecosystem sustainability and economic vitality (Dodds
et al., 2009; Falconer, 2008; Hudnell, 2008; Lopez et al., 2007;
Stewart et al., 2008). From the public health perspective, an
unquantified but significant amount of human morbidity and mortality
result from exposure to high levels of cyanoHAB toxins during
recreational activities and lower doses in drinking water. Health
effects can be acute, as might occur after swallowing a mouth full of
contaminated water, leading to serious illness or death due to
respiratory arrest or organ failure. Lower level exposures cause a
multi-system, flu-like illness. Every year there are multiple reports
of animal deaths in the U.S. due to cyanotoxin exposure, and
occasionally there are reports of human deaths. Most non-lethal cases
of acute cyanotoxin poisoning recover within day or weeks. However, an
unknown percentage of susceptible individuals continue to suffer
neurological and other symptoms for many months or years. The
scientific literature also contains reports of chronic illness
following acute exposure or repeated, low-level exposure to
cyanotoxins. Little is known about the effects of repeated, low-level
exposures, but cancer and neurodegeneration are outcomes implicated in
the scientific literature. For example, laboratory studies indicate
that microcystins are a cause and promoter of liver, colon and other
cancers. Microcystin levels in drinking water are potentially linked to
liver cancer incidence in Chinese epidemiological studies. Other
studies indicate that cylindrospermopsin and other cyanotoxins also may
be carcinogenic.
The toxins also affect freshwater ecosystems, where fish,
zooplankton, macro-invertebrates, wading birds and aquatic vertebrates
suffer further lethal and sub-lethal effects. For example, data from
Florida show strong correlations between Cylindrospermopsis and
cylindrospermopsin concentrations and alligator death rates.
Another important freshwater HAB problem is caused by the ``golden
algae'' Prymnesium parvum which blooms in reservoirs, rivers, and
lakes, and causes extensive fish kills. These blooms have killed
millions of fish in Texas year after year, and have also impacted
Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, Wyoming, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Oklahoma, and Nebraska.

Recent Trends. The nature of the HAB problem has changed
considerably over the last three decades in the U.S. Virtually every
coastal state is now threatened by harmful or toxic marine algal
species, whereas 30-40 years ago, the problem was much more scattered
and sporadic. In inland states, HABs in rivers, lakes, reservoirs, and
other water freshwater bodies have increased as well. Overall, the
number of toxic blooms, the economic losses from them, the types of
resources affected, and the number of toxins and toxic species have all
increased dramatically in recent years in the U.S. and around the world
(Ramsdell et al., 2005).
There are many reasons for this expansion, some of which involve
human activities. Some new bloom events likely reflect indigenous
populations that have been discovered because of better detection
methods and more observers rather than new species introductions or
dispersal events. Other ``spreading events'' are most easily attributed
to dispersal via natural currents, while it is also clear that man may
have contributed to the global HAB expansion by transporting toxic
species in ship ballast water. The U.S. Coast Guard, EPA, and the
International Maritime Organization are all working toward ballast
water control and treatment regulations that will attempt to reduce the
threat of HAB species introductions worldwide.
Of considerable concern, particularly for coastal resource
managers, is the potential relationship between the apparent increase
in HABs and the accelerated eutrophication of coastal waters due to
human activities (Anderson et al., 2002). Some HAB outbreaks occur in
pristine U.S. coastal waters with no influence from pollution or other
anthropogenic effects, but in other areas, linkages between marine HABs
and eutrophication have been noted (Anderson et al., 2008). Coastal
waters are receiving massive and increasing quantities of industrial,
agricultural and sewage effluents through a variety of pathways. Just
as the application of fertilizer to lawns can enhance grass growth,
algae can grow in response to various types of nutrient inputs. Shallow
and restricted coastal waters that are poorly flushed appear to be most
susceptible to nutrient-related algal problems in marine systems.
Nutrient enrichment of coastal waters often leads to eutrophication and
increased frequencies and magnitudes of phytoplankton blooms, including
HABs.
The prevalence and duration of harmful algal blooms in freshwater
is also rapidly expanding in the U.S. and the world. In part, this
reflects rising temperatures, as some HAB species, notably the
cyanobacteria, thrive under warmer temperatures. But the main stimulus
has come from growing nutrient inputs into our water bodies. Recent
assessments by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency indicate that
44% of river and stream miles and 64% of lake and reservoir acres are
impaired pursuant to section 303(d) of the U.S. Clean Water Act (EPA,
2009). Eutrophication, the processes through which the flux of growth-
limiting nutrients from watersheds to receiving waters stimulates
freshwater HABs, continues to increase (Hudnell 2010). Analyses of data
from EPA's first eutrophication survey in 1972 indicated that 10-20% of
all U.S. lakes and reservoirs were eutrophic (Gakstatter and Maloney
1975). The Agency recently reported that over 50% of all U.S. lakes and
reservoirs are now eutrophic or hypereutrophic (EPA, 2009a). This
alarming rate of increase supports my view that a national program on
freshwater algal blooms is urgently needed and should be included in
the HABHRCA legislation, as detailed below.

Economic and Societal Impacts. HABs have a wide array of economic
impacts, including the costs of conducting routine monitoring programs
for shellfish and other affected resources, short-term and permanent
closure of harvestable shellfish and fish stocks, reductions in seafood
sales (including the avoidance of ``safe'' seafoods as a result of
over-reaction to health advisories), mortalities of wild and farmed
fish, shellfish, submerged aquatic vegetation and coral reefs, impacts
on tourism and tourism-related businesses, and medical treatment of
exposed populations. A conservative estimate of the average annual
economic impact resulting from marine HABs in the U.S. is approximately
$82 million (Hoagland and Scatasta, 2006). Cumulatively, the costs of
HABs exceed a billion dollars over the last several decades. These
estimates do not include the application of ``multipliers'' that are
often used to account for the manner in which money transfers through a
local economy. Furthermore, individual bloom events can approach the
annual average, as occurred for example in 2005 when a massive bloom of
Alexandrium species along the New England coast closed shellfish beds
from Maine to southern Massachusetts. A recent study estimated the
direct and indirect costs of the 2005 outbreak at nearly $50 million
for Massachusetts and $23 million for Maine. Furthermore, a one-week
state-wide closure in Maine (soft-shell clams, mahogany quahogs, and
mussels) is estimated to cost the state $1.2 M in lost harvester sales
and a total economic loss of $2.9 M. Typical duration of harvesting
closures in Maine range from 4 to 16 weeks.
There is no national estimate of the economic and social impact of
freshwater HABs, but the impacts are certainly significant. For
example, a single golden algae outbreak in Texas in 2001 caused an
estimated $18 million loss to local economies; these blooms and their
associated fish kills are near annual occurrences. Another example is
the closure of Grand Lake St. Marys in Ohio last summer due to toxic
cyanoHAB blooms. That cost the local community an estimated $200M in
lost tourism income. In addition, countless fish, waterfowl, and pets
were sickened and killed by the lake's toxic conditions, and the state
of Ohio confirmed seven lake toxin-caused illnesses with 21 others
possibly linked to lake exposure, including a case in which an
individual was temporarily blinded.

HAB PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT

In addition to providing background information on HABs, I was
asked to provide my perspective on the research, programmatic, and
legislative needs for the reauthorization of HABHRCA. To accomplish
this, I will first provide some background on the development of the
suite of activities, facilities, and funding programs that constitute
our national strategy for dealing with this significant problem in both
marine and fresh waters.
Our national marine HAB ``program'' or strategy is viewed by many
colleagues in other disciplines as a model program that has succeeded
because of its organization, structure, and planning. As recently as 25
years ago, this was not the case, however, as there was very little
research on HABs, and that being conducted in the academic community
was scattered and unfocused. To rectify this problem, we formulated a
National Plan for Marine Biotoxins and Harmful Algae (Anderson et al.,
1993) that guided activities in this field for the next 10-15 years.
The National Plan was broadly based, encompassing ecology, physiology,
toxicology, human health, economics, ecosystem health, and many other
topics. This breadth exceeded the mandate and resources of any single
agency or program, however, and thus for implementation purposes, it
was necessary to break the plan into a series of programs on
complementary topics. The first thematic area was the ``Ecology and
Oceanography of HABs'', which was addressed by the ECOHAB program. This
was followed by MERHAB (Monitoring and Event Response of HABs), and
then by Ocean and Human Health (OHH) programs. The latter began with a
partnership between the National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences (NIEHS) and the National Science Foundation (NSF), who have
supported four Centers for Oceans and Human Health that conduct
significant HAB research and outreach activities. NOAA then created an
Oceans and Human Health Initiative (OHHI) that supports extramural
research and focused activities at three federal OHH centers.
The 1993 National Plan provided the guidance and perspective that
led to the creation of several multi-agency partnerships and individual
agency initiatives on this topic. Together, ECOHAB and MERHAB have
funded over $100 million in marine and freshwater (Great Lakes) HAB
research since the programs began in 1996 and 2000, respectively.
Significant funding has also been provided by the COHH and OHHI
programs. After more than 10 years of strong program growth and diverse
research activities, the 1993 National Plan became outdated, however,
and thus was replaced by HARRNESS (Harmful Algal Research and Response:
A National Environmental Science Strategy 2005-2015; Ramsdell et al.,
2005). Several hundred scientists and managers, from a wide array of
fields, contributed to the knowledge base on which this new national
science and management strategy is based. HARRNESS is the plan that
will guide U.S. HAB research and monitoring well into the future, and
is one that I enthusiastically support.
At the conceptual level, HARRNESS is a framework of initiatives and
funding programs that identify and address current and evolving needs
associated with HABs and their impacts. In this context, the existing
programs should continue to function, and new ones added to address
important gaps. In the former category, ECOHAB is a critical, core
program that is needed to address the fundamental processes underlying
the impacts and dynamics of HABs. ECOHAB's research results have been
brought into practical applications through MERHAB, a program
formulated to transfer technologies and foster innovative monitoring
programs and rapid response by public agencies and health departments.
MERHAB should also continue under the future national plan.
Two relatively new programs (the Centers for Oceans and Human
Health (COHH) initiative of NIEHS and NSF and NOAA's OHHI) should also
continue as we move forward. They fill an important niche by creating
linkages between members of the ocean sciences and biomedical
communities to help both groups address public health aspects of HABs.
The COHH focus is on HABs, infectious diseases, and marine natural
products, whereas the NOAA OHHI Centers and extramural funding include
these subjects in addition to chemical pollutants, coastal water
quality and beach safety, seafood quality, sentinel species as
indicators of both potential human health risks and human impact on
marine systems. The partnership between NIEHS, NSF, and NOAA clearly
needs to be sustained and expanded in order to provide support to a
network of sufficient size to address the significant problems under
the OHH umbrella. This is best accomplished through additional funds to
these agencies, as well as through the involvement of other agencies
with interests in oceans and human health, including, for example, EPA,
NASA, FDA, and CDC.
A number of the recommendations of HARRNESS are not adequately
addressed by existing programs, however. As a result, the HAB community
needs to work with Congressional staff and agency program managers to
create new programs, as well as to modify existing ones, where
appropriate. Specific recommendations are given below in this regard.

Freshwater HABs. With the exception of the Great Lakes, which fall
under NOAA's jurisdiction, freshwater systems that are impacted by HABs
have not been comprehensively addressed in ECOHAB, MERHAB, or the OHH
HAB programs. This is because NOAA's mandate includes the Great Lakes
and estuaries up to the freshwater interface, but does not include the
many rivers, ponds, lakes, and reservoirs that are subject to
freshwater HAB problems.
The reauthorization of HABHRCA in 2004 expanded the Act to include
blooms in all U.S. freshwaters. The Act mandated an assessment of
freshwater HABs (Lopez et al., 2008), leading to an interagency
monograph that described science and research needs (Hudnell, 2008).
This effort to address freshwater HABs at the national level was
hampered because the Act did not contain a mandate or funding
authorization for the EPA, which is the appropriate Agency to establish
and maintain such a plan. All U.S. freshwaters are within the purview
of the EPA, as defined in the Clean Water Act (2002) and the Safe
Drinking Water Act (2002). The Agency acknowledges its mandate for safe
and clean water in Goal 2 of the 2006-2011 EPA Strategic Plan (EPA,
2008), ``Ensure drinking water is safe. Restore and maintain oceans,
watersheds, and their aquatic ecosystems to protect human health,
support economic and recreational activities, and provide healthy
habitat for fish, plants, and wildlife''. Although the EPA recognizes
the need for a National Research and Control Plan for Freshwater HABs
(Lopez et al., 2008), the Agency has not begun development of a plan
primarily due to the lack of clear Congressional direction and funding.
I believe it is imperative that the reauthorization of HABHRCA
contain an EPA mandate and funding authorization for freshwater HABs. I
make specific recommendations on this below.

Prevention, Control, and Mitigation of HABs. The 2004 HABHRCA
Reauthorization authorized the establishment of three national programs
on HABs. Of these, two existed (ECOHAB, MERHAB), but the third did not.
This was to be ``a peer-reviewed research project on management
measures that can be taken to prevent, reduce, control, and mitigate
HABs.'' (HABHRCA Sec. 605 (3)). In response, NOAA has since established
the Prevention, Control, and Mitigation of Harmful Algal Blooms
(PCMHAB) Program.
Guidelines for the PCMHAB are given in the Congressionally
requested National Scientific Research, Development, Demonstration, and
Technology Transfer Plan on Reducing Impacts from Harmful Algal Blooms
(RDDTT Plan; Dortch et al., 2008). This plan includes PCMHAB, but has
two other essential components as well. These are: 1) a comprehensive
national HAB Event Response program: and 2) a Core Infrastructure
program. Together with the PCMHAB component, these are interdependent
and critical for improving future HAB research and management, and I
therefore urge the Committee to include these as specific, named
programs in the legislation. Justification for this programmatic
emphasis is as follows.
Prevention, control, and mitigation (PCM) of HABs has always been a
priority within Congress. PCM issues were included in the original
HABHRCA in 1998, and were included in the 2004 reauthorization. Further
rationale for this program is that much of the focus of past HAB
research has been on fundamental aspects of organism physiology,
ecology, and toxicology, so less effort has been directed towards
practical issues such as resource management strategies, or even direct
bloom suppression or control (Anderson, 1997). Progress in the area of
bloom suppression or control has been slow, but is now increasing due
to the new PCMHAB program. Among the impediments to progress is that
scientists often choose to focus more on less controversial, and
therefore more easily funded lines of work. Societal concern about
bloom control strategies that might involve the use of chemicals or
engineered or non-indigenous organisms is significant, and therefore it
has been difficult to move research from the laboratory to the field.
In the case of my own laboratory's work on the use of clay dispersal to
control blooms, we have seen that a few vocal opponents can raise
environmental concerns that delay or stop field applications, even
though this method is environmentally benign in comparison to the
damage from the HAB itself, and that this same bloom control strategy
is used routinely elsewhere in the world to protect fish farms (e.g.,
Korea).
Yet another impediment is that for many years, there was no
specific funding specified for PCM research. As a result, PCM proposals
competed with ECOHAB and MERHAB submissions for funds. Given the
controversial nature of many PCM strategies, it is not surprising that
peer reviews of the proposals were variable and sometimes negative, and
that more conservative projects on bloom dynamics, toxin chemistry, or
other topics were selected. I therefore strongly recommend that
specific wording be inserted in the draft HABHRCA legislation to
sustain a national program on Prevention, Control and Mitigation of
HABs, and that specific funds be authorized for that program.
In this context, Congressional oversight may be needed to establish
an agency mandate for control of marine and freshwater nuisance
species. Unlike the Agricultural Research Service of the USDA, which
has a mandate for control of terrestrial plant pests, there is no
federal agency with this responsibility for marine waters. This is an
area where the growing concern about invasive species could be of great
help to the HAB field, as technologies, regulations, policies, and
environmental concerns are common to both fields. I can see a great
deal of value in the convening of a meeting to in which HAB
investigators would meet with those working on control strategies for
invasive species, insects, aquatic vegetation, other pest infestations,
as well as with those working on bioremediation strategies used for oil
spill and pollution events.

Event Response. A major HAB outbreak in the Gulf of Maine in 2009
highlighted the need for an Event Response program as part of the
national HAB program. During this event, virtually the entire coastline
of the state of Maine was closed to shellfish harvesting due to
dangerous levels of toxicity. The same was true for New Hampshire, and
for portions of Massachusetts. Government officials, resource managers,
and the general public were anxious for information on the offshore
extent of the bloom, and it's potential duration, yet there were no
research programs ongoing to provide such information. Senator Snowe
made a direct request to NOAA to provide this type of information,
resulting in a scramble to find funding for ships and research
personnel on short notice. Had there been a national HAB Event Response
Program, as described in the RDDTT report (Dortch et al., 2008), the
response would have been significantly more comprehensive, rapid, and
efficient.
This is but one example of the need for rapid response to HABs that
occur throughout the U.S. In some cases, local resources are
sufficient, but in unexpected events, or those that are more
significant and dangerous than normal, additional resources are needed
that can be rapidly mobilized and used to protect the public health and
fisheries resources. It is therefore my recommendation that specific
wording for a national HAB Event Response program be included in the
HABHRCA legislation, and that specific funds be authorized for that
program.

Infrastructure. Researching and implementing new PCM strategies and
improving event response will not be possible without certain types of
infrastructure, including chemical analytical facilities, reference and
research materials, toxin standards, HAB culture collections, tissue
banks, technical training centers, and databases. At the present time,
many of these facilities or resources are maintained by individual
investigators or laboratories, with no centralized coordination or
support. Personally, I maintain a culture collection of HAB species
that exceeds 400 strains, yet I do not receive targeted funding for its
expenses. This has become a significant financial burden that has made
me begin culling cultures from the collection. For other infrastructure
needs, the necessary resources to not exist, and therefore funds are
needed to provide these to the HAB community. For example, analytical
standards for some HAB toxins are not available, severely restricting
research and management progress. Likewise, molecular probes that allow
the accurate and rapid identification of HAB species are also not
universally available.
The RDDTT report (Dortch et al., 2008) identifies and prioritizes
infrastructure needs for the national HAB program. What is needed is
the Congressional recognition of the need for such a program, and
therefore I recommend that specific wording for a national HAB
infrastructure program be included in the HABHRCA legislation, and that
funds be authorized for this specific program.
The support provided to HAB research through ECOHAB, MERHAB, Sea
Grant, and other national programs has had a tremendous impact on our
understanding of HAB phenomena, and on the development of management
tools and strategies. Since HAB problems facing the U.S. are diverse
with respect to the causative species, the affected resources, the
toxins involved, and the oceanographic systems and habitats in which
the blooms occur, we need multiple teams of skilled researchers and
managers distributed throughout the country. This argues against
funding that ebbs and floods with the sporadic pattern of HAB outbreaks
or that focuses resources in one region while others go begging. I
cannot emphasize too strongly the need for an equitable distribution of
resources that is consistent with the scale and extent of the national
problem, and that is sustained through time. This is the only way to
keep research teams intact, forming the core of expertise and knowledge
that leads to scientific progress. To achieve this balance, we need a
scientifically based allocation of resources, not one based on
political jurisdictions. This is possible if we work within the
guidelines of HARRNESS and with the inter-agency effort that has been
guiding its implementation. It is also critical that appropriations be
increased to include these new areas of effort. The current programs
are effective, and the new ones (PCMHAB, Event Response, and
Infrastructure) are needed to complete the coverage of this diverse and
widespread problem.

COMMENTS ON THE DRAFT LEGISLATION

I offer the following comments on specific aspects of the HABHRCA
Discussion Draft.

Freshwater HAB program. HABHRCA, as enacted and re-authorized, did
not contain a mandate or funding authorization for freshwater HABs,
other than those covered by NOAA's mandate, which includes the Great
Lakes. The freshwater HAB problem is huge, and includes every inland
state, as well as those on the coast, which are also faced with marine
HAB problems. The EPA is the appropriate Agency to establish such a
plan. The 2010 bill to reauthorize HABHRCA contained the EPA mandate, a
modest funding authorization, and direction for the Agency to use those
funds to support research and control projects for freshwater HABs by
becoming a partner with NOAA in the three existing NOAA grant programs
(ECOHAB, MERHAB, and PCMHAB). That bill passed in the House with
bipartisan support, but did not come up for a vote in the Senate. I
urge this Committee to include the EPA mandate, funding authorization,
and direction to participate in existing national HAB funding programs
in the current effort to reauthorize HABHRCA. A National Research and
Control Plan for Freshwater HABs will protect our citizens and
industries, and ensure that they have a sustainable supply of usable
freshwater into the future.

National HAB Program within NOAA. In Section 4, the Discussion
draft states that ``. . . the Undersecretary, through the Task Force
established under section 603(a), shall maintain a National Harmful
algal Bloom and Hypoxia Program pursuant to this section''. The
implication of this sentence is that a formal HABs and Hypoxia Program
exists within NOAA, but this is not the case. The program exists as a
competitive research activity under the National Center for Coastal
Ocean Science (NCCOS). The wording should be changed to ``. . . shall
establish and maintain . . . .'' There are significant benefits to
having a formally recognized and congressionally mandated HABS and
Hypoxia program within NOAA. This simple wording change will make a
huge difference to the way our program is viewed, supported, and
managed within NOAA.

Named Programs and Authorizations. In Section 7 of the Discussion
draft, the authorization details are not provided. As I stated earlier,
Congress has requested that the national HAB research and monitoring
effort be expanded to include several new program areas such as
prevention, control, and mitigation of blooms, event response, and
infrastructure. These enhanced responsibilities and needs will require
modest increases to authorization levels.
I have been told very clearly by managers within NOAA that the
congressional mandate for HABs and hypoxia provided through HABHRCA is
a critical factor in deciding priorities for funding, staffing, and
other resource allocations within NOAA. The same holds for individual
programs--if they are congressionally recognized and mandated, their
longevity and support are assured.Accordingly, I recommend that the
individual programs (e.g., ECOHAB, MERHAB, PCMHAB, Event Response,
Infrastructure) be named specifically in the bill.

Regional Research Action Plans. As emphasized above, HAB phenomena
are diverse throughout the U.S., and therefore impacts and research
needs will vary across regions. I therefore support the congressional
directive to create regional research action plans through a series of
meetings involving managers, scientists, government officials,
industry, and other stakeholders. My concerns here are the timescale
and costs for these meetings. Having participated in a very successful
meeting of this type in Florida, I know that a significant cost is
involved (at least $250 -300K), and that considerable time is needed to
plan, convene, and then report on the results of such a meeting. Given
the inclusion of ``freshwater'' regions involving inland states, of
which there may be many, I can envision NOAA HAB program officials
struggling to organize and run a large number of meetings in a short
period of time, and having to commit significant funds that would
otherwise be directed to research. I would thus recommend a more
gradual approach to the regionalization.

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

The diverse nature of HAB phenomena and the hydrodynamic and
geographic variability associated with different outbreaks throughout
the U.S. pose a significant constraint to the development of a
coordinated national HAB program. Nevertheless, the combination of
planning, coordination, and a highly compelling topic with great
societal importance has initiated close cooperation between officials,
government scientists and academics in a sustained attack on the HAB
problem. Progress thus far has been excellent, as the U.S. HAB program
is seen as a model for other scientific disciplines in the U.S. and the
world. The rate and extent of progress from here will depend upon how
well federal agencies work together, and on how effectively the skills
and expertise of government and academic scientists can be targeted on
priority topics that have not been well represented in the national HAB
strategy. The opportunity for cooperation is clear, since as stated in
the ECOHAB science plan (Anderson, 1995), ``Nowhere else do the
missions and goals of so many government agencies intersect and
interact as in the coastal zone where HAB phenomena are prominent.''
The HAB community in the U.S. has matured scientifically and
politically, and is fully capable of undertaking the new challenges
inherent in an expanded national program. This will be successful only
if a coordinated interagency effort can be implemented to focus
research personnel, facilities, and financial resources to the common
goals of a comprehensive national strategy.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my testimony. Thank you for the
opportunity to offer information that is based on my own research and
policy activities, as well as on the collective wisdom and creativity
of numerous colleagues in the HAB field. I would be pleased to answer
any questions that you or other members may have.
Donald M. Anderson, PhD Senior Scientist Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution

Summary points and recommendations

Marine HABs are a serious and growing problem in the U.S.,
affecting every coastal state; freshwater HABS are an equally
significant problem in inland states. HABs impact public health,
fisheries, aquaculture, tourism, and coastal aesthetics. HAB problems
will not go away and will likely increase in severity.
HABs have a wide array of economic impacts, including the costs of
conducting routine monitoring programs for shellfish and other affected
resources, short-term and permanent closure of harvestable shellfish
and fish stocks, reductions in seafood sales (including the avoidance
of ``safe'' seafoods as a result of over-reaction to health
advisories), mortalities of wild and farmed fish, shellfish, submerged
aquatic vegetation and coral reefs, impacts on tourism and tourism-
related businesses, and medical treatment of exposed populations.
Cumulatively, the costs of marine HABs exceed a billion dollars over
the last several decades. There is no national estimate of the economic
and social impact of freshwater HABs, but the impacts are truly
significant. For example, the closure of Grand Lake St. Marys in Ohio
last summer due to toxic cyanoHAB blooms cost the local community an
estimated $200M in lost tourism income.
A coordinated national HAB Program was created over 15 years ago
and partially implemented. That National Plan has been updated with a
new plan called HARRNESS that can guide the next decade or more of
activities in HAB research and management. Research and management
programs such as ECOHAB, MERHAB, and the Oceans and Human Health
initiatives have been highly successful and productive, but new
programs are needed to cover gaps such as prevention, control and
mitigation of blooms, event response, and core infrastructure.

Recommendations:

Sustain and enhance support for the national HAB plan called
HARRNESS.
Sustain and enhance support for the ECOHAB, MERHAB and OHH
programs, and authorize new programs. In the latter context, a separate
program on the practical aspects of HAB prevention, control and
mitigation (PCMHAB) needs to be authorized, as it was in past HABHRCA
legislation, and two new programs (HAB Event Response and HAB
Infrastructure) should be authorized as well, each with specific
funding lines to insure that resources are indeed directed to these
programs by NOAA and EPA.
Recognize that NOAA will require funds for operations in support of
HAB management, such as HAB forecasting; authorize these activities
with specific language, and specific funding allocations. This could
fall under the Event Response or Infrastructure programs.
Encourage interagency partnerships, as the HAB problem transcends
the resources or mandate of any single agency.
Freshwater HABs are an important focus but are generally not
comprehensively addressed in ECOHAB, MERHAB, or the OHH HAB programs.
EPA should therefore be included in the HABHRCA legislation. Clear
direction should be provided so that EPA and NOAA move this program
forward in a productive and efficient manner. One way to accomplish
this is to require EPA to participate in the established or anticipated
NOAA programs like ECOHAB, MERHAB, PCMHAB, Event Response, and
Infrastructure.
The ECOHAB, MERHAB, PCMHAB, HAB Event Response, and HAB
Infrastructure programs should be named in the HABHRCA legislation.
The wording in Section 4 of the Discussion draft should be changed
to read that ``. . . the Undersecretary, through the Task Force
established under section 603(a), shall establish and maintain a
National Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Program pursuant to this
section''. There are significant benefits to having a formally
recognized and congressionally mandated HABS and Hypoxia program within
NOAA. Currently, this does not exist.
The schedule for reports for program implementation, status
updates, and multiple regional research action plans is very tight and
demanding on NOAA's limited staff. This will also drain considerable
resources from the research budget unless separate appropriations are
made explicitly for these reports. The schedule could be relaxed,
possibly reverting to the 5-year cycle of status reports that was
required by the original HABHRCA
Recommend appropriations that are commensurate with the scale of
the HAB problem in both marine and fresh waters. The national HAB
program is well established and productive, but it needs additional
resources as new topics, responsibilities and tasks are added through
new legislation. Research should be peer-reviewed and competitive, and
should take full advantage of the extensive capabilities of the
extramural research community.

Literature citations:

Anderson, D.M. 1997. Turning back the harmful red tide. Nature 388:
513-514.
Anderson, D.M. (Ed.). 1995. ECOHAB: The ecology and oceanography of
harmful algal blooms
A research agenda. Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. 66 pp.
Anderson, D.M., J.M. Burkholder, W.P. Cochlan, P.M. Glibert, C.J.
Gobler, C.A. Heil, R. Kudela, M.L. Parsons, J.E. Rensel, D.W. Townsend,
V.L. Trainer, and G.A. Vargo. 2008. Harmful algal blooms and
eutrophication: Examining linkages from selected coastal regions of the
United States. Harmful Algae 8: 39-53.
Anderson, D.M., S.B. Galloway, and J.D. Joseph. 1993. Marine
Biotoxins and Harmful Algae: A National Plan. Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution Tech. Report, WHOI 93-02. Woods Hole, MA. 59pp.
Anderson, D.M., P.M. Glibert, and J.M. Burkholder. 2002. Harmful
algal blooms and eutrophication: Nutrient sources, composition, and
consequences. Estuaries 25(4b): 704-726.
Dodds W.K., W.W. Bouska, J.L. Eitzmann, T.J. Pilger, K.L. Pitts,
A.J. Riley, J.T. Schloesser,
D.J. Thornbrugh. 2009. Eutrophication of U.S. Freshwaters: Analysis
of Potential Economic Damages. Environ. Sci. Technol. 43: 12-19.
Dortch, Q., D. Anderson, D. Ayres, and P. Glibert (Eds.). 2008.
Harmful Algal Bloom Research, Development, Demonstration and Technology
Transfer: A National Workshop Report. Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, Woods Hole, MA. http://www.whoi.edu/
fileserver.do?id=43464&pt=10&p=19132
EPA. 2008. 2006-2011 EPA Strategic Plan, EPA-190-R-06-001. http://
www.epa.gov/ocfo/plan/plan.htm accessed January 28, 2009.
EPA. 2009. National water quality inventory: report to Congress,
2004 reporting cycle. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA 841-R-
08-001, Washington, D. C., pp. 37.
EPA. 2009a. National Lakes Assessment: A Collaborative Survey of
the Nation's Lakes. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA 841-R-09-
001, Washington, D. C., pp. 101.
Falconer, I.R. 2008. Health effects associated with controlled
exposures to cyanobacterial toxins. In: Hudnell, H.K., (Ed.),
Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal Blooms: State of the Science and Research
Needs, Adv Exp Med Biol, 619, Chapter 27. Springer Press, New York, pp.
607-612. http://www.epa.gov/cyano_habs_symposium/ accessed January 28,
2009.
Gakstatter, J.H. and T.E. Maloney. 1975. Potential impact of a
detergent phosphorus ban on eutrophication in selected American lakes
and streams. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Corvallis, OR, pp.
19.
Hoagland, P. and S. Scatasta. 2006. The economic effects of harmful
algal blooms. In: E. Graneli and J. Turner, eds., Ecology of Harmful
Algae. Ecology Studies Series. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer-
Verlag.
Hudnell, H.K. (Ed.). 2008. Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal Blooms:
State of the Science and Research Needs, Advances in Experimental
Medicine and Biology, Vol. 619, Springer Press. http://
www.springer.com/biomed/neuroscience/book/978-0-387-75864-0
Hudnell, H.K. 2010. Within water-body management: a needed but
neglected complement to watershed management. Clean Technology and
Environmental Policy 12: 205-207.
Lopez, C.B., E.B. Jewett, Q. Dortch, B.T. Walton, and K. Hudnell.
2007. Scientific Assessment of Freshwater Harmful Algal Blooms.
Interagency Working Group on Harmful Algal Blooms, Hypoxia, and Human
Health of the Joint Subcommittee on Ocean Science and Technology.
Washington, DC.
Ramsdell, J.S., D.M. Anderson, and P.M. Glibert (Eds.). 2005.
HARRNESS. Harmful Algal Research and Response: A National Environmental
Science Strategy 2005-2015. Ecological Society of America, Washington,
DC, 96 pp.
Stewart I., A.A. Seawright, and G.R. Shaw. 2008. Cyanobacterial
poisoning in livestock, wild mammals and birds--an overview. In:
Hudnell H.K., (Ed.), Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal Blooms: State of the
Science and Research Needs, Adv Exp Med Biol, 619, Chapter 28. Springer
Press, New York, pp. 613-638. http://www.epa.gov/cyano_habs_symposium/
accessed January 28, 2009.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Dr. Anderson. I now
recognize our fourth witness, Dr. Kevin Sellner, the Executive
Director of the Chesapeake Research Consortium. Dr. Sellner?

STATEMENT OF DR. KEVIN SELLNER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,

CHESAPEAKE RESEARCH CONSORTIUM

Dr. Sellner. Thank you. I extend my appreciation to the
Subcommittee Chair and Subcommittee Members and staff for this
invitation to discuss the importance of HABHRCA--I will get
used to that acronym in a while--re-authorization to mitigating
the frequent and reoccurring blooms of harmful algae that now
typify many of our Nation's waters.
As my colleagues have just summarized, harmful algal blooms
are a serious and recurring threat to human and domestic animal
health, living resource viability, ambient dissolved oxygen
levels in our eutrophic lakes, reservoirs, and coastal systems
and a substantial economic drain on our already stretched
fiscal resources for local governments, states, and agencies
responsible for safeguarding our Nation's waters and its
citizens.
I will focus my comments on techniques and approaches to
mitigate these algal accumulations, removing them from surface
waters and thereby reducing exposures to our citizens and their
domesticated animals.
Just as on the extremely productive U.S. farmlands, the
supply of nutrients to U.S. waters governs all algal
production, and thus reducing these inputs will have the
greatest impact at limiting these events. However, that focus
area is not integral to HABHRCA but addressed in other
legislation and existing federal programs and agencies.
For bloom removal, direct intervention in dense algal
accumulations is fairly routine in small enclosed systems using
chemical additives, such as copper sulfate or potassium
permanganate, chemicals we have in our labs. However, these are
problematic for open systems with subsequent copper toxicity,
an issue for the other ecosystem processes, while permanganate
dosing is critical to prevent mortalities of all organisms, not
just the bloom algae.
Other techniques that move or mix the water can be
effective using paddle wheel devices or aerators and bubblers.
These generally are most effective in systems without large,
shallow areas where the blooms in the shallows can persist
outside of these mixed areas.
Biological controls using viruses, parasites and grazers of
the blooms have also been proposed, but the expense in
producing the numbers of these bloom-controlling organisms
prohibits this technique for large, open systems.
Finally, harvest of bloom biomass for biofuels has been
proposed, but the technology is hardware rich and labor
intensive, so impractical for large blooms at this time. And
there are more details in my written testimony.
Of great promise is the application of sediments to bind
with and remove the bloom to bottom waters. This approach is
common to Asian countries and used in agriculture areas as
blooms approach. We have recently adapted this technique for
Maryland waters, identifying mixtures of local sediments and a
byproduct of our crab shells to effectively remove laboratory
strains and field blooms of a globally common toxin-producing
algae Microcystis aeruginosa from the water--it was the billion
green example that Don just showed in his slides.
These results are now the foundation for a field
demonstration effort in a lake outside Denton, Maryland, and
possibly in Frederick, Maryland, at Fountain Rock Park, where
natural blooms will be treated with local sediments and the
crab shell byproduct to assess efficacy for routine mitigation
in the lake and then ideally as a routine tool for state
intervention throughout the waters of Maryland's borders.
Three other points need to be made for continued technique
development and routine implementation in U.S. waters. First,
continued research into social sciences should be imbedded in
any future bloom research or mitigation as citizen awareness
breeds understanding and acceptance of intervention. Without an
ability to assess public and other stakeholder reservations and
developing strategies to overcome those perceptions, future
mitigation will likely fail. Social scientists are critical to
future success, and a reauthorized HABHRCA should include this
commitment.
Second, integration and coordination at the national level
is absolutely necessary such that workshops to identify
management needs, research priorities to meet those needs and
coordination across the suite of agencies, scientists and
citizens occurs frequently to address the mandated requirements
from Congress and from the executive branch. This has been
fulfilled through NOAA staffing in the past, but appropriations
for NOAA staffing have steadily declined over the last several
years, severely limiting the agency's ability to meet those
requirements.
Finally, in past HABHRCA legislation, EPA had been
identified as a leader in freshwater bloom ecology, monitoring
and control in this role for the agency needs to be
reinstituted as freshwater issues are beyond NOAA's mandate.
EPA leadership in freshwater bloom activities is critical.
Thank you for this opportunity, and my colleagues and I
look forward to HABHRCA's reauthorization so we might continue
to expand our ability to limit bloom events in U.S. waters.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Sellner follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Kevin Sellner, Executive Director, Chesapeake
Research Consortium

Introduction

I extend my appreciation to the Subcommittee Chair, Subcommittee
members and staff, and agency administrators for this invitation to
discuss the importance of HBHRCA re-authorization to mitigating the
frequent and reoccurring blooms of harmful algae that now typify many
of our nation's waters.
As my colleagues have just summarized, harmful algal blooms are a
serious and recurring threat to human and domestic animal health,
living resource viability, ambient dissolved oxygen levels in our
eutrophic lakes, reservoirs, and coastal systems, and a substantial
economic drain on our already stretched fiscal resources for local
governments, states, and agencies responsible for safeguarding or
nation's waters and its citizens.
I have prepared comments to outline the spectrum of mitigation
options now or soon available for mitigating these recurrent algal
proliferations and accumulations. There are some techniques that show
high potential for reducing blooms in many systems and in some areas
and other nations, are applied more frequently than we do in the U.S.
Just as on the extremely productive US farmlands, the supply of
nutrients to US waters governs all algal production, and thus reducing
these inputs will have the greatest impact at limiting these `events'.
However, that focus area is not integral to HABHRCA but addressed in
other legislation and existing Federal programs and agencies. HABHRCA
IS critical to exploring the reasons for these recurring blooms, and
most importantly 3 critical factors for reducing these recurring
aquatic stresses locally to nationally.

Mitigation and Prevention of Harmful Algal Blooms

First, HABHRCA authorizes support for expanding prevention,
control, and mitigation research for harmful algae, a recent US
commitment long after a report from the community requested such a
program more than a decade ago. Through HABHRCA, NOAA's Center for
Sponsored Coastal Ocean Research now administers a Prevention, Control,
and Mitigation competitive research program which funds research
projects designed to develop and apply technologies to reduce harmful
blooms in US waters. Based on research in freshwaters from China and
saline waters from Korea, Japan, the Philippines, and Florida's western
shelf in the Gulf of Mexico, an inexpensive but very efficient bloom
mitigation technique employing sediment to bind with and remove bloom
algae from the water column looks very promising as an operational
technology for bloom removal. I am part of a recent award, focusing on
removing blooms of toxic, dense surface scum algae Microcystis
aeruginosa, common throughout the world. This bloom-former can produce
the toxins known as microcystins, lethal to domesticated animals
drinking from lakes, ponds, and tributaries containing M. aeruginosa
blooms and induce liver tumors in humans and other animals through
continuous lower level exposures over time. Our laboratory work over
the past 3 years with an honors undergraduate research team at the
University of Maryland indicates that laboratory grown and field
collected blooms are rapidly removed from the water column on additions
of mixtures of local sediments and a crab shell by-product (chitosan).
We are now expanding that work to field blooms in a lake outside
Denton, MD where blooms of the algae will be trapped in large
containers and treated with sediment-chitosan mixtures to determine
removal efficiencies for these field conditions and importantly fate of
the settled bloom and its toxin. We believe that the technique will
work very well, freeing the water from the cells and the toxin and
thereby reducing toxin impacts on domestic animals drinking from the
lake as well as citizens (such as Girl Scouts in the Girl Scouts of
America camp surrounding the lake) using the lake for swimming,
boating, and fishing. From these results, we anticipate moving to open
water applications for eventual technique application as a standard
protocol for state staffs deployed to remove blooms from Maryland's
fresh and bay waters. HABHRCA enabled program initiation, selection of
the project for support, and most likely use of this inexpensive
procedure as a standard tool in protecting state waters in the next 5-
10 years.
Authorization enables exploration of other mitigation procedures
used in other systems and nations. For example, in freshwater systems
with rapidly increasing depths from shores, aeration through bubbling
or mixing of the water column has proven effective in reducing blooms
of these dense surface `scums' so common globally. Some chemical
additives have also been used to remove developed blooms, such as
copper sulfate or permanganate additions. The former is a concern,
however, due to ancillary copper toxicity issues while permanganate
additions must be used cautiously due to the bursting of bloom cells
and release of internal toxins into the surrounding water or living
resource mortalities if too much of the permanganate is added. In
systems with higher salinity such as estuaries or coastal ocean areas,
sediments can be added for removing cells as discussed above, using
compounds other than chitosan to bind the sediments and algae. These
approaches appear very promising but not without substantial effective
outreach and education of local residents to the benefits of the
additions versus the impacts of non-intervention (see social science
needs below).
Other techniques propose to harvest the bloom biomass from bloom
areas and concentrate the algal cells for harvest and biofuel/compost
production. Large filtration devices or multiple screens can be
deployed in the water, concentrating bloom biomass for removal and
processing. This technique, however, is expensive and can be used in
small bloom areas only, or if implemented in very large blooms, is
hardware and labor intensive and therefore requires very large fiscal
commitments. Preventative technologies can also be used to create
chemical conditions in receiving waters that favor beneficial algae
rather than the harmful species. One alternative is to divert waters
known to support algal blooms across fine meshes on gently sloped land
and allow the natural flora to colonize the mesh and remove nutrients
supporting expected recurring blooms, yielding attached algae for
harvest, processing, and biofuel production. These `algal turf
scrubbers' (ATS) have been used effectively in multi-acre systems in
Florida and Texas and been used in demonstration projects in the
Chesapeake Bay watershed. Similarly, filling large translucent floating
`bags' with bloom-supporting water followed by enrichment with rapidly
growing high lipid-containing algae can result in high nutrient uptake
by the `preferred alga', reducing the likelihood for growth of the
harmful species. Harvest of the lipid-rich algae can, in turn, yield
biofuels. A third option is the introduction of materials that bind
available nutrients, with one commercial product Phoslockr very
effective at binding available phosphorus in the water as well as in
loads entering waters treated with the compound. It will continue to
bind phosphorus, the nutrient that favors the proliferation of
freshwater cyanobacteria generally, as long as the binding sites of the
Phoslock remain available. All three of these preventative measures,
however, are costly. ATS systems require land and initial construction
across several acres but continuous algae harvest and returns from the
production of butanol, omega-3 fatty acids, compost, and carbon and
nutrient credits make long-term profit probable; additionally nutrients
in river discharges are also continuous, insuring a likely permanent
source of nitrogen and phosphorus to produce the algae in the ATS and
reduce the likelihood for harmful algae production in natural waters.

The Importance of Social Sciences from HABHRCA

Outreach and education are critical to future application of
research results to societal problems in US waters and hence social
science outlined in HABHRCA insures effective and continuous dialog
with citizens and stakeholders directly or indirectly tied to harmful
algal bloom impacts or intervention. It is currently a required
component of the Prevention, Control, and Mitigation Program
administered by NOAA, a direct result of HABHRCA. The public is deeply
concerned about the proliferation of blooms in local waters, and
informing the community on the detrimental aspects of blooms versus the
benefits to local health, healthy ecosystems, and local livelihoods on
bloom removal is now integral to NOAA's research commitment. In the
program, researchers on the blooms, their fate, and aspects of toxin
removal now actively collaborate with social scientists to work with
citizens and other stakeholders to outline the bloom problem, potential
impacts on the local community and the waters they use, and modes of
intervening in reducing these threats to local-to-regional citizens and
user groups. An example of this interaction of science and citizens is
embedded in our current Denton, MD project where natural and social
scientists will meet with citizens next month to encourage discussion,
communication, and cooperation in reducing the bloom effects in the
local lake. Without this comraderie and understanding, no matter how
efficient the technique is in removing a local bloom, citizen anxiety
of `interfering with mother nature' could prevent any routine
mitigation in state waters, effectively preventing protection of
citizens and their animals and health, perpetuating the status quo of
dying animals and threats to citizen health from toxin exposure. Social
science research and subsequent citizen-scientist cooperation arising
from HABHRCA are critical to future success in routinely mitigating
blooms in our very productive national waters.

National Integration, Coordination, and Reporting of Harmful Algal
Bloom

Management, Research, and Prevention, Control, and Mitigation

An effective collaboration of scientists and non-scientists must be
informed and facilitated by strong Federal leadership, so I encourage
continued support of intramural NOAA staffing to meet this national
need. National workshops must be held to collect needed expert opinion
of on-going and emerging harmful algal issues, draft reports required
by Congress and agency leaders, and provide career opportunities for
students entering the field to protect future citizens from these
expanding blooms and toxins. NOAA's Center for Sponsored Coastal Ocean
Research staff have provided this excellence in the past 15 years, but
excellence requires support so HABHRCA re-authorization and subsequent
agency appropriations for intramural coordination, integration, and
reporting in NOAA and would insure continued national leadership for
the excellent research needed (supported in NOAA-administered
competitive peer-reviewed extramural research for the Ecology and
Oceanography of Harmful Algal Blooms (ECOHAB), Monitoring and Event
Response of Harmful Algal Blooms (MERHAB), and Prevention, Control, and
Mitigation of Harmful Algal Blooms (PCM HAB)), communication with
scientists and users of that science, and implementation of mitigation
procedures most effective at reducing threats to our citizens and
ecosystems.

Re-Institution of EPA Leadership for Freshwater Harmful Algal Bloom

Research, Response, and Prevention, Control, and Mitigation

One more point needs to be made: previous HABHRCA language
identified EPA as a leader in Freshwater Harmful Algal Bloom research
and the language is missing in this year's re-authorization.
Freshwaters are beyond NOAA's mandate and hence it is important to re-
institute the EPA lead role in Freshwater Bloom Research as EPA has a
strong and historic commitment to freshwater health, so EPA is a
natural lead for specific harmful algae research and mitigation. This
is beyond its identified role in water pollution and nutrients, and re-
authorization should re-install the requirement for EPA leadership in
specific algal bloom research efforts.

Concluding Remarks

I appreciate the opportunity to the subcommittee of the importance
of re-authorizing HABHRCA for safe-guarding our nation's waters from
toxins and bloom-induced losses to our economies and health of our
citizens, their animals, and our important and productive aquatic
ecosystems.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Dr. Sellner. They
called us to vote, but I think if Dr. Smith and Dr. McGee, if
you stick to those five minutes, we want to get through your
testimony and then break and come back for questions.
I now recognize our fifth witness, Dr. Stephanie Smith,
Chief Scientist for Algaeventure Systems. Dr. Smith?

STATEMENT OF DR. STEPHANIE SMITH,

CHIEF SCIENTIST, ALGAEVENTURE SYSTEMS

Dr. Smith. Thank you, sir, for the opportunity to come
before your Committee and speak today. I am Stephanie Smith,
Chief Scientist at Algaeventure Systems in Marysville, Ohio,
and it is my privilege to bring you our unique perspective on
harmful algal blooms and also our support for this legislation.
There are five key points that I want to make sure you get
from what I have to tell you today. First, addressing
freshwater HABs is going to require a suite of multiple
technologies that have to be developed both at the fundamental
and at the applied levels. Second, far less appears to be known
about freshwater HABs than marine, and strategies for
addressing HABs in marine systems, as we have come to find, do
not translate to success for freshwater systems.
It is our opinion through our past experiences over this
last year that there is insufficient assessment of HAB
prevalence in inland lakes to truly understand the magnitude of
the problem or the damage to the economies of those
communities.
It appears that more is known about monitoring and
prevention of HABs than about control and mitigation. We
believe more needs to be done to address an ongoing HAB,
especially in a freshwater environment, and those writing in
the scientific literature have also pointed to the need for
more to be done in the area of remediation.
The current level of funding which we understand to be on
the order of $36 million is of course insufficient to meet all
of the needs that we are pointing out today, especially when
one considers that most of that will be spent in marine
environments and the cost of developing mitigation or
remediation strategies is very high. The funding level also
doesn't match the magnitude of the damages assessed, even as
the single example I am going to tell you about is going to
demonstrate.
Probably as demonstrated by the length of my introduction
and apparently the size of the font on my testimony page, we
are newcomers to freshwater HABs. We arrived at this as an area
of interest, not through years of scholarship but through the
recognition that freshwater HABs are a devastating problem for
inland lake communities and economies, and it is in need of
very creative solutions and technologies.
AVS was founded on the belief that algal products are going
to be one of the strongest grown industries over the next 1,000
years, and we have invented some transformational technologies
for dewatering algal biomass to overcome a major energy and
cost barrier in our industry.
The first is the solid/liquid separation system, or the
SLS, and the second is the rapid accumulation and concentration
system, or RAC. The RAC pre-concentrates algal biomass over 30-
fold so it can be more efficiently dewatered and then dried
with the SLS. These technologies exemplify our inventive spirit
but frankly blue-green algae was not part of our original plan.
That changed in the summer of 2010 when freshwater harmful
algal blooms all over Ohio and the most devastating one at the
Grand Lakes-St. Mary's Reservoir in the city of Celina. This
algal bloom contained a dangerous cocktail of toxins that
included microcystins, anatoxins, cylindrospermopsin and
saxitoxins, and it is estimated that this bloom cost this
community between $60 and $80 million in lost revenue. Of
course, there were also health consequences. There were eight
confirmed human illnesses and four dog illnesses. The Grand
Lakes-St. Mary's residents and as we were to come to find, most
residents that experience a bloom, were desperately asking who
is in charge of a situation like this? Are there actually any
remediation strategies or solutions? Of course, a surprising
number of solutions were proposed and some were tested,
including our own which aim to stimulate the growth of non-
harmful algae, or diatoms, in the lake. None of these
approaches were successful in reversing this bloom.
So going forward, we plan to develop our SLS and RAC
technologies in a way that would allow them to be deployed in
lakes for the recovery of biomass, but as with our diatom
approach, these technologies must undergo additional research
and development.
We also have a novel concept in development for diverting
nutrient-laden waters of these eutrophic lakes into a
controlled algal growth system wherein the biomass could be
dewatered for biofuels or other algal products. We do not yet
know whether any of our technologies will have a significant
impact heading off a freshwater HAB, especially the one the
magnitude experienced by GLSM last year. But we are confident
that freshwater HABs can be approached with our technologies in
combination with those of others toward a positive outcome.
The summer of 2010 at Grand Lakes-St. Mary's and our
monitoring and experimentation since then support the five key
points that I want to leave you with, and I will be happy to
entertain any questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Smith follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Stephanie Smith, Chief Scientist,
Algaeventure Systems
Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, thank you for the
opportunity to come before the Science, Space and Technology
Subcommittee on Energy and the Environment. My name is Dr. Stephanie A.
Smith, Chief Scientist at Algaeventure Systems (AVS) located in
Marysville, Ohio, and I am here to offer proponent testimony on the
Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and Control Act (HR 3650),
which aims to develop and coordinate a comprehensive and integrated
strategy to address harmful algal blooms and hypoxia, and to provide
for the development and implementation of comprehensive regional action
plans to reduce harmful algal blooms and hypoxia.
It is my great privilege to bring to you the unique perspective our
company has acquired regarding freshwater harmful algal blooms (FHABs),
and to describe the technologies that have been developed by our
company and which we would like to adapt for FHAB remediation. We
further envision novel remediation approaches, and the legislation at
hand could greatly influence the development of such technologies by us
or other creative people. So perhaps this is the time to make one of
the most important points I hope to communicate to you: addressing
FHABs will require a suite of technologies that come together to attack
the problem, and which must be developed at both the fundamental and
applied levels. Our company is certainly on the applied end of the
spectrum, but we fully expect to engage other scientists, inventors,
entrepreneurs, and engineers to improve our own technologies so that
they work in concert with those developed by others, resulting in
tailored solutions for FHAB sites.
I wish to point out that compared with those we hope to engage, and
to the distinguished panel you have assembled today and in years past,
we are newcomers to FHABs. I am a microbiologist with broad experience
in photosynthetic microbiology and microbial processes, and
professional experience at both Wright State University in Dayton, OH,
and the Battelle Memorial Institute in Columbus, OH. As a
microbiologist I have over the years learned about HABs, the organisms,
toxins, and conditions involved, while my own research focus has always
been in the enzymology of bacterial carbon fixation, and bioremediation
strategies and technologies that leverage natural microbial processes.
I very recently joined Algaeventure Systems, which was formed in 2008
under the leadership CEO Ross Youngs. Univenture, a plastics technology
and manufacturing company founded by Mr. Youngs, sought alternatives to
making their products from petroleum. After intensive research
exploring the opportunities presented by terrestrial-based crops
including corn, soy and palm, it was revealed that only algae held the
potential to sustainably yield bioplastics with the same, or better,
performance characteristics than petroleum-based plastics.
Algaeventure Systems, Inc. was thus founded on the belief that
algal products will be one of the strongest growth industries over the
next 100 years, and that taking carbon dioxide from the air, nutrients
and water from waste streams, and turning these things into useful
products is absolutely necessary for a growing world population with
shrinking resources. But shortly after starting this business, Mr.
Youngs and his team recognized that dewatering algal biomass as part of
the product cycle threatened to be an industry-crushing expense that
would make algal products unaffordable in today's marketplace.
Algaeventure Systems thus invented a key technology that has been
selected & called ``transformational'' by the US Department of Energy's
Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA-E).
Termed the solid-liquid-separation system, or the SLS, this low-
energy, unbelievably simple yet inarguably effective machine is one of
our key technologies that we feel can be applied for recovering biomass
from freshwater systems, including those which are laden with
cyanobacterial biomass.
Mr. Youngs and his team more recently invented a second key
technology that will operate in concert with the SLS, called the Rapid
Accumulation and Concentration system, or RAC. Again, low-energy
consuming and remarkably inexpensive, this machine was conceptualized
because of the search for materials to which algae might attach for
growth. Looking to nature, the team sought to mimic the passive
capturing of planktonic microbes by the ``feather duster'' worm's
appendages. Those research efforts led to a material that is almost
like an algae-magnet; in our own test systems and others it grabs algae
out of the water and with a simple mechanical squeezing action releases
the algae such that the biomass is concentrated over 30-fold. When this
pre-concentrated algal biomass is introduced onto the belt of our SLS
system, a flaky mass that resembles fish food is produced. The biomass
is then manageable, cheap to transport because it is lighter, and can
be used for processing into various products.
These technologies exemplify the inventive and entrepreneurial
spirit of this company, but with that said, ``blue-green algae,'' as
cyanobacteria are often called, were not part of the original plan for
this algae company. Then, Summer 2010 brought several toxic FHABs to
our state, and the most devastating may have been the one that hit the
Grand Lakes-St. Mary's (GLSM) reservoir in the City of Celina. GLSM
enjoys approximately $150-200 million in revenue as a consequence of
recreational lake activities and tourists that are drawn to this
13,000-acre reservoir, which also happens to be the primary source of
potable water for the city of Celina. The shutdown of Ohio's largest
inland lake due to dangerous levels of a cocktail of cyanobacterial
toxins (microcystin, anatoxin, cylindrospermopsin, saxitoxins) has been
estimated to have cost the community $60-80 million in lost revenue.
And of course there were health consequences. Numbers vary according to
reports, but the Ohio EPA reported 8 confirmed human illnesses and 4
dog illnesses, including 3 deaths of dogs believed to have directly
ingested the lake water. A ``no contact'' recommendation was placed on
the lake in July, which ended the tourist season early, and created
numerous and unbearable hazards for the property owners and residents.
The GLSM residents, and as we were to find, most communities that
experience FHABs, seemed to be desperately asking, ``Can anyone help us
with this? Who's in charge of solving problems like this? Is there not
a solution for this problem?'' For those first questions, bear in mind
that when it comes to inland lakes, excepting the Great Lakes, NOAA is
not the agency that responds. Agencies of note that were assisting in
the situation included the Ohio EPA, the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources, Ohio Department of Agriculture, the USDA and the USGS. But
perhaps the most impressive efforts came from the community itself,
which formed a Lake Improvement Association (LIA), and had the
leadership of key city personnel, most notably the tireless Planning
and Community Development Director, Kent Bryan. It was through these
community leaders that AVS was able to fully engage and become rapidly
educated about HABs, and began to formulate options that might have an
impact. The ODA provided financial resources to test some ideas, and
due to the urgency of the situation by August of that year, the
permitting process was accelerated by the EPA, the City of Celina, and
the ODNR to facilitate testing of approaches. Under normal
circumstances, such as where we find ourselves today in trying to
implement and test new approaches, permitting can take 60 days to 6
months.
To the question of whether there was a solution to this problem, a
surprising number of solutions were proposed, and many tested, but none
successful. These ideas were tested at the peak of the FHAB, a nonideal
time, and a demonstration that actual remediation of FHABs is something
for which technologies do not presently exist. Among the ideas that
were explored, AVS derived one from the scientific literature on marine
HABs, in which addition of silica to ocean or estuarine environments
was shown to stimulate growth of marine diatoms, a type of silica-
requiring algae that could out-compete the toxic algae and thereby
possibly stave off a HAB. \1\ As early as 1971 the hypothesis had been
put forth that in eutrophic freshwater systems seasonal succession of
diatoms was closely linked to available silica, and that as they
consumed nutrients in the water, including silica, the latter would
become limiting and lead to diatom decline through the warmer months.
\2\ \3\ \4\ If the diatoms became limited for silica while other
nutrients were still available, it could create an advantageous
situation for toxic cyanobacteria. If this phenomenon were occurring at
GLSM, Mr. Youngs deduced that adding silica to the lake could possibly
stimulate the growth of diatoms, and give them a competitive edge over
the cyanobacteria. With the time short for trying to remediate this
bloom, in collaboration with Bowling Green State University (Bowling
Green, OH), the City of Celina, the US and Ohio EPA, the ODNR and the
Ohio Department of Agriculture, AVS led the testing of a silica
amendment in a small marina in the lake. While the treatment was
clearly non-harmful to the environment (one reason it was readily
permitted under the rushed circumstances), it had no effect on the
bloom that was in progress. When I officially joined AVS in April 2011,
and our team reexamined the many factors that were stacked against this
approach working (e.g., the late stage of the bloom, the high
temperatures, and the fact that water samples taken much later
indicated that silica might not be limiting), we agreed that AVS needed
better data than was currently available to design a well-thought out
approach going forward.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Egge and Aksnes. (1992) Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 83:281-289.
\2\  Kilham, P. (1971) Limnol. Ocean. 16(1):10-19.
\3\  Gibson et al. (2000) Freshwater Biol. 45:285-293.
\4\  Kristov et al. (2000) Hydrolog. Processes. 14:283-295.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
AVS has thus initiated our own monitoring of water quality and
algal diversity, to supplement what was already ongoing by the Ohio EPA
at GLSM. We have added two other lakes to our monitoring program, one
which has frequently experienced FHABs over the years, and a HAB-free
small pond on our own property. Our assessments have already taught us
that the concentrations of soluble silica in these lakes is quite high,
but it remains to be seen whether the concentrations remain that high
throughout the year, or what the correlation might be with relative
diatom biomass in the water column samples. In fact we have also
learned that the toxic cyanobacterial species dominate the biomass in
the water columns of the two lakes that have previously experienced
HABs, even in the months of March, April, and May when we know silica
concentrations should not limit diatoms from flourishing. This means
that some mitigation strategies could possibly be implemented early
relative to the late summer HAB to limit the growth of these
cyanobacteria before they get out of hand. Likewise, perhaps a
comprehensive strategy would combine early-season approaches with bloom
remediation in July-August, so that technologies applied in the latter
have a greater probability of success when applied on a less severe
bloom. We do not yet know whether a condition could be created wherein
diatoms, or some other algal species, could be stimulated to outcompete
cyanobacteria. We plan to continue our monitoring for a full year to
cover a complete seasonal cycle, and if we can find the funding we will
add other lakes and analyses to our program. Our resources are
currently too limited to have a full sampling regimen that yields a
thorough scientific analysis of these lakes, but our observations are
nonetheless enlightening and we look forward to sharing them with
others as we process the data.
As for new technologies to combat FHABs, our company now plans to
develop our SLS and RAC in a way that would allow them to be deployed
in lakes for the recovery of biomass, and we want to explore the
possibility that the biomass could in fact be put to good use, turning
a potentially disastrous scenario into a positive, and possibly even
revenue-generating scenario. Both technologies were developed with
eukaryotic algae that are approximately 5-10 times larger than typical
cyanobacterial cells. In addition to having smaller cells,
cyanobacteria can be filamentous, forming fibrous mats on the surface
of the water or adhered to rocks and sediments. These properties
require that our technologies undergo some additional research and
development to efficiently capture this type of biomass. The City of
Celina is allowing us to do some testing at their lake to see how the
RAC in particular will operate with cyanobacterial biomass, which we
all anticipate will reappear in force this summer. This work is in part
is being funded by the Air Force/Air Force Research Laboratories.
We also have a novel concept in development for diverting the
nutrient-laden waters of these eutrophic lakes into a controlled algal
growth system, wherein the biomass generated could be used for biofuels
or other algal products. Nutrient removal and recovery is an intense
area of interest in the scientific community and is viewed as an
important long-term strategy to reducing HABs, \5\ and we believe that
deliberate culturing of useful algal species can be one of many
successful approaches to that. We do not yet know whether our own
approaches of utilizing the SLS, RAC, and our algal culturing system
can have a significant impact upon heading off or remediating a FHAB,
especially one of the magnitude experienced by GLSM last year. But we
are confident that FHABs can be approached with our technologies in
combination with those developed by others towards a positive outcome.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  Paerl, H. (2008) Chapter 10 in Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal
Blooms: State of the Science and Research Needs. Editor K. Hudnell.
Springer Science + Business Media, LLC. New York, NY.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not point out that we are a
small business, and in order for us to pursue solutions to FHABs with
the same inventiveness and intensity we bring to all of our pursuits,
we must be able to finance it. We are reaching the end of the funds we
had available to develop some of our technologies directed at FHABs,
and that is in no small part why we believe this legislation is so
important. Applying creative solutions in a way that positively impacts
our world and communities, while still supporting a successful business
model that will create jobs and products, is a core mission of our
organization, and we would like FHAB remediation to be part of our
business model.
In closing, our organization arrived at FHABs as an area of
interest not through years of scholarship directed at this specific
topic, but rather through the recognition that FHABs are a devastating
problem for inland lake communities and economies, in need of creative
solutions and technologies. The Summer of 2010 at GLSM, and the
monitoring and experiments we have conducted since then, not only
support the point made at the beginning of this treatise regarding
collaborative technology development, but also bring out several others
that are directly relevant to the legislation at hand, and which I want
to leave you with:

1. As stated earlier, addressing FHABs will require a suite of
technologies that come together to attack the problem, and which must
be applied at both the fundamental and applied levels.

2. Far less appears to be known about FHABs than about marine HABs
and how they might be addressed, and strategies for addressing HABs in
marine systems will not necessarily translate to freshwater systems.

3. It is our opinion, through this past year's experiences, that
there is currently insufficient assessment of HAB prevalence in inland
lakes to truly understand the magnitude of the problem or the damaged
economies. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  Dodds et al. (2009) Env. Sci. Technol. 43:12-19.

4. It appears that more is known about monitoring and prevention of
HABs (both marine and freshwater), than about control and mitigation.
We believe that more needs to be done to address ongoing HABs,
especially in freshwater environments, and those writing in the
scientific literature have also pointed to the need for more to be done
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
in the area of remediation.

5. The current level of funding, which we understand to be on the
order of $36M may be insufficient for addressing the needs we point out
in this testimony, when one considers that most of those funds may be
spent on marine environments, and the cost of developing mitigation or
remediation strategies. The funding level also does not appear to match
the magnitude of the damages assessed, even as the single example
(GLSM) provided in this testimony demonstrates.

Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, thank you once again for
the opportunity to testify before you today, and at this time, I
welcome any questions from members of the subcommittee.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Dr. Smith, and I now
recognize our final witness, Dr. Beth McGee, Senior Water
Quality Scientist at the Chesapeake Bay Foundation. Dr. McGee?

STATEMENT OF DR. BETH McGEE, SENIOR WATER

QUALITY SCIENTIST, CHESAPEAKE BAY FOUNDATION

Dr. McGee. Thank you, Chairman Harris, Mr. Miller and other
Members of the Subcommittee, I really appreciate the
opportunity to speak with you today. Again, my name is Beth
McGee. I am a Senior Water Quality Scientist with the
Chesapeake Bay Foundation.
You have my written testimony which highlights some of our
recommendations for research needs in the Chesapeake Bay, so I
would just like to take my time here to highlight just a few
points.
Probably the most notorious HAB species in the Bay was
pfiesteria. You may recall back in the summer of 1997 this
microbe, which was actually first identified in North Carolina
waters, drew a fury of media attention and public concern
because it was blamed for numerous fish kills and even human
health concerns in the Chesapeake Bay, specifically in the
Pocomoke River on the Eastern Shore.
Since that time, fortunately we have not seen any
reoccurrences of pfiesteria at least in the Chesapeake Bay, but
the events were certainly a wakeup call nationally to the
problems associated with harmful algal blooms. And I think
actually it was one of the reasons that triggered the original
1998 legislation that we are talking about today.
Certainly the Chesapeake Bay has other problems with
harmful algal blooms, things like mahogany tides will cause
fish kills, we have the cyanobacteria, blue-green algae that
have also been talked about that have caused human health
concerns, but probably the most systemic problem in the
Chesapeake Bay is problems with anatoxin and hypoxia. On
average, about 75 percent of the Chesapeake Bay has
insufficient levels of dissolved oxygen. What that translates
into is a huge amount of the Bay, every year that is basically
off limits for the aquatic life that live in the Bay.
Ultimately the solution to both of these problems, that is
anoxia, hypoxia and harmful algal blooms, is reducing excess
nutrients. In the Chesapeake Bay we in fact have a very
detailed nutrient reduction strategy that has just been
developed by the States in collaboration by the Federal
Government. It is mandated under the Clean Water Act, and while
the Chesapeake Bay Foundation is certainly supportive of the
research and monitoring needs that have been identified by some
of the other panelists, we believe that the strategy, this
nutrient reduction strategy that we have in the Chesapeake Bay,
needs to be the principal means by which local, State and
Federal Governments solve the problems associated with anoxia
and HABs in the Chesapeake.
With that, I thank you again for the opportunity to be here
today, and I will be happy to answer any questions after your
break.
[The prepared statement of Dr. McGee follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Beth McGee, Senior Water Quality Scientist,
Chesapeake Bay Foundation
Chairman Harris, Mr. Miller and members of the subcommittee, we
appreciate today's invitation and your interest in this important
topic.
For more than 40 years, the Chesapeake Bay Foundation has been
working to protect and restore the Chesapeake Bay. The Chesapeake Bay
is the nation's largest estuary, and its 64,000 square mile watershed--
from Cooperstown, New York to Cape Henry, Virginia and westward to the
Allegheny Mountains--is a large part of the Mid-Atlantic region. More
than 17 million people live in the Chesapeake Bay watershed, a number
that is increasing by roughly 150,000 each year.
Starting in 1998, the Chesapeake Bay Foundation has issued a State
of the Bay report that grades the health of the bay on a scale from 1
to 100. Last year, the numeric score was ``31''--a D+. The score was an
improvement from the previous report card, but still indicates a Bay
that is dangerously out of balance. The most systemic problem continues
to be an overload of nitrogen and phosphorus pollution that fuel algae
blooms that ultimately, lead to a lack of dissolved oxygen--that is,
hypoxia and anoxia--in many parts of the Bay and its rivers. On
average, over the last 10 years, more than 75% of the Chesapeake Bay
and its tidal rivers have had insufficient levels of dissolved oxygen.
These poor water quality conditions can result in mortality or
stress to aquatic animals like crabs, oysters, and rockfish. In turn,
these impacts have economic consequences.
For example, low oxygen levels can drive blue crabs from their
preferred habitat and kill many of the small bottom organisms on which
the blue crabs feed. A study by the University of Maryland demonstrated
that decreases in dissolved oxygen can reduce crab harvests and revenue
to watermen.
Another critical Bay species, commercially, recreationally, and as
an important part of the Bay ecosystem, is the oyster. Unfortunately, a
combination of overharvesting, disease, and poor water quality has
decimated the oyster populations in the Chesapeake Bay. Extended
periods of zero oxygen conditions can be fatal to oysters and recent
studies have indicated that low oxygen levels can stress the immune
systems of oysters, making them more susceptible to disease. The
decline of the Bay oyster over the last 30 years has meant a loss of
more than $4 billion for Maryland and Virginia.
The rockfish (striped bass) has been, and remains, the most popular
commercial and recreational fish in the Bay, generating roughly $500
million of economic activity related to fishing expenditures, travel,
lodging, gear and so on. Faced with a catastrophic collapse in the
fishery, commercial and recreational fishing were banned in the
Maryland portion of the Bay from 1985-89 and in Virginia during 1989.
The dramatic decline of the population was due to several factors
including overfishing and low dissolved oxygen in deeper parts of the
Bay. Today, the rockfish population is at its highest in decades.
However, scientists are concerned about the high prevalence of disease
which has been attributed to poor water quality and limited
availability of its preferred prey.
Although arguably the Chesapeake Bay's most pervasive problem is
anoxia and hypoxia, like many other coastal and estuarine systems, it
also suffers from the effects of harmful algal blooms (HABs.)
Scientists estimate there are more than 1,400 species of algae in the
Chesapeake Bay and its tidal rivers; 34 are potentially harmful. HABs
represent a significant threat to aquatic life, human health, and
regional economies.
Probably the most notorious HAB species in the Bay is Pfiesteria.
During the summer of 1997, this microbe, first found in North Carolina
waters, drew a fury of media attention and public concern when it was
blamed for fish kills and human health problems in the Chesapeake Bay,
specifically the Pocomoke River in Maryland. This led to closures of
public waterways to commercial and recreational use, resulting in
substantial economic losses to the local seafood and tourism
industries. Since that time, there have been no reported Pfiesteria
outbreaks in the Chesapeake and the role that Pfiesteria played in the
observed effects is still being debated in the scientific community.
Nonetheless, the events triggered intense research into all types of
toxic algae and, since then, state health officials in Maryland have
set up surveillance systems and tried to be more vigilant about warning
the public about HABs through websites (http://www.dnr.state.md.us/bay/
hab/) and swimming beach notices--a model that other tidal Bay states
would be well-served to emulate.
Other harmful algae in the bay include species that produce
reddish-brown ``Mahogany Tides,'' including Prorocentrum minimum,
Karlodinium veneficum, and Cochlodinium polykrikoides. Blooms of these
algae can cause dissolved oxygen problems, in addition to being
directly toxic to fish and shellfish. In particular, Karlodinium is
thought to be responsible for numerous recent fish kills in Maryland.
In addition, recent studies have demonstrated that some species produce
a toxin that is highly toxic to oyster larvae. As a result, several
researchers have speculated that the increase in the distribution and
magnitude of blooms of some toxic species in the Bay may be negatively
impacting native oyster restoration efforts in Virginia and Maryland--
an activity in which the Chesapeake Bay Foundation is heavily invested.
Blooms of blue-green algae, also known as cyanobacteria probably
represent the most significant HAB-related risk to human health in the
Chesapeake Bay. In particular, cyanobacteria produce toxins that have
been associated with liver and kidney disease, vomiting, fevers, and
skin rashes in people. A recent Chesapeake Bay study reported that
between 2000 and 2006, 31 percent of the waters tested for
cyanobacteria blooms had enough toxins to make them unsafe for children
to swim in. The toxins can also cause fish kills, bird, pet, and
livestock deaths. Typically associated with freshwater systems,
cyanobacteria blooms have been causing problems in the Potomac River
and other waterways at least since the 1930s. The first confirmed
presence of toxins in the Chesapeake Bay's tidal waters came in 2000 in
the Sassafras River on Maryland's Eastern Shore. Since then, state
officials have issued no-swimming advisories or beach closures due to
blooms on the Sassafrass, Potomac, and Transquaking rivers.

Research, Monitoring and Communication Needs

In our view, additional research is needed to understand factors
involved in, among other things, bloom initiation and the effects of
climate variability and change. Additional monitoring and communication
is also important.

Understanding factors involved in bloom initiation. We know that
nutrients certainly play a role in bloom formation, but the timing of
nutrient input and the flow pathways are also critically important to
bloom initiation and subsequent transport to adjacent waterways. From
the management perspective, for example, understanding this
relationship may help identify geographic areas and stormwater
management approaches that should be targeted. Better understanding of
bloom formation will also improve scientists' ability to predict the
formation of blooms, thereby increasing the ability to protect humans
from exposure.

Understanding the effects of climate variability and change. Warmer
water temperatures appear to be expanding the range of HABs into the
Chesapeake Bay and causing others to bloom earlier. For example, a
toxic alga normally associated with Florida and the Gulf Coast,
Alexandrium monilatum, in 2007 was believed to have been responsible
for killing whelks (a species of sea snail) in the York River in
Virginia. It was the first known bloom in this area. Increasing
temperatures will also select for different species in the normal
successional pattern in the Bay, with unknown consequences on the
living resources. Better understanding of these likely effects will
help the Bay region better adapt to the ecosystem changes caused by
climate change.

Improved monitoring and communication. Probably because of their
experience with ``Pfiesteria hysteria'', Maryland does a fairly good
job of regular monitoring for common HABs, posting that information in
``real time'' on a web page where it is visible to the public, and
providing a HAB hotline--accessible via the web and by phone--where the
public can report unusual events such as HAB or fish kills. Virginia's
program, while providing some periodic monitoring, a public hotline,
and state agency response to reported HAB events, does not report real-
time information to the public. Due to the apparent increase in the
frequency and extent of HABs in Virginia's tidal rivers, particularly
the James, we believe timely release of this information is critically
important to inform and protect the public.

Draft Bill

The letter of invitation that I received from Chairman Harris asked
me to comment on the subcommittee's draft legislation for the
reauthorization of the Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and
Control Act.
First, there is much that is good in the draft that was shared with
us. It is virtually impossible to dispute the need for additional
federally supported research, development and implementation of action
plans for certain unaddressed aspects of the hypoxia/HAB challenge, and
coordination of federal, State, and local government activities. As a
general matter, the Chesapeake Bay Foundation supports reauthorization
of the Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research and Control Act.
Second, no one should be surprised that we believe that the Act
deserves a special Chesapeake Bay section, parallel but not identical
to the Northern Gulf of Mexico section. We have been on the front lines
of the Chesapeake Bay hypoxia and HAB questions for more than a
generation. Scientists worldwide have recognized for decades that
nutrient over-enrichment and hypoxia are the principal systemic water
quality problems of the Chesapeake Bay. A better understanding of the
underlying processes by which HABs are initiated will lead to better
management strategies. That said, it is also time to address the
underlying cause of these problems: excessive levels of nutrients.
We have one overwhelming concern with this draft legislation: its
failure to acknowledge, or in any way support, the widely accepted
strategy to get nutrients under control under the authority of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act (the Clean Water Act.) There is a
detailed action strategy in place that has been developed and agreed to
by the federal government and the Chesapeake Bay jurisdictions--New
York, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, and
DC. It has been reinforced by the federal courts and by the Congress.
It needs to be acknowledged and supported by this subcommittee. In a
time of such concern about the federal deficit, we simply cannot afford
to have some federal agencies, six states and the District of Columbia
working on one part of the problem, and other federal agencies on
another.
Expanding on that point, Section 8 of the draft bill is
particularly problematic. ``Nothing in this Act, or the amendments made
by this Act, shall be construed to require a State, tribal, or local
government to take any action that may result in an increased financial
burden to such government.'' We want to be very clear: successfully
addressing the nutrient over-enrichment of the Chesapeake Bay in order
to address the widespread hypoxia problem is going to require changes
at the individual, local, and State levels that will impose costs.
Unless the federal government is prepared to fund every penny of every
necessary change-a prospect far beyond rational consideration-there
will be costs to individuals and governments. We believe that such
costs are manageable and will create jobs and spur local economies, and
that it is an appropriate role for the federal government to assist in
supporting some of the costs of necessary pollution reduction
activities. However, pollution from all sources must be reduced.
Individuals, businesses, and units of government cannot expect to
perpetually ``externalize'' their costs by polluting the public's
commonwealth.
In sum, it is the view of the Chesapeake Bay Foundation that
harmful algal blooms are a serious threat to ecological and human
health in estuaries and coastal areas in North America and much of the
rest of the world. Current policies that allow for externalization of
the costs of pollution are at least in part to blame. While there is a
need for more research, monitoring and communication, there is also a
pressing need to reverse the policies that are substantially
contributing to the harmful algal blooms in this country and abroad. In
the Chesapeake Bay watershed, we have a strategy in place; it needs to
be the principal means through which the federal, state and locals
governments bring the Chesapeake Bay back into balance.
Thank you for the opportunity to address the subcommittee today. I
look forward to the discussion.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Dr. McGee. The
Subcommittee will recess until 10 minutes after the last vote
begins. We will resume the hearing for Member questioning at
that time, and I want to thank the panel and look forward to
seeing you, again, 10 minutes after our last vote begins. The
Committee stands in recess.
[Recess.]

Chairman Harris. The Committee is now back in session, and
again, I want to thank the panel for their testimony, and I
will first recognize myself for five minutes.
Dr. McGee, thank you very much for being here. You state in
your written testimony that the Chesapeake Bay should have a
separate provision in the bill. Given the issues to be
addressed in the regional research and action plans, what areas
of research do you recommend that could be specific to the Bay
that would need to be identified in a separate section?
Dr. McGee. Thank you again for the opportunity to be here.
In particular, one of the notions, and this is actually more
related to sort of public notification rather than research, is
we believe Maryland does a really good job of doing some
routine monitoring for harmful algal blooms, for posting
information related to blooms on their web page sort of in real
time. Unfortunately, in Virginia, the information is a little
less readily available. There is no real-time access for the
public to be notified of when blooms are occurring and
therefore can protect themselves. So that would be, I think,
one example around the sort of monitoring public notification
that I believe this legislation could address that could be
specific to the Bay to sort of up the bar for both Maryland and
Virginia and other coastal states within the Bay region.
Chairman Harris. And that would be regarding notification.
But with regards to research, because again, you know, the
focus of this Committee really is the research aspects. Are
there aspects of that research that would be particular to the
Bay?
Dr. McGee. I guess,specific to the Bay but issues that I
have heard from scientific colleagues include the effects of
climate change, for example. We are seeing blooms of algal
species that are from more southern regions that we are now
starting to see show up in the Bay on a regular basis. So
having a better understanding, being able to better predict
what species may be affecting the Chesapeake Bay waters, and
therefore, the residents of the Chesapeake Bay are important.
As I mentioned, we do have problems with mahogany tides, in
particular, which are responsible for fish kills, et cetera.
There is an unclear understanding of what triggers those, the
initiation of those blooms, so better understanding those. You
know, those are not necessarily problems that are unique to the
Chesapeake Bay. I think the species are perhaps unique to the
Bay and other areas, but they would probably be applicable
nationwide.
Chairman Harris. Thank you. Let me just ask, I will ask you
and other Committee Members my comment because in your
testimony you mentioned that, you know, we should concentrate
on kind of what I will call the upstream effect of nutrients,
adding nutrients that promote the growth of the algae that
could result in hypoxia or harmful algal blooms. But downstream
you could also remove some of the algae by for instance
increasing the population of Menhaden, for instance. Is that
something we should be looking at, looking at the effect, the
cost benefit effect of increasing the population of Menhaden to
in fact remove some of the algae so for instance our dead zones
are smaller?
Dr. McGee. The Chesapeake Bay Foundation has thought a lot
about that. I mean, oysters are another example of a really
good in-stream filter that is removing algae, and we actually
do a lot of oyster restoration because of that important
ecological role. But ultimately, our sense is that you really
need to stop pollution at the source because there are no doubt
going to be effects from the nutrients as they travel
downstream to where you might have the Menhaden or the oyster
bar. And so there are going to be effects that we are going to
miss, and so ultimately the solution we think needs to be both
of those. It needs to be protecting and restoring our in-stream
filters but also reducing the sources of nitrogen and
phosphorous pollution coming into the Bay.
Chairman Harris. Any other panel would comment on the use
of the natural eaters of the algae? Yeah, Dr. Anderson?
Dr. Anderson. I would make the comment that there is old
law of unexpected consequences, and we see it an awful lot with
some of these systems. The amazing pictures that I showed you
from China are a perfect example of where they have started a
huge aquaculture industry down near Shanghai and porifera, the
algae you get in sushi, and the green algae that you saw in
huge masses is a contaminant that grows on those racks for
porifera, and they just get thrown in the water and it grows.
And that is a situation where an effort to help clean up the
nutrients with this huge aquaculture site that is removing
nutrients, did a good job there, but produce a problem
elsewhere.
So yes, it can be a great idea, but I think without very
careful and thorough research of all possible outcomes of these
things, we have to be careful with that kind of manipulation. I
am totally for trying those things. I have been arguing forever
we need to try to mitigate these HABs, but we have to do it in
a very careful and scientific way.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. Mr. Miller?
Mr. Miller. Thank you. Dr. Anderson, or I think several of
you, spoke in your testimony of the need for mitigation. I
understand the concern that some of what Mr. Harris just asked
you about kind of creates other complications, and we might
need to find a way to deal with Menhaden and on and on.
What are some of the other ways that we may mitigate the
effects of HABs? Yes, sir. Dr. Sellner?
Dr. Sellner. Well, as I said in my testimony and I maybe
spoke a little bit too rapidly, there are a number of other
ways that are routinely used, particularly in Asia. In Asia
there is a routine application of a mixture of local sediments
and some type of flocculating agent. In our case, it is blue
crab shells, or a byproduct of those shells. And those are used
around the aquaculture pens like Don was referring to, and they
are usually addressing planktonic organisms that are floating
in or are growing in response to the nutrients that are being
excreted by the animals in the pens. So you can apply those
types of sediments to remove the phytoplankton, thereby not
allowing the organisms in the pens to be exposed either to the
low dissolved oxygen from the bloom, and it will also remove
any toxin associated with the algae to the bottom.
The nice thing about those waters generally is that they
have a strong bottom current, so you don't transfer the problem
from the surface to remain at the bottom and exacerbate a low
dissolved oxygen situation or transfer the toxin down to
shellfish or fish that are living on the bottom.
So, that is a very viable technique that is used throughout
mostly in China, Korea and Japan at regular intervals. Other
ways in very small systems, we have ways to mix water in
freshwater enclosed systems, destratifying the water. That
means if you notice when you go swimming you can often be
floating on the surface and you extend your feet down and they
are freezing because the water is stratified, warm at the top
and denser, colder water at the bottom. Well, that is
stratification actually favors the growth of many of our HAB
species. So if we can destratify the water, we can produce the
diatoms like my colleague was referring to, and the diatoms are
generally indicative of healthy waters and support those
organisms that we would harvest. It reduces the harmful algal
blooms so that there are no toxins, et cetera.
The issue again, you get too many diatoms is that, like in
the Chesapeake, if you get too many diatoms and it goes below
that stratification, then you have perpetuation of the low-
dissolved oxygen problem. So that is the Chesapeake's problem,
but if you mix the water--we are not going to mix the
Chesapeake. We have already tried to do that about 20 years ago
under a former DNR director, and that wasn't a wise move. But
in small lakes, that mixing process can work and does work
effectively.
Mr. Miller. Actually, that has used up almost all my time.
It certainly sounds like all the efforts to mitigate create
more potential problems and are more complicated which means
more things can go wrong than simply producing fewer of the
nutrients that create the algal blooms.
Dr. Greene and Dr. Magnien, quickly, I know that every
president, whether it is kind of censor what government
officials are saying in a sinister way or just to know what
they are saying, wants to see a testimony. This Administration
has been no exception, and it is a somewhat cumbersome process
which did not make it possible for you to review the draft
legislation in a way to comment, in your written testimony. But
do you have any comment now. Dr. Magnien, you appeared to want
to answer the last question. Do you want to try to do both
quickly?
Dr. Magnien. Yeah, if I have a little bit of time, on the
mitigation, we typically look at that as not necessarily
controlling the bloom as much as dealing with it like we do
with hurricanes or tornados. And one of the best ways to deal
with that for harmful algal blooms is to be able to forecast
and detect it early and stay out of harm's way essentially,
either move aquaculture resources or alert public health
officials that something is offshore and about to come in. So I
wanted to put that on the table in terms of an important
mitigation tool, and I mentioned that and I have more examples
in my written testimony.
As regards to the draft legislation, yes, we did receive it
recently, but I am prepared to give some comments on that
legislation today. We are very supportive of the
reauthorization, have been for a number of years. It is really
important that we maintain the momentum that we have built.
Many years are often required to get to the point of actually
providing a forecast or a tool to a manager. We have had some
good success. We are seeing an acceleration of these benefits
as a result of our research, and reauthorization would
certainly help us continue on that path and bring these things
to fruition that we have been able to support so far.
We are very pleased that the HABHRCA draft includes the
establishment of an overarching HABs and hypoxia program within
NOAA. This will enhance the visibility of these issues as a
national priority and improve the coordination within NOAA with
other federal agencies and the affected user community.
In addition, we are pleased that the legislation includes
both event response activities and improvements in
infrastructure under the NOAA list of responsibilities. One of
the HABHRCA reports that we presented to Congress that I had
mentioned earlier had management and response and assessment
plan recommends in fact that progress would be enhanced if
event response and infrastructure programs were added in this
legislation.
And finally, we note however that all mention of specific
programs and their associated funding levels are no longer in
the draft bill as they were in the prior version. NOAA has
found that the specification of these programs and the funding
amounts to go with them helps to clarify the intent of Congress
when implementing this legislation, and much of the progress we
have made is because of that specificity and working closely
with this Committee and your staff and ensuring we are on
track.
So those are a summary of NOAA's comments on the
legislation. We would be happy to continue to work with staff
to go over any other additional questions as this legislation
moves forward.
Mr. Miller. Mr. Chairman, it is up to you whether to
allow--I mean, obviously, I am over time, but Dr. Greene? Okay.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. My colleague from
Maryland, Mr. Bartlett?
Mr. Bartlett. I have a farm pond surrounded by a pasture
that drains into it. Obviously it has a huge nutrient load, and
for probably 30 years I struggled with filamentis algae. If I
didn't use copper sulfate, it covered the pond so that it
looked like I could walk on it and by fall--I hate to use
copper sulfate because amphibians are exquisitely sensitive to
that. It just kills them all. So I usually just suffered with
filamentis algae.
And four years ago I put a pair of mute swans, pinioned, so
they will not become feral and they won't leave, put a pair of
mute swans on the pond. It is the most environmentally correct
way to control filamentis algae. They ate it all. It is
incredible. For four years now I have had a pond that is
crystal clear. So this is, at least for a small farm pond, a
great environmental way to control filamentis algae. I don't
know how many grazers there are that could control other
places, but at least for my farm pond, it worked very well.
I gather that one of the nutrient loads in the bay is from
septic systems. I don't know what percents of the nutrients are
septic systems, but I know the governor is concerned about it
and would like to ban further development on well and septic.
You know, when you look at our septic systems, by regulation
you have to eject the effluent from septic tank into the soil
below the root zone of most of our plants, and then we are
surprised when it ends up in our aquifers and ends up in the
bay. We clearly have a disposal system rather than a recycling
system. If you would inject the effluent from the septic tank
at the root zone, most of those nutrients--what is poison to
the bay is golden for your crops. It is exactly the nutrients
that the farmer pays a lot of money for to put on his crops,
and it poisons the bay. It is golden on the crops.
I have worked for a number of years now trying to get some
change in the regulations for septic systems. They will not
permit composting toilets, which of course you have no effluent
running into the bay. They will not permit composting toilets.
They force you to put the effluent under the root zone and then
express great surprise when it ends up in the bay. Is there any
way we can bring sanity to this process?
Dr. McGee. I appreciate your comments, Congressman. With
respect to the loads from septic systems, watershed wide, it is
somewhere around six to seven percent, but that is expected to
grow as our region continues to grow. So it is concerning
because it is obviously a source and a growing one.
I am not an environmental engineer, but I am wondering one
reason why there is a depth requirement is because septic
systems are primarily really designed to take bacteria out, and
if you would inject the effluent from the septic system at too
shallow a level, you could be I think potentially exposing
humans to bacteria. So I think that could be one regulatory
reason why the switch isn't occurring.
Mr. Bartlett. As far as I know, all pathogens are
exquisitely sensitive to ultraviolet light. I think there is
just a modest exposure to light, and they are all dead. Am I
wrong?
Dr. McGee. I think----
Mr. Bartlett. I just think this is a disposal system, out
of sight out of mind. You don't need to worry about it because
you can't see it anymore.
Dr. Smith. Yeah, I am actually a microbiologist, and yeah,
coliform bacteria, I mean the USGS has done a lot of really
good source studies. You know, you can trace, for example, a
lot of coliforms that come from cattle and so forth to the site
even of those cattle because those coliforms can persist in
streams and waterways all the way down to the tap. So as Dr.
McGee pointed out, those bacteria are the primary reason, and
just transient exposure to UV light, I mean, it has to be
pretty intense UV light, far more intense than what they would
typically get when they are floating around in murky waters. So
that is not sufficient to kill those bacteria in those systems.
Mr. Bartlett. Well, you know, if you injected the root zone
of the plant, it doesn't get to the surface. The plants absorb
it. I know a scientist who does this, and he does it very
successfully. He has a gray water system, and all of the
nutrients go into a bed that is a growing thing.
I went to Pennsylvania, and I saw a system, a constructed
wetland, that handled the waste from I think a dozen homes, and
it was really pretty small. And there was no effluent from
that. There are a lot of things we can do if they would simply
change the regulations so that they were legal to do.
My time is up. I thank you very much.
Chairman Harris. Thank you, and we are going to have a
second round of questions.
Dr. Sellner, let me ask you a question. In your statement
you included a description of the techniques you are using I
think at that lake outside of Denton, Maryland, is that right?
Dr. Sellner. Um-hum.
Chairman Harris. Will that technology be transferrable to--
I take it it is a totally freshwater environment--to the marine
environment of the bay or the estuarial environment of the bay,
and if it is, when do you anticipate you can move some of that
research to that environment?
Dr. Sellner. Yes, it is transferrable. Actually Don and his
student have done some very nice work on the Florida red tide
using a similar approach with sediments and flocculation.
It can be done very readily because the process is similar.
We actually had a high-school student take our method that we
are using at Wollaston Lake outside of Denton and try it with
prorocentrum, one of the mahogany tides that Dr. McGee was
talking about, and they took it out just as effectively as the
cyanobacteria that we are studying in the lake, Wollaston.
So it looks very effective. One of the lessons we have
learned from our colleagues, both Don and our Asian colleagues
is that you must change the flocculating agent, just because of
the salt effect. But the sediment, combined with the
flocculent, works very well.
The limitation though about going to the open water, and I
should say the method we are using at Lake Wollaston will be
used, can be used in tidal freshwaters, so Upper Potomac,
Mattawoman Creek, you know, Sassafras, Bud's Creek,
Transquaking, Higginsmill Pond which drains into the
Transquaking, it can be used in those flowing waters. So it is
not just limited to a basin of a lake.
So yes, the technique is quite applicable in terms of
timeframe. As I was talking with your staff member just at
break, one of the limitations is permitting and liability that
we have to address in terms of federal and state concerns of
unexpected consequences. Right now we are doing work to suggest
that following the toxin to make sure that we don't move it to
the bottom, and if it does go to the bottom, does it impact
oysters or swimming Menhaden for example? We believe that the
bacterial process that Dr. Smith knows about will actually
degrade the toxin through time so that it would be a temporary
pulse to the bottom, but it would through bacterial activity,
natural bacterial activity, would actually disappear through
time.
But it is important to consider open systems that as long
as the water is moving, you don't take substrate and allow it
just to accumulate in one area, substrate meaning the algal
biomass.
Chairman Harris. And if that were a successful
technological solution, do you think that there would be
private sector interests? I mean, do you see it eventually that
technology migrates into the private sector to actually do some
of the mitigation and control?
Dr. Sellner. It certainly can be done that way. Right now
the State of Maryland, as you likely know, DNR has some very
good event response capacities. They routinely send out SWAT
teams. Our approach right now has been that it would become a
tool in the State's toolbox, and this technique is inexpensive
relative to many other techniques that are out there,
commercial products that are available. Crab shells are local.
So it could be done by a private firm. I think a cost
benefit analysis would need to be done because no offense to
Dr. Smith and her company, but overhead rates in businesses are
higher than, you know, the state rates for their teams that are
normally out in the field.
So as long as that cost benefit analysis was done, I think
any way to get the technique routinely used should be explored.
Chairman Harris. And Dr. Smith, are there some other
solutions that you can think of or discuss with us about
something that could be available for when an HAB is predicted
to occur, something that might make it less likely to occur, to
mitigate it, other solutions out on the horizon?
Dr. Smith. Yeah, we had looked at the possibility. I didn't
get to talk much about it, of whether you could add silica to a
system and potentially promote the growth of diatoms, but the
way to do that would probably have to be very early in the
spring because when it is really warm--and it also points to
the fact that climate change is going to be a huge issue here--
when it is really warm, speaking as a microbiologist, nothing
is going to grow faster than a cyano. I mean, they are going to
outgrow anything, no matter how much silica you can put into a
system or anything else.
So there is potential for an amendment like that to work. I
think that would probably work even more in some marine systems
than in freshwater systems. What we are learning now is that a
lot of our freshwater systems don't appear to be that limited
for silica actually, so that might not be the factor that is
holding back the growth of beneficial algae. So that would be
another area for very fundamental research. If you wanted to
promote the growth of something that you like better than a
cyano, how are you going to do that? And there could be some
very good basic research done in that area because I think
there have been some examples in the past where, you know, just
getting a bunch of diatoms might not necessarily be a good
thing, either.
So there really has to be some fundamental work there. I
think more on the applied end, especially with these filamentis
cyanos, as Mr. Bartlett pointed out, it does look like you can
walk across a pad of these. I don't know if I would do that on
a 13,000 acre lake like Great Lakes-St. Mary's, but I think
there are also almost what I would call more brute-force
technologies that I think could be looked into for just
harvesting that biomass. I mean, it almost looks like you could
just rake it off of the surface.
With that said, those technologies have to be very low-
energy technologies, and they have to be done in a way that
won't lice that biomass and release more toxins. So that is
something we are considering very strongly. You have to have
sort of a passive harvesting technology to try to get your
hands on that biomass so that you don't create a bigger
problem.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. Mr. Miller?
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Greene, comments
on the legislation?
Dr. Greene. Yes, thank you, Mr. Miller. We are encouraged
by the legislation in that it recognizes the continuing needs
for further research and management tools to address harmful
algae and hypoxia. We are a little unclear at the moment what
the omission of the freshwater piece may have and how that may
impact EPA's role in the future. We are certainly looking
forward to providing written comments once we see the next
draft legislation.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Dr. Greene. Dr. McGee, in your
testimony you discuss the importance of understanding what led
to bloom initiation, bloom formation, the importance of
scientists understanding that. Who is now doing research into
bloom formation?
Dr. McGee. Actually, the scientist who made the
recommendation to me because I queried some of my colleagues
prior to testifying here today, was a researcher down at Old
Dominion University. Her name is Margie Mulholland. I am sure
there are others. Dr. Sellner probably knows some as well. But
that was one suggestion that came to me.
Mr. Miller. Is that research going on now or is that . . .
Dr. McGee. There was some preliminary--yes, there is
research going on right now, but clearly more--I think it seems
the little I know about harmful algae blooms that the more you
dig into it, the harder they are to understand. So I am sure
that one question was answered and many more came up.
Mr. Miller. Dr. Sellner, Dr. McGee said this is an area you
are more familiar with as well.
Dr. Sellner. Yes, I am going to actually defer to Don
because he is very familiar with all of the initiation that is
going on. I could say some things, but I think Don has them at
the tip of his fingers.
Mr. Miller. Dr. Anderson, are you going defer to Dr. Green?
Dr. Anderson. No, I am very happy to handle, Mr. Miller. We
actually, in the Gulf of Maine, New England area, are heavily
invested in studies of the initiation of blooms of an organism
that cause paralytic shellfish poisoning, and that organism has
actually a resting stage or a cyst. It is in bottom sediments.
It is all through the Gulf of Maine, billions and billions of
them are down there. And we have studied them. We now know what
time of year they come up, that they have got a little internal
clock that regulates that emergence, just like we have a daily
rhythm that wakes us up. They have got a yearly rhythm. We have
got that all parameterized, we have got it modeled, and that is
now the basis of the forecast that Rob Magnien has been
mentioning that we are now issuing every year for how big our
blooms are going to be and when they are gong to occur and so
forth. All based on the size of the sea bed of these cells that
have been dropped by the preceding blooms that we go out and
map every year, and we have been working with these NOAA
programs with the methods to both map these out and to just try
to make that a much more efficient and less expensive procedure
because we are finding through year after year of mapping these
features, that there are common aspects of the distributions
that we can then start to have a much more efficient sampling
program to sample just a few locations and extrapolate and know
how many are out there.
So bloom initiation is extraordinarily important, and this
is a good example of where sustained research has led to a
predictive tool and a forecasting tool that is soon to become
operational within NOAA.
Mr. Miller. Okay. I know that Dr. McGee talked about the
role of nutrients as being obviously central, and our own Dr.
Bartlett did as well. How big a role do nutrients play in bloom
formation, Dr. McGee or Dr. Anderson or Dr. Sellner?
Dr. Anderson. I think I will just take a quick shot at
them. I am sure Kevin would like to say something. I wrote a
paper very recently about the U.S. HABs and nitrification, and
we walked around the country with experts from each area and
for each one said with these big outbreaks, in New England and
the Chesapeake and the Gulf of Mexico, how critical are
nutrients from land in these outbreaks. And the answer is in
some, it is extraordinarily important, in some areas. But in
other areas, in the Gulf of Maine for example, along the West
Coast in California, in Alaska and some parts of Washington, it
is natural nutrient sources that are driving these. So it is a
very important point for the Committee to realize that simple
nutrient reductions are not going to eliminate the HAB problem.
It will only affect some of them.
Mr. Miller. My time is expired.
Chairman Harris. Dr. Sellner, did you want to say something
about that?
Dr. Sellner. Yeah, just a little bit. Don hit on the Gulf
of Maine example, but resting stage that he was talking about
is actually characteristic of many of the HABs. So for example,
Denton Lake or actually in your case, Mr. Bartlett, the
filamentis forms, they actually have overwintering stages. They
are not necessarily cued to an internal clock like Alexandria
is in the Gulf of Maine. But when the waters begin to warm, you
know, as Dr. Smith alluded to, for most microbes, warming in a
lake, normal seasonal increase in spring, it is, oh, yes, it is
time to get out of my winter doldrums. A little bit of light
hits the bottom, if they are sitting in nutrients, bang. They
have a competitive advantage.
So there are many overwintering or resistant stages for
many of the HABs out there. So that is one of the processes
that we have to imbed into all of our basic research but also
our mitigation. So there are aspects of this initiation that a
number of groups are studying. Margie Mulholland who Dr. McGee
referred to down at Old Dominion is investigating
accocladinium, a very large dinaflagalant that occurs down
there and it initiates not far from the Norfolk Naval Base, not
attributing it to the naval base, but it is to Elizabeth River
and there is a source there in the sediments that essentially
acts as a seed bed for the rest.
In the York River, there is a bloom former there,
Alexandrium monilatum, that now has come in from the coastal
ocean during a drought, forms a cyst and actually resides in
the sediments. And so now it is there, waiting for that warming
period or those optimal conditions, and then when those optimal
conditions occur, nutrients are around because nutrients are
very plentiful, and the blooms take off.
So nutrients are essential to all plant growth, and the
HABs generally have a life stage that permits use of that under
optimal conditions as well as relatively rapid growth rates or
competitive advantages where they bash their competitors, I
will put it simply.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Dr. Sellner. Mr.
Bartlett?
Mr. Bartlett. Thank you. I have been interested in two
things, one is trying to save our farmland because right now
the only development you can do with well and septic is on
farmland because it can't slope more than 25 percent or they
won't perk it, and it has got to perk and of course that is by
definition farmland. So I have been trying to encourage
development that doesn't chew up farmland and reduces the
nutrient load.
So I have been trying to promote the composting toilets
which really work very well. They have worked very well for a
couple of hundred years in Scandinavia. There is no question
that they work. And I wanted to use rainwater, and we have
prohibitions against using cistern water, so I said, gee, let
me see if I understand this. The rain falls on the hog lot, and
then it flows out of the hog lot into the stream. Then it goes
into the stream, into the reservoir, and you pull it out of the
reservoir and treat it and tell me it is drinking water. I say
can I please have it before it goes through the hog lot? That
seems to be a rational request to make. Enough water falls on
the roof of the average home to meet all of your water needs
for the year if you separate your composting toilet from your
gray water.
We are about the only major country in the world that
flushes their toilets and washes its streets and puts out its
fires with drinking water. So gee, you know, you might be
washing the car and drink from the hose, so you couldn't use
gray water. I said, you don't drink from your toilet, do you?
You know, you learn what you can drink from and where you can't
drink from. I didn't see that as a reasonable objection to
using cistern water.
You know, you could go out on an abandoned freeway and with
a Clivus Multrum, any composting toilet, Clivus Multrum is the
granddaddy of them, and it absolutely works, and with a gray
water system and just, you know, build a bed out there and put
your gray water in that bed and catch water from the roof of
your house, and that would meet all of your water needs for the
year. It is going to be a race from any community, whether they
are brought to their knees due to lack of energy from oil or
lack of water. So we certainly need to conserve water. This
also would markedly reduce nutrients in the Bay. There would be
no nutrients escape that house built out on the center of the
abandoned freeway, would there?
What can we do to get the regulation changed so you can do
that? You know, the only time they will let you use these
alternative systems is when you don't need to use them? Yes?
Dr. McGee. If I could respond, what you have described is
exactly what we have at the Chesapeake Bay Foundation
headquarters.
Mr. Bartlett. I have been there. You do a great job.
Dr. McGee. So we have composting toilets, we have cisterns
on our roof. We use the water so we don't have flush toilets.
We use the water from the roof as fire suppression and for hand
washing, the only potable water. And as a result, we use about
ten percent of the water of an office building of our size. And
we did run into trouble as you noted with the county in terms
of reusing our cistern water and also where our gray water
goes. And we actually sent a little bit of our water to the
sewage treatment plant because they wouldn't let us manage it
on site.
So we share your concerns. I am not sure it is a federal
issue or a state issue or a county issue. I suspect it is
perhaps a combination of all three. But one of the reasons why
we did what we did at the Chesapeake Bay Foundation building is
to show people what is possible, to demonstrate that it is
possible that the toilets don't have to smell, et cetera. So I
appreciate your comments.
Mr. Bartlett. I am very familiar with composting toilets.
Clivus Multrum was one of the first ones. It really works very
well. That is an anaerobic system. There are aerobic systems
that work very well and compost very quickly. You end up at the
end of a year with like a water bucket of humus from the waste
from a whole household. It really is a very effective system.
There are a lot of people that get a lot of satisfaction on
resting lightly on the environment. They would really like to
do that. You can't do it today. How can you all help us to
bring some sanity to these regulations so that you can do that
if you want to?
Dr. Sellner. As I pointed out in the testimony, HABHRCA in
the past has had a very strong commitment to social science
aspects of research, and that social science research leads to
very effective, developing effective communication strategies
with our public and with other stakeholders out there.
So I do believe, and as we found in the Florida red tide
situation, that if we can effectively and routinely communicate
across our citizens, and unfortunately many of us my age and
perhaps a little bit older aren't reachable anymore but the
students are, so what we have found is when we have a very
effective communication and education programs with school
districts, the kids are the major influence at their homes. So
they go home and embarrass you into using, you know, don't
leave the water running while you are brushing your teeth, you
know, why do you take, and this is a tough one, showers. They
love showers. They are going to be in there forever, but they
are the ones who actually come home and embarrass us older
folks into doing the right thing.
So I think our focus, and HABHRCA actually emphasizes that
social science, is to continue to embed funding down the road
in that outreach and effective communication, whether it be
HABs, whether it be nutrients, whether it be any other issue is
we find we can only do our job at application if we can talk
routinely and constantly with our citizens and stakeholders. So
investment in that social science is a critical area.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Dr. Sellner, and you
are right, you know, sometimes we have to think outside the
box, and of course, the purview of this Committee is research,
and some of the best research comes from outside-the-box
thinking, especially on complex topics like this.
Anyway, I want to thank all the witnesses for your valuable
testimony and the Members for their questions. The Members of
the Subcommittee may have additional questions for the
witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to those in writing.
The record will remain open for two weeks for additional
comments from Members. The witnesses are excused, and the
hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 4:20 p.m. the Subcommittee was adjourned.]



