- EPA'S IMPACT ON JOBS AND ENERGY AFFORDABILITY: UNDERSTANDING THE REAL COSTS AND BENEFITS OF ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EPA'S IMPACT ON JOBS AND
ENERGY AFFORDABILITY: UNDERSTANDING
THE REAL COSTS AND BENEFITS OF
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
ENVIRONMENT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 6, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-88

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-723PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              PAUL D. TONKO, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Tennessee                        VACANCY
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Energy and Environment

HON. ANDY HARRIS, Maryland, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               ZOE LOFGREN, California
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, June 6, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Andy Harris, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Brad Miller, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    12
Written Statement............................................    14

Witnesses:

Dr. Michael Honeycutt, Chief Toxicologist, Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    19

Mr. Eugene Trisko, Attorney at Law, on Behalf of the American
Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity
Oral Statement...............................................    53
Written Statement............................................    55

Mr. Tom Wolf, Executive Director, Energy Council, Illinois
Chamber of Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................    75
Written Statement............................................    77

Mr. David Hudgins, Director of Member and External Relations, Old
Dominion Electric Cooperative
Oral Statement...............................................    81
Written Statement............................................    83

Mr. Richard Trzupek, Principal Consultant, Trinity Consultants
Oral Statement...............................................    88
Written Statement............................................    90

Discussion                                                           98

Appendix 1: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Michael Honeycutt, Chief Toxicologist, Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality..........................................   110
Mr. Eugene Trisko, Attorney at Law, on Behalf of the American
Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity...........................   119
Mr. Tom Wolf, Executive Director, Energy Council, Illinois
Chamber of Commerce............................................   126
Mr. David Hudgins, Director of Member and External Relations, Old
Dominion Electric Cooperative..................................   128
Mr. Richard Trzupek, Principal Consultant, Trinity Consultants...   133

Appendix 2: Additional Material for the Record

An Economic Impact Analysis of EPA's Mercury and Air Toxics
Standards Rule.................................................   136

EPA'S IMPACT ON JOBS
AND ENERGY AFFORDABILITY:
UNDERSTANDING THE REAL COSTS
AND BENEFITS OF ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 6, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:15 p.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy
Harris [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. The Subcommittee on Energy and Environment
will come to order.
Good afternoon. I am going to first apologize for a late
start but we just got off the Floor with our first series of
votes today, and I want to thank you all for your patience.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``EPA's Impact on Jobs
and Energy Affordability: Understanding the Real Costs and
Benefits of Environmental Regulations.'' In front of you are
packets containing the written testimony, biographies, and
truth-in-testimony disclosure for today's panel of witnesses.
I now recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement.
I want to welcome everyone to this afternoon's hearing on
EPA's Impact on Jobs and Energy Affordability and to thank our
witnesses for lending this Subcommittee their time and
expertise.
At the outset, I want to note that, unfortunately, due to a
personal conflict, we should congratulate Cass Sunstein on the
birth of a child. Administrator Sunstein from the White House
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs will not be
testifying today. I certainly understand this explanation,
although it was not communicated to the Subcommittee until late
last week. I am concerned and somewhat disappointed in the lack
of transparency and responsiveness demonstrated by the Office
of Information and Regulatory Affairs when trying to organize
this hearing.Staff reached out to identify a mutually agreeable
hearing date over two months ago, and beginning on April 24, I
sent formal invitations expressing flexibility regarding the
Office's appearance that remain unanswered.
I would be greatly disappointed if Administrator Sunstein
refused to testify at some point before this Subcommittee,
especially in light of the fact that his predecessors have
testified before the Science Committee and its Subcommittee
nearly a dozen times. An unwillingness to discuss recent
regulatory developments would be especially disconcerting,
given that Mr. Sunstein is responsible for overseeing the Open
Government Initiative for the President's self-proclaimed
``most transparent Administration in history.''
Further, his office is charged with enforcing the Executive
Order requiring that the regulatory system be ``based on the
best available science'' as well as OMB standards on
information quality, peer review, and data access. These are
all issues directly relevant to the Subcommittee's jurisdiction
and work, and I expect the Administrator to communicate to the
Subcommittee by the end of this week when it would be
convenient for him to testify in the coming months.
While OIRA is not represented to discuss this process of
integrating scientific and economics assessments into
regulatory decision making, there are numerous Executive Orders
and OMB and Agency guidelines for thorough regulatory analysis.
Unfortunately, many of these guidelines have been willfully
ignored in order to pursue an unprecedented regulatory agenda
that is at odds with the President's rhetoric about an ``all-
of-the-above'' energy policy.
Our witnesses today will describe a pattern of scientific
and economic practices at EPA and OIRA that inflates health-
based regulatory benefits; overlooks actual economic, energy
affordability, and jobs impacts; and fails to reflect
uncertainty in communicating risks. All too often, major EPA
regulations have been underpinned by secret science, hidden
data, and black box models. As demonstrated in the hydraulic
fracturing cases in Pavillion, Wyoming, Parker County, Texas,
and Dimock, Pennsylvania, the Agency often appears more
concerned with crucifying press releases and enforcement
actions than meaningful peer review or scientific analysis.
Additionally, EPA has failed to account for the health
impacts of the higher energy prices and joblessness that these
regulations guarantee. More and more of these regulations are
almost exclusively justified on the basis of incidental ``co-
benefits'' from particulate matter reductions--raising the
specter of double-counting--and private benefits on the
assumption that all regulated entities are acting irrationally
and against their economic self-interest and the--and that EPA
knows what is best for their bottom line.
The absurdity of these estimates is demonstrated in OIRA's
2012 Draft Report to Congress, which indicates that, based on
benefits estimates generated by EPA, the Agency's air quality
regulations represent almost 80 percent of the benefits for all
federal rules. Despite President Obama's Executive Order
requiring that regulatory benefits justify costs, EPA recently
announced its Carbon Pollution Standard for New Power Plants
and claimed that the rule ``will result in negligible CO
2

emission changes, energy impacts, quantified benefits, costs,
and economic impacts.'' As a matter of principle, regulatory
benefits should justify their costs, and EPA's pursuit of this
coal-killing regulation, despite its own admission that the
rule has negligible benefits is mind boggling. As several of
our witnesses will testify, this statement strains credulity,
and the proposal is a de facto ban on new, clean, coal-
generated electricity in this country, as well as directly at
odds with the President's ``all-of-the-above'' energy rhetoric.
I want to thank the witnesses for appearing before the
Subcommittee today, and I look forward to a constructive
discussion.
I yield back the balance of my time, and I recognize the
Ranking Member, Mr. Miller, for five minutes for an opening
statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harris follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Chairman Andy Harris

I want to welcome everyone to this afternoon's hearing on EPA's
Impact on Jobs and Energy Affordability, and thank our witnesses for
lending this Subcommittee their time and expertise.
At the outset, I want to note that, unfortunately, due to a
personal conflict, Administrator Cass Sunstein from the White House
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, or OIRA, will not be
testifying today. I certainly understand this explanation, although it
was not communicated to the Subcommittee until late last week. I am
concerned and somewhat disappointed in the lack of transparency and
responsiveness demonstrated by OIRA when trying to organize this
hearing. Staff reached out to identify a mutually agreeable hearing
date over two months ago, and beginning on April 24 I sent formal
invitations expressing flexibility regarding OIRA's appearance that
remain unanswered.
I would be greatly disappointed if Administrator Sunstein refused
to testify before this Subcommittee, especially in light of the fact
that his predecessors have testified before the Science Committee and
its Subcommittees nearly a dozen times. An unwillingness to discuss
recent regulatory developments would be especially disconcerting, given
that Mr. Sunstein is responsible for overseeing the Open Government
Initiative for the President's self-proclaimed ``most transparent
Administration in history.'' Further, his office is charged with
enforcing the Executive Order requiring that the regulatory system be
``based on the best available science'' as well as OMB standards on
information quality, peer review, and data access. These are all issues
directly relevant to the Subcommittee's jurisdiction and work, and I
expect the Administrator to communicate to the Subcommittee by the end
of this week when it would be convenient to testify in the coming
months.
While OIRA is not represented to discuss this process of
integrating scientific and economics assessments into regulatory
decision making, there are numerous Executive Orders and OMB and Agency
guidelines for thorough regulatory analysis. Unfortunately, many of
these guidelines have been willfully ignored in order to pursue an
unprecedented regulatory agenda that is at odds with the President's
rhetoric about an ``all-of-the-above'' energy policy.
Our witnesses today will describe a pattern of scientific and
economic practices at EPA and OIRA that inflates health-based
regulatory benefits, overlooks actual economic, energy affordability,
and jobs impacts, and fails to reflect uncertainty in communicating
risks. All too often, major EPA regulations have been underpinned by
secret science, hidden data, and black box models. As demonstrated in
the hydraulic fracturing cases in Pavillion, Wyoming, Parker County,
Texas, and Dimock, Pennsylvania, the Agency often appears more
concerned with crucifying press releases and enforcement actions than
meaningful peer review or scientific analysis.
Additionally, EPA has failed to account for the health impacts of
the higher energy prices and joblessness that these regulations
guarantee. More and more of these regulations are almost exclusively
justified on the basis of incidental ``co-benefits'' from particulate
matter reductions (raising the specter of double counting) and private
benefits on the assumption that all regulated entities are acting
irrationally and against their economic self-interest (and that EPA
knows what is best for their bottom line).
The absurdity of these estimates is demonstrated in OIRA's 2012
Draft Report to Congress, which indicates that, based upon benefits
estimates generated by EPA, the Agency's air quality regulations
represent almost 80 percent of the benefits for all federal rules.
Despite President Obama's Executive Order requiring that regulatory
benefits justify costs, EPA recently announced its Carbon Pollution
Standard for New Power Plants and claimed that the rule ``will result
in negligible CO
2
emission changes, energy impacts,
quantified benefits, costs, and economic impacts.'' As a matter of
principle, regulatory benefits should justify their costs, and EPA's
pursuit of this coal-killing regulation, despite its own admission that
the rule has negligible benefits, is mind boggling. As several of our
witnesses will testify, this statement strains credulity, and the
proposal is a de facto ban on new, cleaner coal-generated electricity
in this country as well as directly at odds with the President's ``all-
of-the-above'' energy rhetoric.
I want to thank the witnesses for appearing before the Subcommittee
today and I look forward to a constructive discussion.
I yield back my time.

Mr. Miller. Thank you, Chairman Harris.
I also want to begin by congratulating OIRA Administrator
Cass Sunstein on the birth of a daughter last week. The human
gestation period is somewhat predictable, and I suspect that
Mr. Sunstein has known for some time that his wife would give
birth about when she did. And that explains some of his
reluctance to agree to a date to testify from among the options
that the majority offered him. It is hard for me to imagine
that he may not have mentioned that as the reason until last
week, but it is hard for me to imagine he was keeping his
wife's pregnancy secret. Pregnancy, particularly in the later
stages, tends to be a fairly transparent event.
But today's hearing is one he probably would not mind
missing. This Committee certainly should inquire into the cost-
benefit analysis of environmental regulations. I have been
concerned about economic cost-benefit analysis for a long time.
Placing a dollar value on human life in deciding the economic
benefit of environmental regulations raises serious questions,
both practical and moral. Should we really value the lives of
older Americans less than younger Americans, as at least one of
our witnesses today apparently favors? And in a letter to
Administrator Sunstein last fall, Chairman Harris asked, ``in
spite of the fact that most mortality associated with
particulate matter happens in the population over 65 years of
age, EPA puts the same value on mortality for all ages. In your
view, is this practice appropriate?''
The Bush Administration briefly considered a senior death
discount to justify weakening environmental regulations by
valuing the lives of Americans older than 70 at 37 percent less
than the values of the lives of other Americans. Their analysis
reduced the economic benefit of one air pollution regulation
from $77 billion to $8 billion. The Bush Administration
recognized that they were swimming in deep waters, however, and
dropped the idea of a senior death discount in economic cost-
benefit analysis. That seems like the right decision to me.
But we know that as a practical matter if we forbid
anything that could result in someone's death, then all
economic activity will grind to a halt. But putting a dollar
value on lives and valuing the lives of some more than others
raises profound moral questions. I admit that deep
philosophical discussions make me feel like I am back in
college. I am in a dorm room late at night; three or four of us
have had a few beers. We are sure that we are considering
issues that have gone largely unexamined by previous
generations and that our insights are wise beyond our years,
but it is certainly better to talk about these questions out
loud and let the American people in on the discussion. They
might not agree that old folks' lives should be discounted. In
fact, they might decide that Congress is really just more
interested in pleasing special interests than in protecting the
health of our mothers and fathers. And any supposed
philosophical justification or economic justification for what
Congress is doing is phony.
If that was what this hearing was about or even a
discussion of economic cost-benefit analysis that was a notch
or two less abstract or philosophical, the majority would have
invited EPA to provide a witness to explain how it would do
cost-benefit analysis. So EPA, it does cost-benefit analysis of
environmental regulations, not OIRA. Instead, this hearing is
one more forum for big, specific industries to air their
grievances about the EPA. We have heard again and again over
the last year and a half that the EPA is filled with
authoritarian zealots bent on destroying jobs, raising energy
costs, and otherwise making us all eat granola, wear sandals,
and ride bicycles. We have heard repeatedly that the EPA knows
little of scientific methods and even less of economic analysis
often from witnesses with few apparent credentials as
scientists or economists.
Given the disjointed nature of the list of particular
grievances with the EPA aired today, the minority decided not
to call a witness to today's hearing. If this Committee holds a
hearing in the future for a serious, focused discussion of
cost-benefit analysis, the communities affected by
environmental exposures, and the practical and moral judgments
that are behind the value of statistical life, we will
certainly invite a witness.
For today, I am submitting for the record letters and
reports by groups and experts with the experience and knowledge
to contribute to a thoughtful discussion of cost-benefit
analysis.
I yield back. And Mr. Chairman, I believe that you have
been provided already--or your staff has been provided already
a list of the letters--the documents that we submit for the
record.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Ranking Member Brad Miller

Thank you, Chairman Harris.
I want to begin by congratulating OIRA Administrator Cass Sunstein
on the birth of a daughter last week. The human gestation period is
somewhat predictable, and I suspect that Mr. Sunstein has known for
some time that his wife would give birth about when she did, and that
explains some of his reluctance to agree to a date to testify from
among the options that the majority offered.
But today's hearing is one he probably doesn't mind missing.
This Committee certainly should inquire into the cost-benefit
analysis of environmental regulations. I've been concerned about
economic cost-benefit analysis for a long time. Placing a dollar value
on human life in deciding the economic benefit of environmental
regulations raises serious questions, both practical and moral. Should
we really value the lives of older Americans less than younger
Americans, as at least one of our witnesses apparently favors? And in a
letter to Administrator Sunstein last fall, Chairman Harris asked,``In
spite of the fact that most mortality associated with [particulate
matter] happens in the population over 65 years of age, EPA puts the
same value on mortality for all ages. In you view, is this practice
appropriate?''
The Bush Administration briefly considered a ``senior death
discount'' to justify weakening environmental regulation. By valuing
the lives of Americans older than 70 at 37 percent less than the lives
of other Americans, their analysis reduced the economic benefit of one
air pollution regulation from $77 billion to $8 billion.
The Bush Administration recognized that and dropped the idea of a
``senior death discount'' in economic cost-benefit analysis. That still
seems like the right decision to me.
We know that as a practical matter, if we forbid anything that
might result in someone's death, then all economic activity would grind
to a halt. But putting a dollar value on lives, and valuing some lives
more than others, raises profound moral questions.
I admit that deep philosophic discussions make me feel like I'm
back in college, I'm in a dorm room late at night, three or four of us
have had a few beers, and we're sure that we're considering issues that
have gone largely unexamined by previous generations and that our
insights are wise beyond our years.
But it's certainly better to talk about these questions out loud
and let the American people in on the discussion. They might not agree
that old folks' lives should be discounted. In fact, they might decide
that Congress is really just more interested in pleasing special
interests than in protecting the health of our mothers and fathers, and
any supposed philosophical justification for what Congress is doing is
phony.
That's what the title of this hearing suggested we would discuss
today.
If that was what this hearing was about, or even a discussion of
economic cost-benefit analysis that was a notch or two less abstract or
philosophical, the majority would have invited the EPA to provide a
witness to explain how they do cost-benefit analysis. Instead, this
hearing is one more forum for specific big industries to air their
grievances about the EPA. We've heard again and again that the EPA is
filled with authoritarian zealots bent on destroying jobs, raising
energy costs, and otherwise making us all eat granola, grow beards, and
ride bicycles. We've heard repeatedly that the EPA really knows little
of scientific methods and even less of economic analysis, often from
witnesses with few apparent credentials as scientists or economists.
Given the disjointed nature of the list of grievances with the EPA
aired today, the minority decided not to call a witness. If this
Subcommittee holds a future hearing for a serious, focused discussion
of cost-benefit analysis, the communities affected by environmental
exposures, and the practical and moral questions that are behind the
Value of Statistical Life, we will certainly invite a witness. For
today, I am submitting for the record letters and reports by groups and
experts with the experience and knowledge to contribute to a thoughtful
discusssion of cost-benefit analysis.
I yield back.

Chairman Harris. Yes. The Chair appreciates the request,
but I have to reserve the right to object to inclusion of the
items in the record at this time as our staff simply has not
had the time to adequately review the contents of the documents
for relevance and appropriateness. As you know, we received--or
may not know--we received most of the materials at 11:30 last
night. And, you know, Congress, we like to think is a 24/7
body, but 11:30 last night is a little late. We received
additional materials at 10 o'clock this morning. You know that
we have been in session since then, and they total 18 documents
and 140 pages. And, you know, we read fast, but we don't read
that fast.
So it is quite possible that most, if not all, of these
items will not present a problem but we simply need additional
time for review.
The Chair would remind and encourage all Members wishing to
submit extensive materials into the record to share those as
far in advance as possible to allow for reasonable review times
so that we can, you know, get them in the record under
unanimous consent, but I am afraid that won't be possible at
this time.
Mr. Miller. And, Mr. Chairman, given that, first of all, I
would like to have a chance to discuss these issues if you
determine on any basis that these should not be part of the
record. I do not recall any time that the minority has
submitted documents for the record and had that request denied,
but I would reserve the right to object to any documents that
the majority wishes to enter into the record.
Chairman Harris. Sure. And if we send something over at
11:30 last night, I think you--it would be totally, totally
appropriate for you to--especially 140 pages at 11:30 at night,
it would be totally appropriate for that to be a fact.
Let me just--since you mentioned a letter that I had
written to Mr. Sunstein, I look forward to discussing the
issues about statistical lives, maybe with Administrator
Sunstein, maybe with Ezekiel Emanuel also, because the whole
purpose of the letter was that, in fact, Mr. Sunstein has said
that we should use statistical life here and has repeatedly
called for conducting regulatory analysis. I actually asked, is
it appropriate in an EPA study? So I agree with you that that
is something we should discuss in a very open forum.
Now, if there are Members who wish to submit additional
opening statements, your statements will be added to the record
at this point.
At this time, I would like to introduce three of our
witnesses, and I will yield to Mrs. Biggert to introduce Mr.
Wolf and Mr. Trzupek. The first witness is Dr. Michael
Honeycutt, the Chief Toxicologist with the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality. Welcome back. He has been employed by
the TCEQ since 1996 and has managed a division of 14
toxicologists since 2003. His responsibilities include
overseeing health effects, reviews of air permit applications,
overseeing the review of the results of ambient air monitoring
projects, and overseeing the reviews of human health risk
assessments for hazardous waste sites.
Our next witness is Mr. Eugene Trisko, Attorney-at-Law, who
is testifying on behalf of the American Coalition for Clean
Coal Electricity. For 10 years, Mr. Trisko served as an expert
witness on water utility cost of capital before the Public
Utility Commissions of Maryland, Virginia, and West Virginia.
In 2000 and again in 2007, Mr. Trisko was appointed by the U.S.
Department of State to represent U.S. industry and labor in
bilateral negotiations with Canada on air pollution control.
Our fourth witness today will be Mr. David Hudgins, the
Director of Member and External Relations at the Old Dominion
Electric Cooperative. Old Dominion is a generation and
transmission cooperative that supplies the electricity needs of
12-member electric distribution cooperatives that serve over
500,000 customers in Virginia, Delaware, and Maryland, and I
might add, the 1st Congressional District of Maryland as well.
In his position, Mr. Hudgins works with these member
cooperatives and local, regional, and state governmental
agencies to identify and attract businesses to locate in the
predominantly rural areas served by these cooperatives.
I now yield to Mrs. Biggert to introduce our third witness,
Mr. Tom Wolf; and our fifth and final witness, Mr. Richard
Trzupek.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is my pleasure to
be here this afternoon to introduce both of these witnesses
from my home State of Illinois.
Mr. Wolf is the Executive Director of the Illinois Chamber
of Commerce's Energy Council, where he advocates for the
development of across-the-board energy sources. Prior to
joining the Chamber, Mr. Wolf spent more than 20 years as a
Public Affairs Executive and holds a bachelor's degree from the
University of Wisconsin in Madison.
Mr. Trzupek has worked in the environmental industry for
three decades, starting as a stat tester and now acting as an
Environmental Consultant to many businesses. He is the author
of Air Quality Permitting and Compliance Manual and Regulators
Gone Wild. I haven't read that one yet--but how the EPA is
ruining America's industry--and holds a bachelor's degree from
Loyola University in Chicago.
So I thank both of you for joining us and providing your
insights into these troubling EPA regulations. I look forward
to hearing your testimony.
Yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mrs. Biggert.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes, each after which the Members of the Committee
will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize Dr. Michael Honeycutt to present his
testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. MICHAEL HONEYCUTT,

CHIEF TOXICOLOGIST,

TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

Mr. Honeycutt. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and Members of
the Committee. I am Dr. Michael Honeycutt, Director of the
Toxicology Division at the TCEQ. I have submitted more detailed
written comments on the science behind EPA's cost-benefit
analysis, but I will touch on a couple of highlights right now.
The EPA's cost-benefit analysis is detailed in the
Regulatory Impact Analysis for each significant rule. A number
of Executive Orders address the requirement for and the goals
of cost-benefit analysis. Under the Reagan Administration, the
benefits for a proposed rule had to outweigh the cost for that
rule. However, the Clinton Administration in this--the language
was changed substantially such that the benefits must simply
justify the cost. That position is maintained in the current
administration, along with consideration for additional factors
such as equity, fairness, promotion of economic growth, and job
creation.
The vast majority of the benefits that EPA calculates come
from the so-called ``co-benefits'' of reducing fine particulate
matter, or PM, even on the rules that do not directly target
PM. Those estimated benefits rely heavily on two key
assumptions: number one, that PM causes mortality; and that,
number two, that there is no safe level of exposure to PM. The
most recent analysis of the costs and benefits of the Clean Air
Act concludes that for every $1 society spends complying with
these regulations, $30 in benefits is obtained. However, more
objective assessments of the human health benefits from cleaner
air do not necessarily support the conclusion that the benefits
outweigh costs.
Keeping that in mind, I want to briefly talk about the
ecological epidemiology studies that EPA is using as the
primary basis for the PM benefits. These studies are
exploratory studies designed to look for correlations. They are
supposed to be followed up by more rigorous epidemiology and
clinical studies to determine whether the correlations are
real. These studies are not supposed to be used quantitatively,
and they are certainly not rigorous enough to set environmental
policy. The assumption is that breathing PM made individuals
die sooner than they would have otherwise.
This type of study is notorious for unresolved issues. Were
the individuals actually outside? Did they take their
medications that day? Do they have other risk factors with a
stronger influence on life expectancy like smoking, cholesterol
levels or obesity? There are a whole host of common-sense
questions that go unanswered in these studies. Simply put,
these studies cannot tell us if PM caused these deaths or even
if these people died prematurely, much less tell us what PM
might have caused their death.
Since 2009, the EPA has assumed that there is a linear
relationship between PM exposure and mortality. And you can see
on the overhead here, data from a typical study showing that
the relationship between mortality risk and PM levels is not
obvious. That is not a straight line. I am sorry. In fact, one
would be hard pressed to detect a linear association.
Nevertheless, statisticians can run data through elegant models
to try to find statistically significant correlations, but the
output of those models is only as good as the input and, as any
scientist will tell you, statistical correlation alone does not
imply causation.
EPA also assumes that any exposure to PM, no matter how
low, directly causes premature death. This method extrapolates
risk far below the NAAQS, extending to background levels. This
approach is not entirely accurate, nor is it conclusively
supported by the data. In fact, ecological epidemiology studies
are not designed to detect thresholds. Furthermore, this
assumption does not take into account the fact that the body
can handle small doses of PM, and indeed, this concept is the
cornerstone of toxicology.
When the scientific data addressing the association between
PM and premature death is examined in detail, it becomes
obvious that these statistical associations may have very
little biological significance. The increased chance of dying
that is reportedly due to PM exposure is extremely small. This
chance is communicated by what is known as relative risk, with
a relative risk of 1.0 being not significant. Scientific as
well as legal guidance indicates that relative risks below 2.0
should not be considered to support this relationship. The
relative risks for PM and premature death reported to date are
considerably lower than 2.0.
For the two studies EPA uses, one relative risk is 1.06 and
the other is 1.16. Some of the studies show no relationship,
and in fact, some studies suggest that PM can make you live
longer.
These issues illustrate EPA's modus operandi. The concept
of ``weight of evidence'' is misused to discount contradictory
data. They use worst-case assumptions, fail to put risks into
proper perspective, and fail to disclose how uncertain the data
are. Our agency believes that regulations are an integral and
necessary tool to protect public health and our natural
resources. Likewise, our expectation is that those regulations
be based on sound science and justifiable and that they realize
true benefits.
Thank you for this opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Honeycutt follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Mr. Eugene Trisko for five minutes to
present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. EUGENE TRISKO,

ATTORNEY AT LAW, ON BEHALF OF THE

AMERICAN COALITION FOR CLEAN COAL ELECTRICITY

Mr. Trisko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Miller.
I am Eugene Trisko. I am here on behalf of the American
Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity. And I have conducted, for
the better part of the last decade, an annual study as a
consultant to ACCCE entitled, ``Energy Cost Impacts on American
Families.'' This study really started soon after the Kyoto
Protocol when a question arose, what are American families
spending on energy? Because there were a variety of estimates
at that time when the Kyoto Protocol was being considered in
the United States, a number of studies that suggested impacts
on the order of $500 or $1,000 per household or more.
So we wanted to try to get a handle on a baseline--what are
Americans spending now for energy? So having done this study
pretty much on an annual basis since 2000, we have created, if
you will, a baseline that has allowed us to track changes in
energy costs. The report analyzes consumer energy costs since
the year 2001 for all U.S. households and examines the pattern
of energy expenditures among four income levels and for senior
and minority families. It relies on historical energy
consumption survey data and current energy price forecasts from
the Department of Energy's Energy Information Administration.
By way of a footnote, EIA is just now beginning to release the
results of its 2009 survey of residential energy consumption
and it has not yet gotten to the point where it is releasing
consumption or expenditure data. When we get that information,
we will update the study accordingly. But based upon the
preliminary results from the 2009 survey, it appears that the
consumption data, if anything, may be somewhat higher than they
were in the previous study in 2005.
Slightly more than one half of U.S. households have average
pretax annual incomes below $50,000. Mr. Chairman, this country
is divided precisely in half at an annual household income
pretax of $50,000. Our median family income today is $49,455.
And that has not changed in principle in the 10 years in which
I have been conducting this study, with no adjustment for
inflation. In 2001, families with gross annual incomes below
$50,000 spent an average of 12 percent of their average after-
tax income of $21,800 on residential and transportation
energy--gasoline. In 2012, these households are projected to
spend 21 percent of their average after-tax income of $22,390
on energy.
Family incomes have not kept pace with the rising cost of
energy. The U.S. Census Bureau reports that since 2000, real
inflation-adjusted median household income has declined by six
percent and is seven percent below the median household income
peak of $53,000 that occurred in the year 1999. Higher gasoline
prices account for nearly 4/5ths of the increased cost of
energy for consumers since 2001. In nominal dollars, average
U.S. household expenditures for gasoline will grow by 136
percent from 2001 to 2012, based on EIA gasoline price
projections for 2012.
Electricity has maintained relatively lower annual average
price increases compared to residential natural gas and
gasoline. Electricity prices have increased by 51 percent in
nominal dollars since 1990, well below the 72 percent rate of
inflation in the consumer price index. The nominal prices of
residential natural gas and gasoline have nearly doubled and
tripled, respectively, over this period.
Virtually all of the residential electricity price
increases over the past two decades have occurred since 2000.
These increases are due in part to additional capital,
operating, and maintenance costs associated with meeting clean
air and other environmental standards.
Lower-income families, including millions of fixed-income
seniors, are more vulnerable to energy costs than higher-income
families, because energy represents a larger portion of their
household budgets. Energy is consuming 1/5th or more of the
household incomes of lower- and middle-income families,
reducing the amount of income that can be spent on food,
housing, health care, and other necessities.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Trisko follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Mr. Wolf to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. TOM WOLF,

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, ENERGY COUNCIL,

ILLINOIS CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Mr. Wolf. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My name is Tom Wolf. I am the Executive Director of the
Energy Council at the Illinois Chamber of Commerce. The Council
is made up of companies that generate, transmit, transport
energy or supply the energy marketplace. Thank you for the
opportunity to give a little bigger-picture perspective on some
of the regulations being proposed on future greenhouse gas
emission sources.
When it comes to the energy regulatory oversight,
businesses are looking for a few general themes. Some of them
include predictability, what can and should they plan for; a
sweet spot where interests--including environmental interests--
are protected and commerce can flourish; benchmarks that are
based on science and engineering, not wishful thinking; and
diversity, allowing everyone a shot at success so we don't rely
too much on one form of energy.
We believe the new rulemaking on greenhouse gas emissions
for new sources proposed by the U.S. EPA falls short of these
goals. Here are a couple of reasons why.
The proposed rulemaking sets a limit which most natural gas
generators can accommodate with today's technology but that
coal generation cannot. It seems a bit strange that this magic
limit saves the planet and just so happens to allow natural gas
but not coal generation. We understand there is a provision in
the U.S. EPA regulations for coal companies to average the
greenhouse gas emissions over 30 years, theoretically allowing
them to build a new plant, retrofit it with sequestration
technology when it becomes available--if and when it becomes
available and move forward--that path for new coal could move
forward. But that path seems to run through the installation of
carbon capture and sequestration, a technology that is still
under development and too expensive for use today. We hope that
changes but it is unclear that it will.
Given that, what company will be able to get financing for
a new plant that is built on the hope that a new technology
will be available and affordable at some point in the future?
We don't believe investors would or could take that risk. Let's
take a moment to remember how much cleaner coal generation has
become in the past three decades. The Prairie State generation
plant in Marissa, Illinois, outside St. Louis on the Illinois
side of the Mississippi River produces 50 percent less
regulated emissions and 15 percent less greenhouse gas
emissions using the best available control technology, a great
step forward.
However, we believe if these proposed regulations take
hold, the leap coal producers are asked to make in greenhouse
gas emissions will be a roadblock to innovation, not an
incentive. The leap being asked for could result in companies
abandoning coal research and moving to other forms of energy,
leaving us more vulnerable with fewer supply choices.
We believe if these regulations are enacted, the cleaner
coal technologies will be invented somewhere else, or they
won't be invented at all because other countries that rely on
coal are making little to no effort to minimize greenhouse gas
emissions. We are a leader in cleaner coal technologies today
and could be going forward.
I hesitate to try and quantify the exact costs of the
proposed rulemaking that I am going through. If I have learned
one thing in my four years in this position, it is that the
future is really hard to predict. Who could have predicted the
natural gas--the new natural gas finds that we found in our
country that could turn us into a natural gas exporter versus
an importing one we thought we would be? Who could have
predicted that crude oil from North Dakota, which was 7,500
barrels per day in 2006, is now over 500,000 barrels a day? Who
could have predicted that wind turbines would be 30 percent
more efficient than they were three years ago or solar
equipment costs would plummet the way they have?
But unless there is a leap in coal generation technology
that is unforeseen at this time, we believe the rules proposed
by the U.S. EPA and new sources will effectively shut down the
future of new coal generation and the jobs, economic
development, and opportunity that would come with it.
In closing, I want to talk about the Prairie State. I took
a tour of Prairie State, talked the lead environmental engineer
there and asked him what he felt about working at that plant
and how he felt about working on the environmental controls.
And he said, I am a kid in a candy store. I reap potential
environmental controls in this plant and I am so proud of
working here. We need to make regulations that inspire him to
roll up his sleeves and find the next innovation that makes
coal even cleaner instead of rulemaking that I believe makes
him want to throw up his hands and go, are you kidding me? We
can't do it.
So we suggest taking a long, deep breath, take a hard look
at these new regulations and change them to allow new coal
plants to be built, incentivized in a way that creates a market
for the technological advances that will make coal cleaner and
cleaner and a viable option for United States and global
electricity users.
Thank you for this opportunity, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wolf follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Mr. David Hudgins for five minutes to
present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. DAVID HUDGINS,

DIRECTOR OF MEMBER AND EXTERNAL RELATIONS,

OLD DOMINION ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE

Mr. Hudgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the
Committee.
Good afternoon. My name is David Hudgins. I am the Director
of Member and External Relations at Old Dominion Electric
Cooperative. ODEC is a generation and transmission cooperative
headquartered in Glen Allen, Virginia, which is outside of
Richmond. We provide electric power to 11 member-distribution
cooperatives in Virginia, Maryland, and Delaware. Among our
portfolio of fossil fuel generation, we have a 50 percent
ownership in an 850 megawatt coal-fired plant in Halifax
County, Virginia, and two simple cycle combustion turbines in
Virginia and 50 percent of another one in Maryland.
As an owner of existing fossil fuel generation, and more
importantly, as we continue our interest and efforts to develop
a coal-fired base facility, Cypress Creek Power Station, ODEC's
decisions on future generation will be directly and negatively
impacted by the adoption of the New Source Performance
Standards for carbon dioxide, and I very much appreciate the
opportunity to speak today on the EPA proposal or, as I learned
over the weekend, the Employment Prevention Agency--i.e., this
plant will employ 3,000 construction workers for four years,
225 permanent jobs at the end of the construction, and that is
not including the ripple effect of hundreds of millions of
dollars that are going to ripple through the economy. So it has
a material impact on the entire region about the rules.
But today, I am here to state officially that ODEC has
significant concerns related to the proposal. This rule, the
NSPS, is at its core flawed. EPA fails to provide stated
benefits for this rule. The proposed rule's standard is set
without regard to fuel type, with only certain natural gas-
fired units capable of meeting the proposed limit without
control equipment. Given that there is currently no
commercially available, demonstrated technology capable of
removing the required CO
2
, namely carbon capture and
storage from large coal power plants, this standard mandates
fuel choice in lieu of technologies. The NSPS was never
intended to be used to ``redefine'' a source or dictate use of
one fuel over another. NSPS must be technologically driven and
not enacted to drive an overall national mitigation goal.
Additionally, the EPA, in their efforts to justify this
standard, relied on two major assumptions. First, EPA believes
that implementation of a currently unachievable CO
2

standard for coal will drive commercial development of the
emerging carbon capture technology to ensure future compliance.
Second, the proposed rule presumes supply of natural gas will
be both affordable and readily available to fuel the
significant increase of base load generation in the coming
decades. ODEC believes both of these assumptions are erroneous.
With regard to carbon capture technology, EPA states in the
release of the proposed standard, ``today's proposal does not
interfere with construction of new coal-fired capacity.'' EPA
is justifying the standard by providing a 30-year averaging and
assuming that full-scale carbon capture technology would be
commercially viable within 10 years given current and projected
government testing and demonstration. This averaging
requirement alone will preclude any new coal plants from being
built. No company will take the risk to invest billions of
dollars into a power plant in the hopes that carbon capture
technology will be developed. Additionally, financial lending
institutions will not lend money to construct a plant without a
viable technology to demonstrate compliance. This is a $5
billion investment on behalf of the cooperatives to provide
1,500 megawatts.
There are some demonstration projects involving enhanced
oil recovery; however, this Administration's Interagency Task
Force on Carbon Capture noted, ``only when the financial,
economic, technological, legal, and institutional barriers are
addressed will carbon capture be a viable mitigation option.''
Finding suitable storage areas, developing pipeline
infrastructure, and developing large-scale capture technology,
in addition to the legal and liability issues, are
significant--if not insurmountable--hurdles to overcome.
ODEC has been and continues to be a member of the Southeast
Regional Carbon Sequestration Partnership. We recognize the
need for these partnerships to facilitate exploration and
expansion of this Nation's technological capabilities. As a
Virginia cooperative, coal has been an abundant, consistent,
and economical source of fuel for development of base load
electric generation for many decades. While all of us have seen
recent prices of natural gas at all-time lows, EPA's assumption
that prices will remain low is extremely short-sighted.
Historically, the U.S. Government has consistently failed
to accurately predict future natural gas prices, and world
market implications on natural gas pricing are disturbing.
Electrical affordability from natural gas generation is
significantly driven by the fuel price. EPA's proposed standard
will effectively eliminate ODEC's choice for affordable base
load electric power.
ODEC recognizes that solutions to this country's power
needs in the future will take resources and innovation.
However, this proposed mandate will not drive those solutions.
Because of the significant impact it will have on the electric
generation industry as a whole, and more importantly, on ODEC's
ability to construct new base load generation that will be
affordable for all of our members--owners, ODEC urges the
Committee to fully and objectively examine the source material
and this proposed rule. Also, we urge the Committee to
encourage the EPA to withdraw this proposed rule.
This concludes my testimony and thank you again for the
opportunity to speak on this fundamental issue of powering the
United States economy into the future. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hudgins follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize our final witness, Mr. Richard Trzupek, for
five minutes to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. RICHARD TRZUPEK,

PRINCIPAL CONSULTANT,

TRINITY CONSULTANTS

Mr. Trzupek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Miller, for the opportunity to testify here today.
I am Rich Trzupek, a chemist and environmental consultant
currently employed as Principal Consultant with Trinity
Consultants, Inc. I work in the trenches, as it were, for the
small and midsized companies that do not have their own
environmental staff.
You have my written testimony, so I would like to use this
time to highlight a few points.
First, the perception in the regulative community that the
EPA is overly aggressive and overly intrusive is real and in my
opinion justified. When former Region 6 Administrator Dr. Al
Armendariz--sorry about that--Armendariz made his famous
crucifixion speech, it came as no surprise to those who work on
the industrial side. From an industrial point of view, he
honestly expressed--albeit in far-too-colorful language--the
way that most high-ranking EPA officials view enforcement
actions. My experience has been that, at the federal level,
intimidation is often as important as compliance.
Second, many parts of the regulatory structure and the
federal permit systems are needlessly cumbersome and complex.
Some say they do what they can to provide help in
streamlining--TCEQ is a great example--but there is little they
can do about the parts of their programs which are subject to
U.S. EPA oversight and approval. The complexity the regulatory
structure creates more and more opportunities for
noncompliance, which has nothing to do with exceeding emission
limits, but rather strictly about paperwork and procedures.
The combination of aggressive enforcement, regulatory
complexity, and a clunky federal permit system does lead to
adverse economic consequences. I have seen many cases in my
career where the decision not to build a facility in the United
States or the decision not to expand an existing facility was
heavily influenced by the regulatory environment. This is not
to say that environmental regulations were the only factor in
these decisions but they were important factors.
Third, I believe it is time for Congress to review the way
the U.S. EPA is allowed to continually redefine its mission,
particularly with respect to the Clean Air Act. Under the Clean
Air Act, the U.S. EPA is allowed to continually redefine what
constitutes clean air by issuing a new ambient air quality
standards. By continually moving the goalposts farther and
farther as the air has gotten remarkably cleaner and cleaner,
the Agency thus justifies continuing with less and less actual
environmental or human health returns. The United States now
has some of the cleanest air in the world, and I would
respectfully suggest that it is time we acknowledge that fact
and that the Clean Air Act reflects that fact.
Fourth, the economic justifications that the U.S. EPA uses
when promulgating new regulations are, in my opinion, seriously
flawed. In my opinion, U.S. EPA both grossly overestimates the
economic benefits of regulations and ignores many economic,
societal, and health consequences on the other side of the
ledger. In a way, I think it is unfortunate that we call the
metric value a statistical life because it tends to imply maybe
I can plop down $9 million and buy a person. What it really is
is the net economic productivity of the average person, how
much money he makes, how much he impacts the economy. When you
say it is a value of a life it is going to be insulting no
matter the number. I personally think I am worth more than $9
million over the course of my life. And there is no way that
metric should be used or should be called what it is as though
it was a real value of a life. It is a value of what a person
does and earns in his life.
You will note that all of the above comments are not
related to the U.S. EPA under this or any other administration.
These comments would have applied four years ago, eight years
ago, 12 years ago, et cetera. The only real difference over
time is that we can apply the word ``more'' each and every
year. Regulations get more complex, the EPA gets more
aggressive, economic justifications are more unbelievable, et
cetera.
There is one thing that is unique to the EPA under the
current Administration and that is what I refer to as the
regulatory tsunami aimed squarely at the use of coal and power
industrial sectors. Through a combination of greenhouse gas
limitations--which previous witnesses have talked about--new
permitting requirements, new ambient air quality standards, and
new hazardous air pollution rules, the Agency has made it
virtually impossible to build the new, modern coal-fired
generation in the United States that would replace our aging
fleet.
The EPA has thus effectively decided that more and more of
the base load power generation capacity the American depends on
will be natural gas-fired. In the long term, I strongly suspect
this will lead to substantial increases in the cost of
electricity and in more wildly fluctuating power prices.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and please
feel free to call on me again in the future if I can be of
assistance to the Committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Trzupek follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I thank the witnesses for being available for questioning
today, reminding Members that Committee rules limit questioning
to five minutes.
The Chair at this point will open the round of questioning
and I recognize myself for five minutes.
Mr. Trzupek, let me just follow up on that regulatory
tsunami. I am sure you are aware, as everyone in the public is,
you know, we have this 2,700-page Affordable Care Act bill and
a whole bunch of rules and regulations have to come from it.
Are you aware that there are twice as many regulations from the
EPA as there are from Health and Human Services before OIRA
right now, despite the fact that HHS has to implement a 2,700-
page health bill that involves 17 percent of the U.S. economy,
twice as many? Would that surprise you?
Mr. Trzupek. That frightens me.
Chairman Harris. It wouldn't surprise. I didn't think it
would.
With regards to this statistical life, that is kind of
related to the quality adjusted life, which is, if I recall,
Ezekiel Emanuel, the advisor to the President, is the one that
introduced that concept in regards to how to ration medical
care as we go to look to decrease the costs of Medicare in the
future. Am I correct? I mean it is the same concept that in
fact older lives somehow don't get the same amount of resources
as younger lives?
Mr. Trzupek. Yeah, that is correct.
Chairman Harris. Right, that was Ezekiel Emanuel's--the
whole point of his pretty famous paper.
Now, Dr. Honeycutt, let me ask you some questions. I am
going to ask you--can we show the slides here? Because I am
going to show this--these are some of your slides here that you
didn't present, but they are in the written testimony. Now, the
first one suggests--because, you know, in science you like to
think we kind of, you know, seek the truth. Apparently, the
truth before pre-2009 appeared to be that maybe four percent of
all deaths was due to PM
2
, but the truth somehow
changed post-2009 and all of a sudden four times as many
deaths. One of those sciences is wrong, right? I mean we have
to assume that no cataclysmic event occurred in 2009 except
maybe the beginning of a new administration that would have
quadrupled the number of deaths attributable to PM
2
,
is that--that is kind of correct?
Dr. Honeycutt. Yes.
Chairman Harris. Right? Okay. Now, let's go to the next
slide, which I think is one that you showed. When I took my
master's degree at the School of Public Health, the first thing
they taught us in the statistics course is before you do any
statistics you actually look at the data. Now, I look at this
data and if you took that line that is vertical which really is
nothing, that is just, you know, that .15, and you looked at
that data and I asked someone to draw the best line--to imagine
that a line describes this data or even a curve describes this
data, one would look at it and go, well, you really can't
because with those outliers there on the right you could say,
well, I could draw a line going downward with those outliers on
the left. Well, maybe it is straight across.
So the first validation of any statistical analysis is look
at it and say should you subject this statistical analysis? I
got to you tell you, I look at this, I say I am not sure I
would. Let's go to the next slide.
And that is true, right? Is that--that is the way you are
supposed to deal with statistics?
Dr. Honeycutt. You are absolutely correct.
Chairman Harris. This is the assumption of causality. Now,
this is the most worrisome because what you are suggesting--and
I wish, you know, Cass Sunstein were here and God bless him on
the birth of a daughter. I have two daughters. You know, he is
going to have his hands full and three other--three boys. He is
going to have his hands full for a while. But the research was
an association.
Dr. Honeycutt. Absolutely.
Chairman Harris. Which they teach you in epidemiology
should never be attributed to causality until you do actual
studies that prove causality, is that correct?
Dr. Honeycutt. Yes, sir.
Chairman Harris. Okay. Now, this is the assumption of
causality, and even if you assume causality, this is where you
say most of the studies--because that line above the number one
assumes that there is no effect--most of those studies fall on
that line and only one study if I look at it doesn't have an
estimate--a range of estimate--of accuracy of estimate that
actually doesn't touch the line one.
Dr. Honeycutt. Yes, sir. It is very----
Chairman Harris. So the assumption looking at that data
would be there is actually no evidence that there is an
increase in relative risk.
Dr. Honeycutt. There is very little.
Chairman Harris. In fact, the studies you showed indicate
there is a 1.06. I imagine that study actually included 1 as
part of the range.
Dr. Honeycutt. Actually, it didn't. It was very close to 1.
Chairman Harris. Well, you said there were two studies,
1.06 and 1.16, but I don't see two that don't touch the line of
1, maybe 1.16 that did it. That is what I thought.
Next slide.
This one is very interesting, because it assumes that if
you want to live a longer life in Dallas and in Houston, you
better start breathing some PM
2
----
Dr. Honeycutt. Yes, sir.
Chairman Harris [continuing]. Is that right?
Dr. Honeycutt. Yes, sir.
Chairman Harris. Because using the same association and the
same causality information to say that actually your risk is
decreased in Dallas and Houston and Birmingham and I know Las
Vegas crosses the 1. And actually, there are only very few
cities where there is even a slight increase. You know, maybe
in Phoenix and Milwaukee it might not be hazardous, but that
could outweigh Dallas and Houston.
As far as you know, does the EPA--did they change the
requirements for Dallas and Houston based on this scientific
data?
Dr. Honeycutt. No, sir. We have the same requirements
everyone else does.
Chairman Harris. You do? Even though the evidence is that
in Texas it appears to be protective?
Dr. Honeycutt. Yes, sir.
Chairman Harris. Okay. That is kind of what I thought.
Anyway, thank you very much. We will get a second round, be
sure to get some more in. And I now recognize the Ranking
Member, Mr. Miller, for five minutes.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
That set of questions make it all the more remarkable that
no one from EPA was invited to appear at this hearing because
these analyses are done by EPA; they are not done by OIRA. It
certainly would have been useful to have had someone here from
EPA to ask some of those very particular questions that the
Chairman was just asking.
The reason that I set out verbatim in my opening statement
the Chairman's question to Cass Sunstein last fall is I did not
want to summarize the position he was taking since it was, as
they say in ``Jeopardy,'' in the form of a question. But let me
put this innocent--although it pretty clearly is implicit in
the question--for purposes of this question, if your position
is that EPA should value life not by life but by years, and
that if an environmental exposure lessens life by a percentage
and therefore it is more years for younger people, then if that
is your analysis, then you are saying, yes, younger people's
lives should count for more than older people's lives.
Given that assumption, Mr. Honeycutt, could you answer this
question? In spite of the fact of that most mortality
associated with particulate matter happens in the population
over 65 years of age, EPA puts the same value on the mortality
for all ages. In your view, is this practice appropriate?
Dr. Honeycutt. No, sir.
Mr. Miller. That is not appropriate?
Dr. Honeycutt. No, sir.
Mr. Miller. Okay. You do believe that younger lives should
count for more than older lives? There should be a senior
discount?
Dr. Honeycutt. Actually, the lives should be the same. It
is the life years that needs to be different because actually
the rules impact----
Mr. Miller. Right.
Dr. Honeycutt [continuing]. People mainly 80 and over.
Mr. Miller. So you were----
Dr. Honeycutt. So it adds months to their lives. So a 25-
year-old, if he lives past 25 years old--if this were infant
mortality, you would be correct. You would use a whole life.
But we are talking adding lives to people who are over 80 or
adding years--months to the lives of people who are over 80.
Mr. Miller. Okay. So you are, again, the gist out of the
analysis that you get there is that the life of a younger
person should count for more than a life of an older person?
Dr. Honeycutt. Well, they should count equally because a
25-year-old--his value of a statistical life--it should be the
same no matter what. But an 80-year-old who dies four months
sooner than they would have, they have only lost that four
months.
Mr. Miller. All right. Thank you, Dr. Honeycutt.
Dr. Honeycutt, there is a pretty clearly established legal
concept that there can be many causes, but if they act in
concert they are all--that each one is a cause. Do you dispute
that in any way? I mean, if someone is obese and a smoker and
is exposed to particulate matter or any other kind of
environmental exposure and that combination had not existed
they would have survived, then each one of those is a cause.
Dr. Honeycutt. Each one can contribute. The question is how
much do they contribute? And I think the answer is those other
factors contribute a lot more than PM does if PM does at all.
Mr. Miller. Okay. I understand the whole idea of double
counting is that the--that two different rules may accomplish
the same purpose and if you count it the same for both, you are
double counting. But it is certainly possible to have discrete
benefits from two different rules, and it is possible to have a
cumulative effect from two different rules. Your slides suggest
that there has been double counting but there is absolutely
no--you cite no authority for that at all. What is your
authority for the EPA double counting the benefits of air
pollution controls, for instance?
Dr. Honeycutt. Well, I mean it is taken directly from EPA
analysis because when you reduce--if a rule reduces PM by a
microgram per cubic meter and another one does, it is reducing
the same microgram per cubic meter.
Mr. Miller. Why is it not 2 micrograms per cubic meter?
Dr. Honeycutt. Because it looks at what----
Mr. Miller. How do you know it is the same microgram?
Dr. Honeycutt. Because you are measuring--if you are
measuring at a monitor--see, these aren't looking at sources;
they are looking at monitors in the environment, monitors at a
city. So if it is reduced at a monitor somewhere, it doesn't
really matter where it came from. It is reduced at the monitor.
That is the different between an ambient standard and a point
force standard.
Mr. Miller. Right. But you have offered no authority. Is
there any authority--is there any published paper that shows
that they are actually double counting rather than there being
discrete benefit or cumulative benefit?
Dr. Honeycutt. I am not sure about a published paper on
that, but you can actually just look at EPA's data and pull
that information out. It is there. I would be happy to show you
that.
Dr. Miller. Okay. Well, even better would be to have an EPA
witness come and have that person ask those questions.
My time has almost expired and I will yield back the last
15 seconds.
Chairman Harris. Thank you. I think you are actually 15 in
the red, but we will give you--remember, we are going to have
another five minutes. And gosh, I kind of wish that the
minority had invited the EPA. I would love to hear their
explanation.
Mrs. Biggert is recognized, the gentlelady from Illinois,
for five minutes.
Mrs. Biggert. And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wolf, you recently testified at a public hearing in
Chicago on EPA's proposed carbon pollution standard. Do you
think that based upon recent EPA behavior, the Agency is likely
to incorporate and respond to your concerns in the final
standards?
Mr. Wolf. I hate to predict the future of what government
agencies do. I certainly hope that they will take a look at
this. The industry--you know, I represent a lot of different
voices in the industry in Illinois--wind, solar, coal, nuclear,
crude oil, utilities--it is not like they are against every
regulation in the book. They would like regulations that they
believe allow a sweet spot for that environmental protection
and a successful business model. And I am hoping the U.S. EPA
looks at this specific one and has a path for coal that really
is a path for coal and not a roadblock.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay. Then, do you think that the recent EPA
regulatory activity is consistent with the all-of-the-above
energy policy?
Mr. Wolf. I think this proposal is not consistent with
that. I think this proposal does preclude coal--new coal
generation from happening. The coal producers and actually some
of the other producers of energy I have talked to about these
regulations, people aren't even in the coal business, some of
the wind people I talk to look at this and say, yeah, they are
not going to be able to build with this. It is just too much of
a leap. Where they say incentivization for maybe permitting
incentivizations, a renewed permit is X percent cleaner for
greenhouse gas gives that incentive as an idea to get better
and better and cleaner and cleaner over time. If you just say
here is this big bar you have to reach and they can't reach it,
they aren't even going to try to get there.
Mrs. Biggert. I know that in Illinois there was
sequestration that was talked about for a long time in southern
Illinois which has not happened, but it seems like there has
been some breakthrough on the greenhouse gases for coal. I
thought that they really had--in some of the plants had been
able to remove that from there.
Mr. Wolf. Well, on the sequestration side there is actually
a pilot project going on in Decatur right now----
Mrs. Biggert. Yeah.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. Where they are sequestering a
million metric tons over three years and we are hopeful that
pilot project will prove successful both technologically and
environmentally and economically. But again we are not sure.
Mrs. Biggert. So it is moving forward?
Mr. Wolf. It is moving forward but there are a lot of
``ifs'' in that scenario and to say--to put out regulation that
says every if is going to work out; therefore, let's do it this
way is grasping. And then, you know, there is--I think the coal
industry has shown over the past three decades that it can get
better. And that is in their hands and saying we are done. This
is it. This is the best we can do. Consistently, they are
showing they can get cleaner and cleaner in their energy and
production and we should give them that chance to continue
that.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay. Then, Mr. Trzupek, what are the
cumulative effects of these various EPA rules on the bottom
line for small businesses?
Mr. Trzupek. For small businesses they have a very marked
effect on the bottom line. In the small entrepreneurial
businesses that I deal with, the person who is trying to manage
the EPA program is usually the driving force in that business;
he is the entrepreneur. And the more time he has to spend doing
things that really don't have environmental benefit, they are
just about paperwork and procedures, the less time he is being
productive, the less time he has to devote to growing his
business.
Mrs. Biggert. And do you think that the EPA's carbon
pollution standard that will effectively ban coal generation
will impact the manufacturers and small businesses?
Mr. Trzupek. I think in the long term because coal has been
for years the great stabilizer in energy prices and natural
gas, as I think Mr. Hudgins pointed out, historically
fluctuates a lot and if you don't have certainty on energy
prices, that is definitely going to affect my clientele.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay.
And Mr. Trisko, what impact will the recently proposed and
finalized rules on the power sector have on coalmining and
coalminers?
Mr. Trisko. The--thank you, Mr. Wolf.
Mrs. Biggert. Mr. Trisko, yeah.
Mr. Trisko. Yes. Thank you. The most recent economic impact
analysis of the impact of the EPA Mercury and Air Toxics
Standards Rule sponsored by ACCCE is prepared by National
Economic Research Associates. I could briefly summarize those
job results because your hearing is focused in part on the
impact of these rules on jobs. Now, this is not broken down for
coalmining jobs. Coalmining jobs obviously are kind of first in
line. They are the first to be lost in this process followed by
losses in the utility sector, the railroad sector, and so
forth. There are, of course, some offsetting job gains in
construction--construction of pollution controls and the like.
The NERA study of the MATS rule--and this is prepared,
dated March 21, 2012, so it was prepared after the final rule
was promulgated and it is focused only on the MATS rule and
compares that rule relative to two baselines; first, a CAIR
baseline, the Clean Air Interstate Rule, which is in effect
today pending the court's stay of CSAPR; and then second, a
baseline of the CSAPR rule assuming that that is implemented at
some point. And in sum, the estimate of the net job impacts for
the two rules are a net loss of 215,000 permanent full-time
equivalent jobs for the MATS rule plus CSAPR relative to a CAIR
baseline. So it is a net loss, 215,000 permanent jobs.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay.
Mr. Trisko. When you compare the MATS rule relative to the
CSAPR transport rule, the estimate is for a net loss of 180,000
permanent full-time jobs. ACCCE would like permission to submit
this study for the record following the conclusion of this
hearing because all of the assumptions underlying the findings
I have just summarized are contained therein.
Mrs. Biggert. Mr. Chairman, I would ask that the study be
submitted for the record.
Chairman Harris. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information may be found in Appendix 2.]
Chairman Harris. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back her
time.
We have enough time for a second round of questioning if--
and I will begin a second round of five minutes of questions.
If we can show one of the--show the slides. You can put
them up--and this slide right here. I finally found that other
box that didn't intersect with zero because it is so close to
the line of 1 you can't see it. The two studies with the lines
are the Laden study from 2006, the Pope study from 2002 which
actually forms the basis of $1.8 trillion of the $2 trillion
benefit claimed by EPA, the economic benefit. Now, my reading
of that slide shows that both those overlap the relative risk
of 1. Is that true?
Dr. Honeycutt. Well, sir, there----
Chairman Harris. Or are they just really, really darn
close?
Dr. Honeycutt. They are very close.
Chairman Harris. Okay. And just to put it into perspective,
is it true that smoking increases--the relative risk of smoking
is about 2.8 times?
Dr. Honeycutt. Yes, sir.
Chairman Harris. So you are looking at maybe two, three
percent increase versus a 280 percent increase--180 percent
increase----
Dr. Honeycutt. Yes, sir.
Chairman Harris [continuing]. In those? Okay. And that is
1.8 trillion of the 2 trillion. That is how really you get to
30 to 1----
Dr. Honeycutt. Sure.
Chairman Harris. Do you know if meta-analysis has been
conducted on those to actually increase the power of it to see
if when you put all of those studies together they intersect--
they overlap 1?
Dr. Honeycutt. Yes, sir. A meta-analysis has been done. The
problem is one of those studies has over a million people in
it.
Chairman Harris. I got you. So it weighs--you are right. It
overweighs in the meta-analysis. I understand that.
Look, I am sorry that the EPA isn't here to testify, but to
be honest with you, we have been waiting since September. We
were promised by--personally, Gina McCarthy promised me to send
that data that justifies that from those two studies and the
data. And Mr. Holden appeared and Mr. Smith asked him--he
promised he would send it. We have been waiting for, you know,
seven or eight months. I understand the EPA is busy writing
regulations and doing other things but they should have some
time to respond to Congress when we ask those kind of
questions.
Now, Mr. Hudgins, Cypress Creek Power Station, that base
facility you are talking about that would be--would help
provide electricity into my district for Choptank Electric. You
know, you stated that your decisions on the base load facility
it will be ``directly and negatively impacted by the new carbon
pollution standard for power plants despite the Agency's claim
that there is zero cost associated with the rule.'' We are
going to have Lisa Jackson--if she appears--testifying in this
room at the end of the month and she has claimed that this rule
won't kill coal due to flexibilities included and the ability
to incorporate carbon capture and sequestration in 10 years. My
assumption from your testimony is that you are not--you don't
really agree that that is necessarily true. Obviously, you
probably would have gone ahead and built the facility.
Mr. Hudgins. Mr. Chairman, at the end of the day, this
whole process of billions of dollars is driven by the financial
institutions that we deal with, Wall Street. And one thing that
bankers do not want is uncertainty.
Chairman Harris. Right. I should say it is actually the
financiers who really don't trust that that is a stable,
financially sound decision to----
Mr. Hudgins. Take a $5 billion risk----
Chairman Harris. Right, on the fact that, for instance,
carbon--and we know because we have had testimony in front of
this Committee that carbon capture and sequestration, the
demonstration projects actually aren't--haven't been done. They
are just not scalable. They are really not financially feasible
and yet we still hear that that is true.
The prediction of energy costs--because I guess Lisa
Jackson bases that on a--you know, a $250 million BTU cost of
natural gas but the EIA estimate--and, you know, you have to
trust the EIA at some point--are you aware of what their
estimate was for this year's cost of natural gas two years ago?
Mr. Hudgins. I am not.
Chairman Harris. It is 4.50. It is actually 2.50. The
government is only off by a factor of 80 percent in that
estimate. Do you have any reason to believe that the government
will be able to predict or that Ms. Jackson is able to predict
the cost of natural gas? And is that, in fact, part of the
basis for the decision to say that, you know, coal really might
be--the price stability of coal might be the most dependable
way to go if these rules weren't in place?
Mr. Hudgins. Mr. Chairman, sometimes we go to use common
sense and every time you have a----
Chairman Harris. This is Washington, DC. I beg to differ.
Mr. Hudgins. I understand, but at the end of the day, it is
about monopoly and if we are forced as a utility into the gas
market as to be the sole supplier of gas--I mean of electricity
from gas, then what is going to happen to a price in any
monopoly? And we can point to our history when the monopoly
occurs, prices rise.
Chairman Harris. Sure.
Mr. Hudgins. And what we were fearful of three, four years
ago, gas was at almost $14 MCF.
Chairman Harris. You are absolutely right, and we have a
long history of the stability of coal prices.
Mr. Trisko, can you add to that?
Mr. Trisko. Yes, Dr. Harris. Given your penchant for
statistical analysis, I think you would be interested to find
that the EIA's analysis of the NYMEX future natural gas
contract that appears on the short-term energy outlook Web page
for DOE contains a tab called probability analysis. And if you
click that tab on probability, you will find the 95 percent
confidence intervals for the NYMEX December 2013 natural gas
contract. It gives the reference case projection and then the
95 percent confidence intervals around that projection. Now,
that is a contract price that is 18 months hence and EIA's 95
percent confidence interval is between a range of slightly less
than $2 per million BTU and slightly less than $8 per million
BTU.
Chairman Harris. Only a four-fold range.
Mr. Trisko. Yeah.
Chairman Harris. Easy to predict I guess. Listen, thank you
very much and I defer--I recognize the Ranking Member, Mr.
Miller, for a second round of questions.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Among the 17 documents
that I earlier asked to be included in the record and do not
yet have a ruling on, almost all of them are letters from
groups that have an opinion, have a point of view on this
topic. I have never known an organization that has a point of
view on a topic that is before a Congressional Committee being
denied the right to have their views included in the record.
Some clippings, articles, and various publications, and
only a couple of at all detailed technical kinds of documents,
one of which is Summary of Expert Opinions on the Existence of
a Threshold and the Concentration Response Function for PM-
related Mortality, technical support document. This is
published by the EPA, was compiled by the EPA. It includes
several participants, some of which I have heard of like the
American Heart Association, some of which I have not heard of
but the list of authors of their papers is long, and their
credentials appear impressive and in every case they have an
equally long and equally impressive list of peer reviewers. It
is pretty stunning to me to think that the majority staff does
not know about this, did not know about this document well
before last night in preparing for this hearing because this
seems to be a pretty basic document.
Dr. Honeycutt, are you familiar with this document?
Dr. Honeycutt. I am familiar with most of the statements in
it.
Mr. Miller. Well, are you familiar with the list of
scientists who participated in one way or another either as
authors or as--well, some list authors and peer reviews; some
list experts, but those--this list of scientists who
participated in preparation of this document?
Dr. Honeycutt. Yes, sir.
Mr. Miller. You are familiar with that list? Okay. Well,
you have criticized the EPA, including in your testimony today,
as being secretive, not telling you what their analysis is.
This seems pretty open.
Dr. Honeycutt. Well, actually, the data underlying their
analysis is not available.
Mr. Miller. Was that data provided to this list of--it
looks like probably a couple hundred scientists?
Dr. Honeycutt. No, it wasn't. That data is held by a couple
of universities and only the university professors have access
to the data.
Mr. Miller. I am sorry. The data is not provided to peer
reviewers?
Dr. Honeycutt. That is correct. Only the analysis of the
data is.
Mr. Miller. The people who--the scientists who agree to be
peer reviewers are not seeing the data upon which they are----
Dr. Honeycutt. You are absolutely correct.
Mr. Miller. I am not correct. I am not saying it. I am
asking you.
Dr. Honeycutt. Your statement is correct.
Mr. Miller. Okay. But that is what you are saying. All
right. And so you disagree with the statement by the EPA that
studies demonstrated an association between premature mortality
and fine particulate pollution at the lowest levels measured in
the relevant studies levels that are significantly below the
NAAQS for fine particles. These studies have not observed a
level at which premature mortality effects do not occur. You
say that is not supported by data or by scientific analysis?
Dr. Honeycutt. Oh, no, sir. That is absolutely true. But
there are other studies that don't show that association and
there are other studies that show that PM is--if you can
interpret it this way--healthful. And I think that is the
problem. EPA doesn't present that data. They only present the
positive data. They don't present the negative data.
Mr. Miller. Okay. One of the advantages of having peer
reviewers is presumably that they know the literature of the
field. Do you believe this--what appears to me in my lay
opinion to be an impressive set of experts--do you think they
do not know the data in this area or the analysis, the
literature in this area?
Dr. Honeycutt. Well, actually a number of those people,
that is their data, so I would expect them to advocate the use
of their own data over another researcher's data. But----
Mr. Miller. But the other studies that you refer to----
Dr. Honeycutt. Um-hum.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. And I--you are saying that what
they are referring to is just some studies and then there are
contradictory studies. So when they say that the studies
demonstrate an association between premature mortality and fine
particulate--fine particle pollution at the lowest levels
measured in the relevant studies that what they are saying is
our studies, but there are other studies that contradict that?
Dr. Honeycutt. That is true.
Mr. Miller. And that these couple hundred scientists did
not know about those studies or did they know about those
studies?
Dr. Honeycutt. They may have. I am not sure what they did
or didn't know, but those studies are older studies. Those
studies--the exposures occurred during the '80s and '90s. A lot
of the newer data shows different effects or doesn't show the
effect.
Mr. Miller. Okay. My time is expired.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
And seeing no other Members here, I want to thank the
witnesses for their valuable testimony, the Members for their
questions. The Members of the Committee may have additional
questions for you and we will ask you to respond to those in
writing if we do. The record will remain open for two weeks for
additional comments from Members.
Again, I want to thank you very much for your patience in a
late start to the hearing because of our voting schedule. The
witnesses are excused. Thank you all for coming.
The hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:27 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix 2

----------

Additional Material for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

An Economic Impact Analysis of EPA's Mercury and Air Toxics Standards
Rule

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


