- AN OVERVIEW OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN OVERVIEW OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BUDGET
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, MARCH 1, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-65

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

72-921 [DF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             PAUL D. TONKO, New York
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               JERRY McNERNEY, California
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
Tennessee                        HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY

C O N T E N T S

Date of Hearing

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Ralph M. Hall, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking
Minority Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
U.S. House of Representatives..................................    15
Written Statement............................................    16

Witnesses:

Dr. Steven Chu, U.S. Secretary of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    18
Written Statement............................................    19

Discussion.......................................................    22

Appendix 1: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Steven Chu, U.S. Secretary of Energy.........................    52

Appendix 2: Additional Material for the Record

Analysis of Impacts of a Clean Energy Standard as Requested by
Chairman Bingaman, November 2011...............................   123

Charts Submitted by Representative Rohrabacher...................   155

AN OVERVIEW OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BUDGET
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 1, 2012

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:36 a.m., in Room
2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ralph Hall
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Hall. Okay. The Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology will come to order. And I say good morning and
welcome to today's hearing entitled ``An Overview of the
Department of Energy Research and Development Budget for Fiscal
Year 2013.'' In front of all of us here are packets containing
the written testimony, biography, and Truth-in-Testimony
disclosure for today's witness, the Secretary of Department of
Energy, Dr. Steven Chu. And we are honored of course to have
you, sir.
I want to welcome everyone here today for the hearing on
the President's fiscal year 2013 budget request for the
Department of Energy, and in particular I want to extend a warm
welcome to you, Mr. Secretary, for appearing before the
Committee yet again this year. We may occasionally have strong
disagreements, but we thank you for your service and for your
willingness to appear before this Committee.
This is the President's fourth budget submission in
Congress, so its general priorities, and my concerns with them,
should come as no surprise. As in the years past, the budget
calls for massive increases in green energy programs while
flat-lining or cutting programs devoted to basic research and
the advancement of the domestic production of reliable and
affordable sources of energy, such as oil, natural gas, coal,
and nuclear. The lack of balance in this approach is
disappointing, and I hope and expect that Congress is going to
reject it.
Last year, I used a gambling term to highlight my concern
with the President's budget, specifically the extent to which
President Obama ``doubled-down'' on his energy and climate
agenda in light of the continued struggling economy, trillion-
dollar deficits, rising gas prices, and fuel supply concerns
driven by Middle East turmoil. All of these issues remain
today, and some, such as the price of gas, have been further
exacerbated. After a year in which American taxpayers saw their
money wasted in high-profile failures of government-backed, so-
called clean energy companies, it is surprising that DOE now
uses that same term, ``double-down,'' to describe the
Department's budget proposal. In this context, I think I can at
least understand the Administration's use of a gambling
metaphor to describe its plans for risking taxpayer dollars.
Last year, the centerpiece of the President's energy policy
proposal to Congress was enactment of a Clean Energy Standard
to mandate the purchase of certain types of ``clean''
electricity. At the time the President announced it, the cost
of his proposal was not clear, so I asked DOE's Energy
Information Administration to calculate projected costs under
various scenarios. The best estimate scenario found that
nationwide electricity prices would increase almost 30 percent
by 2035, and gross domestic product would be reduced by
approximately $100 billion annually. A comparable analysis
requested by the Senate yielded similar results.
In light of the data from DOE, the President continues to
push for a mandate that Americans purchase more expensive
electricity, while other countries seek to make energy cheaper
for their citizens. This is especially disappointing and should
again be soundly rejected by Congress, as was the previous
proposal to increase the cost of energy through a cap-and-trade
scheme. Meanwhile, gasoline prices approach record highs,
placing additional energy costs on consumers, causing pain not
only at the pump but also in every other sector of the American
economy that depends upon affordable fuel to deliver goods and
services.
In response, the President ironically calls for an ``all-
of-the-above'' energy strategy but continues to propose
policies that in reality show his lack of concern with gasoline
prices. His Administration continues to actively take steps
that place upward pressure on oil prices. He delayed offshore
drilling permits and blocked production of the Outer
Continental Shelf and the Alaska National Wildlife Refuge. He
thwarted construction of the Keystone Pipeline. He proposed
through EPA and other agencies costly new regulations. And he
proposed eliminating or cutting R&D programs aimed at advancing
domestic production and supply of oil and natural gas
resources.
Had the President moved forward with the ``all-of-the-
above'' energy policies, he would understand that producing
America's natural resources makes a difference--just as
American ingenuity makes a difference. It may take the American
public to convince the President to approve the pipeline and
expand domestic production. I hope today's hearing provides an
opportunity to address these topics further.
I now recognize Ranking Member Ms. Johnson for her
statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hall follows:]

Prepared Statement of Chairman Ralph M. Hall

I want to welcome everyone here today for this hearing on the
President's Fiscal Year 2013 budget request for the Department of
Energy, and in particular I want to extend a warm welcome to Secretary
Chu for appearing before the Committee yet again this year. We may
occasionally have strong disagreements, but we thank you for your
service and your willingness to appear before this Committee.
This is the President's fourth budget submission to Congress, so
its general priorities--and my concerns with them--should come as no
surprise. As in years past, the budget calls for massive increases in
green energy programs while flat-lining or cutting programs devoted to
basic research and the advancement of the domestic production of
reliable and affordable sources of energy, such as oil, natural gas,
coal, and nuclear. The lack of balance in this approach is
disappointing, and I hope and expect Congress will reject it.
Last year I used a gambling term to highlight my concern with the
President's budget, specifically the extent to which President Obama
``doubled-down'' on his energy and climate agenda in light of the
continued struggling economy, trillion-dollar deficits, rising gas
prices, and fuel supply concerns driven by Middle East turmoil. All of
those issues remain today, and some--such as the price of gas--have
been further exacerbated. After a year in which American taxpayers saw
their money wasted in high-profile failures of government-backed, so-
called clean energy companies, it is surprising that DOE now uses that
same term, ``double-down,'' to describe the Department's budget
proposal. In this context, I think I can at least understand the
Administration's use of a gambling metaphor to describe its plans for
risking taxpayer dollars.
Last year, the centerpiece of the President's energy policy
proposal to Congress was enactment of a Clean Energy Standard to
mandate the purchase of certain types of ``clean'' electricity. At the
time the President announced it, the cost of his proposal was not
clear, so I asked DOE's Energy Information Administration to calculate
projected costs under various scenarios. The best estimate scenario
found that nationwide electricity prices would increase almost 30% by
2035, and gross domestic product would be reduced by approximately $100
billion annually. A comparable analysis requested by the Senate yielded
similar results.
In light of this data from DOE, the President continues to push for
a mandate that Americans purchase more expensive electricity, while
other countries seek to make energy cheaper for their citizens. This is
especially disappointing and should again be soundly rejected by
Congress, as was his previous proposal to increase the cost of energy
through a cap-and-trade scheme.
Meanwhile, gasoline prices approach record highs, placing
additional energy costs on consumers, causing pain not only at the pump
but also in every other sector of the American economy that depends
upon affordable fuel to deliver goods and services. In response, the
President ironically calls for an ``all-of-the-above'' energy strategy
but continues to propose policies that in reality show his lack of
concern with gasoline prices. His Administration continues to actively
take steps that place upward pressure on prices. He delayed offshore
drilling permits and blocked production in the Outer Continental Shelf
and the Alaska National Wildlife Refuge. He thwarted construction of
the Keystone Pipeline. He proposed through EPA and other agencies
costly new regulations. And he proposed eliminating or cutting R&D
programs aimed at advancing domestic production and supply of oil and
natural gas resources.
Had the President moved forward with ``all-of-the-above'' energy
policies, he would understand that producing America's God-given
natural resources makes a difference--just as American ingenuity makes
a difference. It may take the American public to convince the President
to approve the pipeline and expand domestic production. I hope today's
hearing provides an opportunity to address these topics further.
I now recognize Ranking Member Johnson for her opening statement.

Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you for calling this hearing. And let me thank Secretary Chu
for being willing to come. I am always delighted to be in the
presence of a Nobel Laureate because I know I can learn a lot.
I am just trying to figure out how to start this. I will be
the first to say that on balance I am not particularly happy
with this budget request. I think that too many worthwhile
programs will be cut while others will not be increased enough.
Still, I applaud the Administration for making tough decisions
and prioritizing in a time of fiscal austerity. It is
undoubtedly a painful but useful exercise. And in better times,
these programs would receive the funding they need.
However, I cannot help but lament the fact that we find
ourselves in this position to begin with and I feel that
Congress has to accept its share of the blame. We in Congress
could acknowledge the immense challenges in energy that lie
before us and have the foresight to know that increased
investment across the energy technology spectrum, from basic to
applied research and demonstration, will pay untold dividends
for future generations. We could recognize the role that truly
fundamental discovery-driven research and large user facilities
play in positioning the United States at the center of
mankind's quest to better understand our universe.
Instead, unfortunately, this Congress seems content to put
DOE in a corner and tell it to figure out how to do more with
less. We say we want to run government more like business.
Well, businesses need revenue or they don't grow, they don't
innovate, and they don't succeed. We could start to raise the
needed revenue by pulling back the unnecessary tax breaks and
subsidies enjoyed by the most profitable and wealthiest
companies and individuals in this country and we could use
those resources to invest in our scientific talent and
infrastructure and in development of new, cleaner, more
efficient, and cheaper energy technologies.
I am under no illusion that change will come overnight. We
are just beginning to chip away at the multigenerational energy
problem, the scale and complexity of which few of us can grasp.
But we have to start now if we want to make a positive impact
for future generations. We can begin by giving up on the notion
that the energy market has ever been or ever will be a free
market. In a perfect world, consumers would be empowered with
the knowledge and resources to make informed choices about
their energy use, and investors would be willing to take bigger
risks on companies that are driven to create the cleanest and
most efficient technologies. But we are just not there yet.
Until we see more competition from emerging sectors, the energy
markets will not be free.
Some of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle decry
DOE's investment in clean energy technologies as somehow
skewing the market by picking winners and losers and crowding
out private investment. Yet the very energy industries my
colleagues hold out as exemplars of the free market--oil, gas,
nuclear, and coal--are the ones that have benefitted most from
the government largesse, and curiously, the ones they hold out
as most deserving of continued taxpayer-funded research.
From high efficiency gas turbines to coal plants to nuclear
reactors developed at federal labs with federal dollars to the
directional drilling and hydraulic fracturing practices that
have led to the shale gas boom of today, we have seen how
government research can pay off, but it required decades of
federal investment, the overwhelming majority of which was
focused on fossil and nuclear energy. These technologies have
kept energy costs low to consumers and our industrial base, and
allowed the economy to grow to what it is today. But it is time
to level the playing field and introduce real competition to
the markets. And that is where the priorities set by this
budget request come into play. We have to find the greatest
value for the taxpayer's dollar, and today, it is in the
emerging energy technology sectors that can most benefit from
government support. We have seen how federal dollars can be the
seed capital for private sector innovation, and how even small
government investments can be leveraged to provide scientific
breakthroughs and technological advances that private industry
by itself cannot--or at least will not--accomplish.
We also know well that without federal sponsorship of
fundamental research in physical sciences, America will fall
behind in these fields. These are investments in people and
ideas that have paid off in the past, and I hope that we can
demonstrate the foresight to know that they will continue to
pay off in the future.
Thank you and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Johnson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson

Thank you, Chairman Hall, for calling this hearing today to review
the Administration's fiscal year 2013 budget request for the Department
of Energy's civilian research programs. And, thank you, Secretary Chu,
for joining us today to provide your perspective on how these proposals
were developed, and insight into the President's vision for both the
Department and the role of energy in our economy.
I will be the first to say that, on balance, I am not particularly
happy with this budget request. I think that too many worthwhile
programs would be cut, while others will not be increased enough.
Still, I applaud the Administration for making tough decisions and
prioritizing in a time of fiscal austerity. It is undoubtedly a painful
but useful exercise, and in better times these programs would receive
the funding they need. However, I cannot help but lament the fact that
we find ourselves in this position to begin with, and I feel that
Congress has to accept its share of the blame.
We in Congress could acknowledge the immense challenges in energy
that lie before us, and have the foresight to know that increased
investment across the energy technology spectrum--from basic to applied
research and demonstration--will pay untold dividends for future
generations. We could recognize the role that truly fundamental
discovery-driven research and large user facilities play in positioning
the U.S. at the center of mankind's quest to better understand our
universe.
Instead, unfortunately, this Congress seems content to put DOE in a
corner and tell it to figure out how to do more with less. We say we
want to run government more like business. Well, businesses need
revenue or they don't grow, they don't innovate, and they don't
succeed. We could start to raise the needed revenue by pulling back the
unnecessary tax breaks and subsidies enjoyed by the most profitable and
wealthiest companies and individuals in this country. And we can use
those resources to invest in our scientific talent and infrastructure,
and in development of new, cleaner, more efficient and cheaper energy
technologies.
I am under no illusion that change will come overnight. We are just
beginning to chip away at a multi-generational energy problem, the
scale and complexity of which few of us can grasp. But we have to start
now if we want to make a positive impact for future generations.
We can begin by giving up on the notion that the energy market has
ever been, or will ever be, a free market. In a perfect world,
consumers would be empowered with the knowledge and resources to make
informed choices about their energy use, and investors would be willing
to take bigger risks on companies that are driven to create the
cleanest and most efficient technologies. But we are just not there
yet. Until we see more competition from emerging sectors, the energy
markets will not be free.
Some of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle decry DOE's
investment in clean energy technologies as somehow skewing the market
by picking winners and losers and crowding out private investment. Yet,
the very energy industries my colleagues hold out as exemplars of the
free market--oil, gas, nuclear and coal--are the ones that have
benefitted most from government largesse and, curiously, the ones they
hold out as most deserving of continued taxpayer-funded research.
From high-efficiency gas turbines for coal plants, to nuclear
reactors developed at federal labs with federal dollars, to the
directional drilling and hydraulic fracturing practices that have led
to the shale gas boom of today, we have seen how government research
can pay off. But it required decades of federal investment, the
overwhelming majority of which was focused on fossil and nuclear
energy.
These technologies have kept energy costs low for consumers and our
industrial base, and allowed the economy to grow to what it is today.
But, it is time to level the playing field and introduce real
competition to the markets, and that is where the priorities set by
this budget request come in to play. We have to find the greatest value
for the taxpayer dollar, and today it is in the emerging energy
technology sectors that can most benefit from government support.
We have seen how federal dollars can be the seed capital for
private sector innovation, and how even small government investments
can be leveraged to provide scientific breakthroughs and technological
advances that private industry by itself cannot accomplish. We also
know well that without federal sponsorship of fundamental research in
the physical sciences, America will fall behind in these fields. These
are investments in people and ideas that have paid off in the past, and
I hope that we can demonstrate the foresight to know that they will
continue to pay off in the future.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Chairman Hall. I thank you, Ms. Johnson.
And if there are Members who wish to submit additional
opening statements, your statements can be added to the record
at this point or whenever you want to.
At this time, I would like to introduce our witness, Dr.
Steven Chu, who serves as the Secretary of Energy. Dr. Chu is
currently serving as the 12th Secretary of Energy. He is a
distinguished scientist and has devoted his scientific career
to the search for new solutions to our energy challenges.
Prior to his service as Secretary, Dr. Chu was a Director
of DOE's Lawrence Berkeley National Lab and was a Professor of
Physics in molecular and cell biology at the University of
California Berkeley. He is a co-winner of the 1997 Nobel Prize
for physics. That is quite an honor.
As our witness should know, testimony is limited to five
minutes, after which the Members of the Committee will have
five minutes each to ask questions. We have for you flexibility
as you need because it is an honor to have you here. We know
your schedule and we thank you for your time. So at this time
we will recognize you for as much time as you require. And
thank you for being here.

STATEMENT OF MR. STEVEN CHU,

SECRETARY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Secretary Chu. Thank you, Chairman Hall, for those kind
remarks. And also Ranking Member Johnson, Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
Department of Energy's fiscal year 2013 budget request.
To promote economic growth and strengthen security,
President Obama has called for an ``all-of-the-above'' strategy
that develops every source of American energy. The President
wants to fuel our economy with domestic sources of energy while
increasing our ability to compete in the clean energy race.
The Department's Fiscal Year 2013 budget request of $27.2
billion is guided by the President's vision, our 2011 Strategic
Plan, and our inaugural Quadrennial Technology Review. It
supports leadership in clean energy technologies and invests in
science and innovation to promote economic prosperity. Decades
ago, the Energy Department support helped develop the
technologies that have allowed us to tap into America's
abundant shale gas resources. Today, our investments can help
advance technologies that will unlock the promise of renewable
energy and energy efficiency.
The budget request invests approximately $4 billion in our
energy programs. It advances progress in areas from solar to
offshore wind to carbon capture and utilization and storage, to
smart grid technologies. It will also help reduce America's
dependence on foreign oil, which every day places a crushing
burden on families and on our economy. As the President and I
have said, there is no silver bullet and there are no easy
answers, but we can and must pursue a serious, long-term, all-
of-the-above approach that diversifies our energy mix, protects
consumers from the high price of gas, harnesses American
resources, and creates jobs here at home. That is exactly what
this budget does.
The budget request also invests $770 million in a nuclear
energy program to help develop the next generation of nuclear
power technologies, including small modular reactors. It
includes funding for continued nuclear waste R&D, which aligns
with the recommendation of the Blue Ribbon Commission on
America's Nuclear Future.
As we move to a sustainable energy future, America's fossil
energy resources will continue to play an important role in our
energy mix. The budget request includes $12 million as part of
a larger R&D initiative by the Departments of Energy, Interior,
and EPA to understand and minimize the potential environmental
health and safety impacts of natural gas development through
hydraulic fracturing. The budget also promotes energy
efficiency to help Americans save money by saving energy, and
it sponsors R&D on industrial materials and processes to help
U.S. manufacturers cut costs.
To maximize our energy technology efforts in areas such as
batteries, biofuels, and electric grid technologies, we are
coordinating research and development across our basic and
applied research programs and ARPA-E. Competing in the new
energy economy requires our country to harness all of our
resources, including American ingenuity.
To help keep the United States at the forefront of science
and technology, the budget request includes $5 billion for the
Office of Science to support basic research that could lead to
new discoveries and help solve energy challenges. These funds
support progress in materials science, basic energy science,
advanced computing, and more. They also provide America's
researchers and industries with state-of-the-art tools.
The budget request continues to support Energy Frontier
Research Centers, which aim to solve specific scientific
problems to unlock new clean energy development. It also
supports the five existing Energy Innovation Hubs and proposes
a new Hub in electricity systems. Through the Hubs, we are
bringing together our Nation's top scientists and engineers to
achieve game-changing energy goals.
Additionally, the budget request includes $350 million for
ARPA-E to support research projects that could fundamentally
transform the way we use and produce energy. ARPA-E invests in
high-risk, high-reward research projects that, if successful,
could create the foundation for entirely new industries. Eleven
projects that received a total of $40 million from ARPA-E over
the last two years have done such promising work that they now
have attracted more than $200 million in combined private
sector funding. Taken together, our research initiatives will
help rev up America's great innovation machine to accelerate
energy breakthroughs. In addition to strengthening our economy,
the budget request also strengthens our security by providing
$11.5 billion for the National Nuclear Security Administration.
The budget request makes strategic investments to promote
our prosperity and our security. At the same time, we recognize
the country's fiscal challenges and are cutting back where we
can. We are committed to performing our work efficiently and
effectively. We are also breaking down barriers to make it
easier for businesses to move technologies from our national
labs to the marketplace, which can help the United States seize
technological leadership.
Countries around the world recognize the energy opportunity
and are moving aggressively to lead. This is a race we can win,
but we must act with fierce urgency.
Thank you, and now I am pleased to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Chu follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. Steven Chu,
Secretary, U.S. Department of Energy

Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss the President's Fiscal Year 2013 Budget request for the
Department of Energy.
To promote economic growth and strengthen national security,
President Obama has called for ``an all-out, all-in, all-of-the-above
strategy that develops every source of American energy--a strategy that
is cleaner and cheaper and full of new jobs.'' The President wants to
fuel our economy with domestic energy resources while increasing our
ability to compete in the global clean energy race.
Although the United States has reclaimed the title of world leader
in clean energy investments, we are at risk of falling behind again
unless we make a sustained federal commitment to supporting our
domestic clean energy economy. To compete globally, America has to do
more than invent technologies; we also have to produce and sell them.
Our country faces a stark choice: we can create jobs making and
exporting the energy technologies of tomorrow or we can cede leadership
to other countries that are investing in these industries. As President
Obama reiterated in his State of the Union address, passing a Clean
Energy Standard is a vital step that Congress can take to broaden our
clean energy market and promote U.S. leadership.
Making the most of America's energy resources is a pillar of the
President's economic blueprint to build an economy that lasts. The
Energy Department also supports other key elements of the President's
agenda including leading in innovation; reducing our dependence on oil;
cutting costs for families, businesses, and manufacturers through
energy efficiency; and reducing nuclear dangers worldwide.
Guided by the President's vision, the Department's 2011 Strategic
Plan and our inaugural Quadrennial Technology Review, our FY 13 budget
request of $27.2 billion invests in the following priorities:

Accelerating the transformation of America's energy
system, and securing U.S. leadership in clean energy technologies;

Investing in science and innovation to promote our
Nation's economic prosperity; and

Keeping Americans safe by enhancing nuclear security
through defense, nonproliferation, and environmental cleanup.

These priorities will be enabled through a continuing commitment to
fiscal responsibility and management excellence.

Leading in the Energy Technologies of the 21st Century

Last year, a record $260 billion was invested globally in clean
energy, and trillions of dollars will be invested in the coming
decades. To seize this market and job creation opportunity, the
President's budget request invests in programs that advance research,
development, manufacturing and deployment of the energy technologies of
the future.
Decades ago, support from the Energy Department helped to develop
the technologies that have allowed us to tap into America's abundant
shale gas resources. Today, our investments can help us advance
technologies that will unlock the promise of renewable energy and
energy efficiency.
The budget request invests approximately $4 billion in our energy
programs. It supports the Department's SunShot initiative to make solar
energy cost-competitive with any other form of electrical energy,
without subsidy, by the end of the decade. It advances technological
progress in areas ranging from offshore wind to carbon capture,
utilization and storage to smart grid and energy storage. And it helps
reduce our dependence on oil by developing the next generation of
biofuels and accelerating research in advanced batteries and fuel-
efficient vehicle technologies.
Leadership in nuclear energy technologies is also essential to our
ability to compete globally. The budget request invests $770 million in
the nuclear energy program to help develop the next generation of
nuclear power technologies, including small modular reactors. It also
includes funding for continued R&D on the storage, transportation and
disposal of nuclear waste, which also aligns with the recommendations
of the Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future.
As we move to a sustainable energy future, America's fossil energy
resources will continue to play an important role in our energy mix.
President Obama is committed to developing our oil and gas resources in
a safe and sustainable manner. Last year, our oil import dependence was
at its lowest level in 16 years, oil production reached its highest
level in eight years. and natural gas production set a new record.
Building on this progress, the Energy Department's budget request
includes $12 million as part of a $45 million priority research and
development initiative by the Departments of Energy, the Interior, and
the Environmental Protection Agency to understand and minimize the
potential environmental, health, and safety impacts of natural gas
development through hydraulic fracturing (fracking).
The budget request also promotes energy efficiency to create jobs
and to help Americans save money by saving energy. It supports home
weatherization and calls for passage of the HOME STAR program to
provide incentives to homeowners to make energy efficiency upgrades. It
also invests in research and development to improve building efficiency
and supports the President's ``Better Buildings'' Initiative to
catalyze private sector investment in commercial building efficiency.
Finally, the budget request sponsors R&D on industrial materials and
processes to help U.S. manufacturers cut costs and improve their global
competitiveness.
To maximize our energy technology efforts, the Department is
breaking down silos and coordinating research and development across
our program offices. Modeled after our SunShot initiative, we're
bringing together our basic and applied research programs and ARPA-E to
harmonize their work in areas including batteries, biofuels and
electric grid technologies.
And to encourage manufacturing and deployment of clean energy
technologies, the President has called for renewing and extending
proven tax incentives including the Production Tax Credit, the 1603
cash payment in lieu of tax credit program and the Advanced Energy
Manufacturing Tax Credit, known as 48C.
As industry, Congress, and the American people make critical energy
decisions and require greater understanding of domestic and
international energy markets, it's important that we adequately fund
the Energy Information Administration, the nation's premier source of
independent statistical information about energy production and use.
That is why the budget request includes $116 million for EIA.

Unleashing U.S. Innovation to Create Jobs and Lead in the Global
Economy

Competing in the new energy economy will require our country to
harness all of our resources, including as the President said, the
``one critical, renewable resource that the rest of the world can't
match: American ingenuity.'' A key part of our country's success has
been our leadership in science and technology, but we can't take that
leadership for granted. According to the National Science Foundation's
2010 Science and Engineering Indicators report, from 1996 to 2007 the
average annual growth of R&D expenditures in the United States was
about five to six percent, compared to more than 20 percent in China.
To help keep the United States at the forefront of science and
technology, the budget request invests in cutting-edge research that
could spur new jobs and industries. This includes $5 billion for the
Office of Science to support basic research that could lead to new
discoveries and help solve our energy challenges. These funds support
progress in materials science, basic energy science, advanced computing
and more. They also provide America's researchers and industries with
state-of-the-art tools to help take their work to the next level.
The budget request continues to support Energy Frontier Research
Centers. The Energy Frontier Research Centers are working to solve
specific scientific problems to unlock new clean energy development. So
far, the EFRCs have published more than 1,000 peer-reviewed papers and
filed more than 90 patent applications or patent/invention disclosures.
Researchers are reporting multiple breakthroughs in areas ranging from
advanced battery technology and solar energy to solid-state lighting
and nuclear power.
The budget request also supports the five existing Energy
Innovation Hubs and proposes a new Hub in electricity systems. Through
the Hubs, we are bringing together our Nation's top scientists and
engineers to achieve game-changing energy goals. The Hubs continue to
make progress. For example, the Modeling and Simulation for Nuclear
Reactors Hub has released the first versions of its software that, upon
completion, will simulate a virtual model of an operating physical
reactor. The Fuels from Sunlight Hub has filed multiple invention
disclosures and published scientific papers. And the Energy Efficient
Building Systems Hub is developing advanced building modeling tools and
has built one of the country's first 3-D building design labs.
Additionally, the budget request includes $350 million for the
Advanced Research Projects Agency for Energy, known as ARPA-E, to
support research projects that could fundamentally transform the ways
we use and produce energy. ARPA-E has invested in roughly 180 high-
risk, high-reward research projects that, if successful, could create
the foundation for entirely new industries. These companies and
research teams are working toward a prototype of a battery that has
double the energy density and one-third the cost of batteries in 2010,
bacteria that use carbon dioxide and electricity to make fuel for cars,
grid scale electricity storage and other potentially game-changing
breakthroughs. Eleven projects that received $40 million from ARPA-E
over the last two years have done such promising work that they have
now received more than $200 million in combined private sector funding.
Taken together, our research initiatives will help rev up America's
great innovation machine to accelerate energy breakthroughs.

Nuclear Safety and Security

In addition to strengthening our economy, the budget request also
strengthens our security by providing $11.5 billion for the
Department's National Nuclear Security Administration. NNSA plays a key
role in achieving President Obama's nuclear security objectives.
As the United States begins the nuclear arms reduction required by
the New START treaty, the science, technology, and engineering
capabilities within the nuclear security enterprise will become even
more important to sustaining the U.S. nuclear deterrent. The budget
request includes $7.6 billion for Weapons Activities, a five percent
increase over the FY 2012 enacted levels. This increase provides a
strong basis for transitioning to a smaller yet still safe, secure, and
effective nuclear stockpile. It also strengthens the science,
technology, and engineering base of our enterprise. The budget request
also includes $1.1 billion for the Naval Reactors program to ensure the
safe and reliable operation of reactors in nuclear-powered submarines
and aircraft carriers and to fulfill the Navy's requirements for new
nuclear propulsion plants that meet current and future national defense
requirements.
Additionally, the budget request supports NNSA's critical work to
prevent nuclear terrorism--one of the most immediate and extreme
threats to global security and of one President Obama's top priorities.
It includes $2.5 billion to implement key nuclear security,
nonproliferation, and arms control activities. It supports efforts to
detect, secure, and dispose of dangerous nuclear and radiological
material around the world. And it will help the Department to fulfill
its role in accomplishing the President's goal of securing all
vulnerable nuclear materials worldwide in four years.
Finally, the budget request includes $5.7 billion for the Office of
Environmental Management to continue progress cleaning up the Nation's
Cold War nuclear sites.

Fiscal Responsibility and Management Excellence

The Department of Energy's FY 13 budget request makes strategic
investments to promote our country's future prosperity and security. At
the same time, we recognize the country's fiscal challenges and our
responsibility to invest in much-needed programs while cutting back
where we can. That is why the President's budget request eliminates $4
billion in inefficient and unnecessary fossil fuel subsidies.
Given the urgency of the challenges we face, the Department is
committed to performing our work efficiently and effectively. We are
streamlining our organization to improve performance and save taxpayer
money. For example, the Department achieved approximately $330 million
in strategic procurement savings in FY 11. We are taking several other
steps such as reducing the size of our vehicle fleet, cutting back
travel costs, and consolidating Web sites.
We are also breaking down barriers to make it easier for businesses
to move technologies from our national labs to the marketplace, which
can help the United States seize technological leadership and create
jobs. For example, we've started a program which makes it easier,
quicker, and less costly for start-up companies to sign option
agreements to license national lab technologies. And to make it easier
to work with the labs, we've reduced the advanced payment requirement
and streamlined the Cooperative Research and Development Agreement
contract and approval process.
Throughout American history, the Federal Government has played a
critical role in supporting industries that are important to our
prosperity and security, from aviation and agriculture to
biotechnologies and computer technologies. We should continue to do so
today to lead in the new clean energy economy. Countries in Europe,
Asia, and throughout the Western Hemisphere recognize the energy
opportunity and are moving aggressively to lead. This is a race we can
win, but we must act with fierce urgency.
Thank you, and now I am pleased to answer your questions.

Chairman Hall. Sir, I thank you for your testimony.
And I remind members that Committee rules limit questioning
to five minutes. We try to stay as close to that as we can.
The Chair at this point will open the round of questions.
And I recognize myself for five minutes.
Mr. Secretary, two years ago the Obama Administration
unilaterally shut down the Yucca Mountain project and threw
U.S. nuclear waste management policy into disarray. President
Obama created a ``Blue Ribbon Commission'' at the same time his
Administration dismantled the existing Nuclear Waste Management
program. I ask a question of you and I want you to answer yes
or no because I know how very great you are strengthening a yes
or weakening a no or vice versa. You are capable--I do ask--and
if you can't give me a yes or no answer, tell me you don't want
to.
Did you tell the Blue Ribbon Commission they could not
consider Yucca Mountain in their report?
Secretary Chu. That was not in the charge of the Blue
Ribbon Commission.
Chairman Hall. Well, now, you are not answering me yes or
no. Can you do that if you can? I am going to assume that you
did.
To date, taxpayers have spent--is that okay?
Secretary Chu. That was not----
Chairman Hall. I don't want to suppress you. If you can
tell me no as quick as you can say yes, why, I would like to
hear it.
Secretary Chu. It was not in the charge of the Blue Ribbon
Commission.
Chairman Hall. Okay. All right. To date, taxpayers have
spent over $15 billion to study and prepare Yucca Mountain to
serve as a repository and you know that. You know all about it.
Additionally, since the creation of the Blue Ribbon Commission,
the taxpayers' liability for not accepting ownership of
radioactive waste by 2020 increased 21 percent to almost $21
billion. With the massive investment and decades of study
already completed on Yucca Mountain, why refuse to allow the
Blue Ribbon Commission to even entertain the idea or even to
consider that Yucca Mountain could be a part of America's
nuclear waste policy management?
Secretary Chu. The Blue Ribbon Commission was not designed
as a siting commission. It was designed to look broadly at the
back end of the fuel cycle. I think it was an extraordinary
committee with able leadership, General Scowcroft and
Representative Hamilton, and it came up with a number of
recommendations that we hope Congress will consider very
seriously. We in the Department of Energy have established a
taskforce to look at these recommendations.
Chairman Hall. Well, regardless of whether Yucca Mountain
has a future--and apparently it doesn't--do you think there is
a value in completing the scientific and technical review of
the science suitability and making the results public to where
people themselves can make their own decision on it whether you
were right or wrong?
Secretary Chu. Right now, the decision is before the courts
and we are awaiting the decision. Of course, in the meantime we
are looking at the recommendations of the Blue Ribbon
Commission because I think everybody agrees that the backend of
the fuel cycle needs the attention of the country and we need
solutions.
Chairman Hall. Last year, when you testified in this
Committee, I asked you what impact the President's Clean Energy
Standards would have on energy cost. And that is for American
energy consumers who have to make that payment. You committed
to having the Energy Information Administration examine the
economic impact of the Clean Energy Standard, which they did at
my request. And I thank you for that.
And I ask unanimous consent to insert this into the hearing
record. And without objection, it is so ordered.
[The information may be found in Appendix 2.]
Chairman Hall. Are you aware that that exercise and the
findings of EIA--are--you are aware of that, aren't you?
Secretary Chu. I am aware of many of the findings of EIA. I
can't say that I remember exactly everything that they said.
Chairman Hall. Well, this is yours or your people----
Secretary Chu. Right.
Chairman Hall [continuing]. And you produced this.
Secretary Chu. That is correct.
Chairman Hall. Let me provide this. Then let me help you.
Let me provide just a brief summary of the results. Under the
Clean Energy Standards similar to what President Obama proposed
and as you outlined to me last year, the report found these
things: household electricity will increase by $115 per person
per year in 2025 and by $211 per person in 2035. Nationwide
expenditures on electricity will increase by $41 billion in
2025 and by $77 billion in 2035. Nationwide manufacturing
employment would decline by a million jobs in 2025. And in his
State of Union Address, the President reiterated his calls for
Congress to mandate this Clean Energy Standard that we have
here.
Why is the President pursuing a policy to increase
electricity cost on Americans? Can you give me an answer for
that? Or you may not agree that he is, but I think the facts
cry out that he is costing us and not drilling whether you like
the word of how fossil fuels cause some problems, and of course
they cause some problems. I am part of that problem because I
was here when we wrote the Clean Air Act and we put the EPA in
there to have a balancing figure, and that gave the EPA the
strength that they are using now to push energy people around.
And I resent that and I think everybody on this Committee
resents it.
I just--do you agree that any clean energy mandate, no
matter how flexible it is, will increase the cost of
electricity?
Secretary Chu. First, let me respond to what you said about
the President. The President by no means wants to increase the
energy bills in America. He is very committed to making
available both affordable and clean energy. What the EIA
studies do typically is they look at existing technologies.
They cannot--and they are acting responsibly and they do this
for that reason. They cannot presume that there will be
technological advances in the future so they say this is what
we see today based on today's technologies.
But having said that--may I----
Chairman Hall. Sure. I am over my time but go ahead.
Secretary Chu. I will try to be very brief. Having said
that, it is the Department of Energy's mission to bring down
these costs and it is our goal. And we feel that it is only a
matter of when, not if, clean energy will be as competitive as
any form of energy.
Chairman Hall. That may be so. I can't argue the future
with you, but I know about the past and I know how energy
people feel and I know that energy States are being punished
and the people are losing.
My time is up. Recognize Ms. Johnson.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would
like to make this statement prior to my question and would like
to note that while I do not object to Chairman Hall submitting
for the record his analysis of the Clean Energy Standard, I do
want to make it clear that it is one of several such analyses
of the CES that should be considered.
I am concerned that this analysis was designed from the
start to show a worst-case scenario for the impacts of Clean
Energy Standard on the economy, leaving out a number of
critical factors that would have painted a more comprehensive
and accurate picture of CES as it would actually be
implemented. I urge my colleagues and the public to review some
of the more rigorous and comprehensive analyses such as those
directed by outside stakeholders and Senate Energy Committee
Chairman Bingaman before coming to a conclusion about the role
new energy technologies will play in the future.
I might have some questions of the Secretary on this topic
and make additional comments and the statement for the record,
but thank you. I will now begin my questions.
The Department of Energy's Quadrennial Technology Review
sought to set priorities within the Department's portfolio. It
finds that energy technologies addressing the transportation
sector have been historically underfunded as compared to
stationary energy. Do you believe there should be a different
balance between transport and stationary energy within the DOE
portfolio?
Secretary Chu. Yes, very much so. In fact that was one of
the conclusions of our Quadrennial Technology Review. Given the
high price of gasoline, we said what can we do in the
Department of Energy to advance technologies to reduce the cost
of transportation for every American family? And so we were
aligned with the idea that, first, we wanted alternatives.
Diversification means that you are no longer solely dependent
on oil for transportation. We were going to invest--we were
going to be investing in technologies that can improve the gas
mileage, again, but keeping costs the same or even reducing
costs but increasing the gas mileage of automobiles that would
also make our cars competitive internationally. We were going
to be doing biofuels investments and battery investments.
I am very happy to say that a company the Department of
Energy invested in two days ago made an announcement that they
now have a battery that has doubled the energy capacity with
the same manufacturing costs. It is going to be--it is
validated by a third party and so this is going to be great
news because that means we can reduce the cost of plug-in
hybrids, electric vehicles, and can imagine a day in the near
future where you might see a $20,000 car all electric, the
operating cost--it would save American families over $1,000 a
year to have such a car.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you. How does the fiscal year 2013
budget address these findings that energy for the transport
sector has been underfunded compared to electricity?
Secretary Chu. Pardon? Could you repeat that again?
Ms. Johnson. The budget--how does it address----
Secretary Chu. Oh, fine. Fine, thanks.
Ms. Johnson. Yes.
Secretary Chu. It appears in several ways--first, in energy
efficiency and renewable energy technologies. We have a lot of
effort in batteries there. Our ARPA-E program is investing in
very, very innovative, short-term, two-year funding for
batteries. Office of Science is investing in the more
fundamental aspects of science, the kind of science that when
done at Argonne National Laboratories 10 years ago has worked
its way into today's current batteries, but we want to fund
science that five years and 10 years from today will further
reduce the cost of batteries. We also fund biofuels so that
next-generation biofuels can be competitive without subsidy
with oil at, let us say, $80 a barrel. This would be very
exciting.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Hall. I thank you, Ms. Johnson, and I will have an
answer for you when we take our second group as to your
surprise at my position.
Recognize Mr. Sensenbrenner for five minutes.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, thank you for coming here.
When President Bush left office, the average price of gas
was $1.85. Now, it is at $3.65 and going up, a doubling of gas
prices under the Obama Administration's watch. The President
has said that he is going to look for every single area we can
make an impact and help consumers in the month ahead. You said
yesterday in another Congressional hearing in answer to a
question by Congressman Nunnelee whether your overall goal was
to lower the price of gasoline. And you said no. Now, I
somewhat want to expand on the Chairman's statement that energy
States are being punished. I think all American consumers are
being punished, and as the price of gas goes up, money that can
be invested in our already fragile economy is taken out of
consumers' pockets. Did you want to retract what you said
yesterday and help everybody working on at least slowing this
spike in the price of gas and then lowering it?
Secretary Chu. We very much want to not only slow the price
but reverse the price increase in gasoline. If one reads my
entire statement, it was very consistent with that. As I said
in my opening remarks, we definitely feel the pain that every
American and every business feels when the price of gasoline
goes up. We have been focused in my time as Secretary of Energy
and the President's time since taking office on trying to first
do what we can with the tools we have available to decrease the
prices. And the tools we have available in the Department of
Energy are that we want to diversify our energy supplies
because----
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well----
Secretary Chu [continuing]. We want to increase the
production of oil----
Mr. Sensenbrenner [continuing]. Okay, but----
Secretary Chu [continuing]. And gas but also diversity----
--
Mr. Sensenbrenner [continuing]. You know, meanwhile the
price of gas has gone up by 100 percent on your watch. And this
is unacceptable. And I remember four years ago, the President,
some of his supporters were complaining about the price of gas
going up in the last year of the Bush Administration. Before
you got your present job, you made a statement that you wanted
to see the price of gas reach the prices that exist in Europe,
and those are somewhere between $7 and $9 a gallon depending
upon what country you are in. Can you retract that statement
now, or is that still your goal and the goal of the
Administration?
Secretary Chu. That is not my goal. But let me----
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Then will you retract the statement?
Secretary Chu. Everything I have done as Secretary of
Energy is to first try to lower the prices by--we have invested
in ways to increase production. We have invested in other ways
in batteries and biofuels and energy efficiency to help the
American public.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well----
Secretary Chu. But----
Mr. Sensenbrenner [continuing]. You know, there have been
bans on offshore drilling, we have the President vetoing the
Keystone XL pipeline, gas is subject to the law of supply and
demand, and as economies get better, they use more energy. And
there have been obstructions in increasing the supply that can
be refined and sold to American consumers.
Secretary Chu. First, let me also point out that when the
President took office, the economy was in freefall. When the
world goes into a terrible recession, that has a downward
effect on gasoline prices. The price of oil--and the most clear
correlation is between gasoline prices is----
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, with all due respect, Mr.
Secretary, the economy is not that healthy, employment is down
in the United States in the last three years, unemployment is
still higher than it was in January of 2009. You know, I have
seen a trend that production will be increased on private land
but not on federal land. And when is this Administration going
to end the lockup increasing production on federal land? That
will increase the production as well. The President did say he
was going to put everything on the table and it seems to me
that there are still a lot of items under the table that can
increase production and maybe reduce the price of gas that this
Administration is turning its back on. When is that going to
change?
Secretary Chu. Let me first finish my answer from the
previous question. The economy was in freefall. In a severe
recession, the price of gasoline goes down. The economy is
coming back slowly. It is very--we are doing----
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, the economy is coming back slowly,
but the price of gas has gone up 100 percent in the last three
years, and that is going to retard the economy coming back
faster and more people getting jobs and more investment in
creating jobs in the private sector. You know, all this doesn't
add up. And, you know, I admire you for getting a Nobel Prize
in physics. I don't think you would do very well in getting one
in economics.
And my time is up and I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hall. You are doing such a good job I yield to you
another minute if you need it to let him answer some of these
things.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. I will be happy to let him answer.
Secretary Chu. As I said before, the economy is rising. The
President is very concerned; I am very concerned about the high
price of gas. We are very concerned as gasoline prices and oil
prices increase that that can have a dampening effect on the
economy. That is why we are so focused on this and that is why
the tools we have--that I have in the Department of Energy are
focused on what we can do both in the near-term future, but
also in the mid- and long-term future. The President has said
very clearly that there is no single silver bullet, and that is
why we applaud the rising production of gasoline and natural
gas. That is why we are working with industry to see how we can
get natural gas to be used for part of our transportation
needs, and all those other----
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, sir, you know, with all due
respect, there is a silver bullet and it is going right in the
wallet of the American consumer with the doubling of the price
of gas on this Administration's watch. That has got to stop and
I haven't seen you withdraw either your 2008 statement or the
answer that you gave to Congressman Nunnelee yesterday. Thank
you.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman's time has more than expired.
The Chair recognizes Ms. Fudge for five minutes.
Ms. Fudge. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you so much, Mr. Secretary, for being here today.
Mr. Secretary, in my home State of Ohio, manufacturing is a
major industry and we have many unemployed workers, as you
might imagine, whose skills are not being used. I see that you
have a $150 million increase for the Advanced Manufacturing
Office. Could you please tell me what kinds of technologies
will be developed with the extra money and how it will help
spur economic growth and employment in manufacturing States
such as Ohio?
Secretary Chu. Sure. One of the things--let me give you one
example in Advanced Manufacturing. We know that composite
materials--these are carbon composite materials in particular--
can play an incredible role in a lot of technologies, from
airplanes to automobiles to just lighter-weight stronger
materials. So we have a carbon composite facility that allows
industries--U.S. industries--to come in and try different
things in this facility, new manufacturing methods to lower the
cost.
Ms. Fudge. Where is the facility?
Secretary Chu. This is actually in Oak Ridge.
Ms. Fudge. Go ahead.
Secretary Chu. Okay. Oak Ridge National Laboratory. So that
is just one example of what we are trying to do in advanced
manufacturing, again going directly to the goal of the
Department of Energy and the goal of every action I have taken
since I have become the Secretary of Energy, which is to help
make more efficient automobiles, make them more efficient so
the American consumers can purchase these automobiles and have
less of a gasoline bill. And that is what we are doing as much
as we can, all the tools to lower the prices--not to lower the
prices but to help--we certainly want to lower the prices of
gasoline, but we also want to have people use less.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary, Ohio has experienced at least 11 earthquakes
in less than a year. The Ohio Seismic Network believes that
they are tied to wastewater injection wells. I understand that
the 11 earthquakes in Ohio are not necessarily related to the
hydraulic fracturing technology but to the disposal of all the
high volumes of hydraulic fracking wastewater going into
injection wells. It is my understanding that compared to
conventional oil and gas development, hydraulic fracturing will
require significantly larger quantities of water. Is that true?
And if so, how will all of this water be disposed of if not in
injection wells?
Secretary Chu. Well, we certainly are looking very
carefully at the role of any sort of liquid and fluid injection
into rocks and what their role might be in seismic events. We
certainly have a lot of expertise in that. We feel that one
does not want to triple--most of the seismic events are events
that are so small in magnitude that people cannot feel them,
but we certainly are very, very concerned and we are doing
research into the extent that wastewater injection or any fluid
injection into rocks could trip off a more significant event.
And so this is one of the things that we do in the Department
of Energy is to do research so that one could extract the gas
and the gas liquids from fracking, but we do it in an
environmentally safe way. And so we are committed on that path.
Ms. Fudge. So to go back to the question, are you saying
you are studying how to dispose of the waste, or what are you
saying?
Secretary Chu. Well, there are two questions. The question
is what is the role--as you noted in your opening statement--
what is the role of fluid injection in triggering seismic
events? And what can we do? So first, we need to establish what
the role is. There is a very thoughtful piece written by a
staffer, Professor Mark Zoback, on this, who was actually part
of our Secretary of Energy Advisory Board Subcommittee, on
trying to develop ways so we can extract natural gas with
fracking in an environmentally responsible way. And so I
think--I recommend you read that paper because it looks at what
are the issues and also what is actually happening vis-a-vis
water injection into the ground.
Ms. Fudge. Mr. Secretary, I will have to get with your
office on that.
But just in an effort to be considerate of the time of my
colleagues, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Chairman Hall. I thank the gentlelady.
Mr. Rohrabacher, California, for five minutes. We will have
a vote on the Floor in a little bit and we will comment on that
when you finish, Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes, thank you very much.
Secretary Chu, I saw that NASA in their budget request
included funding to restart the plutonium-238 production to--
and this is powering deep space projects. I also noticed there
is not a corresponding item in the DOE's budget request. Now,
is plutonium production going to be restarted at NASA, and what
is your expectation that NASA will cover all the costs of this
program?
Secretary Chu. I think we are working with NASA on that.
The plutonium, as you noted, is used as an energy source for
deep space missions. The probes are so far away solar power is
not viable. And so we are working, too, with NASA on how the
generation of that energy source----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, if we are going to have a long-term
space strategy, we need to make sure that this isn't lost in
the shuffle because that is an important factor in having a
successful deep space program.
Let me ask you about the reactor program. I am very
concerned that it seems that the spending that I have here--and
I am submitting this, Mr. Chairman, these charts for the record
at this point. Mr. Chairman, submitting this for the record.
Chairman Hall. Without objection.
[The information may be found in Appendix 2.]
Mr. Rohrabacher. And it seems to indicate that we are
spending money or you are proposing to spend money in a way
that when it comes to reactors, nuclear reactors, that instead
of going with the new reactors, the high-temperature reactors
like Toshiba's S4s or GE's Prism or General Atomic's EM2, that
instead what we are doing is focusing more resources and higher
percentage resources on older light-water reactor-type
technologies. Even though they are smaller modular reactors, it
is still light-water stuff that is 50-year-old technology. Now,
why are we doing that? Why are we not focusing on developing
this new technology that could actually eat the waste and
eliminate some of these problems about Yucca Mountain and
everything, but instead spending our money on old technology?
Secretary Chu. Well, the small modular reactors I wouldn't
call specifically as old technology.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, as long as it is based on light
water, it is an old concept.
Secretary Chu. The reason we are doing this is because
there is a recognition that many of the power sites in the
United States could not accommodate--and around the world--
could not accommodate large reactors on the scale to 1 to 1.5
gigawatts. The electrical infrastructure would not accommodate
that. And there is a race among countries. South Korea has
already approved one of the small modular reactors in South
Korea. But we are very concerned. This is something again that
will help American industry because we believe these small
modular reactors----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Secretary, you and I both agree on that.
The only--what we are disagreeing on is whether or not the
money that is going into these small modular reactors is going
to go into a high-temperature version or a light-water version
of the reactor. And I am--I--for the life of me I can't
understand when the high-temperature gas-cooled reactors, the
reactors that we have here--as I say, Toshiba and both GE and
General Atomics, these are--companies have--this is available.
Why aren't we backing the companies up on the new stuff rather
than light-water reactors? I mean--anyway, you get my point and
I hope you would seriously look into that and consider a
restructuring of that priority.
One last area and I have only got one minute left. I am
very concerned that we are not having an honest discussion on
energy with this Administration. And I am talking about you,
sir. I am talking about generally what we have--and I sat
through the State of the Union. The President was taking both
sides of every issue. And, you know, it is all of the above and
then we know that just a few days before he said it is going to
be all of the above to us, he was nixing, you know, the
Keystone Pipeline. And I think we need to have a much more
honest discussion on this. The American people are suffering
right now. We got--we are not going to help manufacturing in
these States that we just heard about if all the consumer money
is being drained away and spending it on gasoline. And we are
not going to have more gasoline until we have more production
of gas and oil.
And I have got 20 seconds left, so let me just say I
noticed you are requesting $12 million to look at fracking. I
hope it is not--that this is not what it appears to be from the
rest of the Administration, $12 million that is spent on how to
find out ways of stopping fracking, because fracking is what is
going to bring down the cost of oil and gas and going to permit
manufacturers to sell their products because people have money
in their pocket rather than just putting it in the gas station.
So I am hoping that that is not the case, but it seems to me,
Mr. Chairman, everything indicates what we heard from the EPA
and hopefully not with this $12 million expenditure that you
are requesting that this Administration is committed not to
opening up new oil and gas but to try and find ways of stopping
it, getting those guys who are producing our oil and gas. And
that needs to--we need to have an honest discussion of what our
priorities really are. And I don't think we are getting it and
again, not from you, but, frankly, from the President of the
United States on this.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back. We do have a vote
on. We have about eight minutes. The Committee will stand in
recess until five minutes after the conclusion of the last
vote. I hope everybody comes back. And we will try to be a
little more honest----
[Recess.]
Chairman Hall. Thank you for your patience.
And the Chair now recognizes Mrs. Bonamici for five
minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, for your service and for
recognizing and mentioning the importance of reducing our
dependence on foreign oil and fossil fuels. I was pleased to
see that your testimony discusses ARPA-E, and you mentioned the
innovative work being done in the area of battery design. Well,
I am proud that one of those projects is taking place in
Oregon, how there is a company called ReVolt Technology, and
ReVolt has brought this innovative zinc-air battery research
and also jobs to our community. And we have seen firsthand the
importance of the ARPA-E program. And I see that the
Administration has proposed increasing ARPA-E funds by $75
million, and I wonder if you could elaborate on the importance
of this increased funding in enabling us to continue building
on these new technologies such as the new generation battery
technologies that will help Americans move away from fossil
fuel consumption.
Secretary Chu. Sure. The design of ARPA-E was very focused.
A short-term company or research group comes in with a specific
idea. The tenure of these grants is something on the order of
two years, very short-term, modest amounts of money to just
push it over the edge. Very promising technologies, but we also
designed in the America Competes Act that we wanted ARPA-E to
really look for game-changing events, not incremental progress
but game-changing events. And after two years, it ends and you
get private sector funding or it gets picked up by someone
else. And so that has proven to be very successful, as I note
in my testimony. A small amount of money has been leveraged--
$40 million has already been leveraged to private sector
investments of over $200 million. And we expect going forward
that that number will even grow.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. And I agree that it is a good
investment.
And also you speak about the need to invest in clean and
renewable energy and ensuring that we have that access to clean
renewable domestic energy as a matter of both national and
economic security. Now, there is also some promising work being
done in Oregon about the development of wave energy technology,
and I know that is true with other coastal areas as well. So in
addition to providing another means of energy production, we
have also seen the research and development and manufacturing
benefits.
So it is critical that when we talk about domestic
renewables, we also include in these discussions the
encouraging developments around wave technology. And I wonder
if you could address that issue as well.
Secretary Chu. We certainly we are looking at all forms of
new technologies. Kinetic wave technology is one; geothermal is
another one. So it is not just restricted to solar and wind.
And then the wind technologies, we think that on-land wind is
being established, so we are concentrating on how those
technologies can work in a marine environment, again because it
is the research that we are really pushing.
Ms. Bonamici. Sure. And--terrific. I just want to follow
up. I just had a discussion with someone about the wave energy
buoys with wind turbines on top, so I think we just really need
to look at all options for making sure we have renewable
sources of energy. So thank you for your work.
And Mr. Chairman, I will yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady yields back.
Dr. Broun, Georgia, five minutes.
Mr. Broun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I believe that the Federal Government should
not be picking winners and losers in the marketplace. It seems
to me that DOE has repeatedly proven that this Administration
is clueless when it comes to making good business investments
and that it also tends to side with political crony companies.
Unfortunately, the Department's political favors come with more
than a billion-dollar price tag that will have to be paid for
by American taxpayers.
Time and time again, we have seen companies like Abound
Solar, Beacon Power, A123 Batteries, and of course Solyndra
receive millions and billions of dollars just to drop jobs. In
addition to those $465 million that went to Tesla Motors to
make a luxury electric car with a sticker price of $100,000,
worst kind of corporate welfare. In the President's Energy
budget, the few people to be able to afford those cars would
receive a $10,000 tax subsidy. How can President Obama justify
asking for more than a half a billion dollars in additional
funding for his preferred green programs?
Secretary Chu, you tell me why you think your department
deserves more taxpayer money to blow through given your abysmal
track record. What grade would you say you deserve for the
management of the DOE resources over the last three years?
Secretary Chu. Well, I would give myself a pretty good
grade, because if you look at what we have done and what we
have supported and the breakthroughs that have occurred during
this tenure, I think it speaks very well. As I said before, the
battery research has been going extremely well, way ahead of
what we thought was the schedule. We are very focused on a lot
of the grid technologies on solar technologies. And as another
example of the Bioenergy Research Centers, which were started
in the previous Administration, have done extremely well and we
are continuing funding for those. A lot of the inventions and
technologies are now being licensed by companies and they are
entering the pilot productions. So there are many successes in
the technologies that the Department of Energy has supported.
And the private sector, American industries are picking up
these technologies.
Dr. Broun. So what grade would you give yourself, A to F?
Secretary Chu. Oh, I don't know.
Dr. Broun. What grade would you give yourself?
Secretary Chu. There is always room for improvement, maybe
an A minus.
Dr. Broun. Sir, I give you a D minus or an F. Somebody who
makes a 69 on a test fails. Now, you do have some successes. I
appreciate the loan to the Georgia Power Company to put in
place the two new reactors there at Plant Vogtle, the first
reactor that has been authorized in over 30 years. We need to
have the ability to put in place nuclear reactors very quickly.
I would like to see a template so that if a company followed
that template, they could just go ahead with the construction
that the government would oversee it just to make sure it was
being followed, but they wouldn't have to spend millions or
billions of dollars in just trying to get approval from the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, particularly as anti-nuclear as
this Administration has been.
But you all have had failure after failure after failure.
Sir, I am not sure why we should give you any more money
because I think you have failed. Like I say, I believe you have
got a D minus or an F at best.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. Gentleman yields back. Mr. Secretary, just
for your knowledge, if you have ever been asked that question
before, you are entitled to know how the Chairman did when
asked that question. One time I made four Fs and a D, and my
dad punished me for spending too much time on one subject.
All right. Who do we recognize? Recognize Mr. Lujan.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
And Dr. Chu, in your prepared testimony you state that with
the New START Treaty, the science, technology, and engineering
capabilities within the nuclear security enterprise will become
even more important to sustaining the U.S. nuclear deterrent.
President Obama, during his State of the Union this last year,
said ``today the discoveries taking place in our federally
financed labs and universities could lead to new treatments
that kill cancer cells but leave healthy ones untouched.'' He
goes on to say that, ``We shouldn't gut these investments in
our budget. Don't let other countries win the race to the
future.''
I would like to focus on this theme of nurturing the
scientific engineering capabilities of the NNSA laboratories.
With the 2013 budget request, NNSA's budget will have increased
about 10 percent from 2011, yet over the same two-year time
frame, the budget of Los Alamos National Laboratory will have
decreased by about 10 percent. This is about a $300 million
decrease in just two years and choked the scientific and
engineering capabilities at our lab. Because of these budget
cuts, the lab has requested a voluntary reduction and forced
incentive program with the goal of eliminating 400 to 800 jobs.
This reduces the true source of scientific and engineering
capability, the men and women who have served the Nation there
who have the experience and training that is difficult and
expensive to replace.
And finally, a recent National Academies' report, one that
distrustful oversight by NNSA, in which individual transactions
are reviewed at every step, is harming the vitality and long-
term viability of the science and engineering capability at the
NNSA labs. When you combine all of this distrustful and harmful
oversight with the significant loss of personnel and reduction
of funding over multiple years, you get a very damaging set of
events that could do permanent harm to the lab and my district
in the northern part of New Mexico.
So, Mr. Secretary, I have a lot of respect for you, but I
have a lot of concern as to what has happened with Los Alamos.
As I look at the budget, it looks like Los Alamos took a much
greater hit than any of the other labs, and quite honestly,
almost as much as the other labs combined. So, Mr. Secretary,
what I am looking for is some assurance and some long-term
commitment, one, to see how we can fix the arbitrary hits that
look--that were targeted to Los Alamos, as well as a commitment
to Los Alamos National Laboratory.
Secretary Chu. Well, certainly, Los Alamos National
Laboratory is an excellent laboratory, but within our budget
constraints going forward, we do have to make hard decisions,
but certainly Los Alamos is going to be an essential part of
the future of the NNSA laboratories. Those hard decisions need
to be made, but we feel that they have not only a very rich
past but also an outstanding group of scientists and engineers
in that laboratory and will be a vital part of the NNSA
mission.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate it, Mr. Secretary, and I look
forward to hopefully meeting with you soon with Senator
Bingaman. I know a request has gotten in with yourself and Mr.
D'Agostino and we look forward to having those conversations
about the commitment to Los Alamos.
And Mr. Chairman, I want to quickly turn to all of this
conversation and attacks on President Obama with increasing gas
prices. You know, report after report shows that production is
up under this Administration. Under President Barack Obama,
production is up. The Republicans in this Congress voted
against an amendment that I offered on the Floor of the House
and in Committee, in the Natural Resources Committee, when
there was a provision in front of us to increase production in
the Gulf.
My amendment was real simple. It said during tough economic
times, let us make a commitment--because I know how to count;
my dad taught me how to count very young--and we knew the bill
was going to pass. But what we asked our colleagues from the
other side of the aisle was if we are going to pass this bill,
let's at least commit to keep any new production in the United
States for American consumption and to be refined in the United
States. I couldn't get one of my colleagues from other side of
the aisle to support that amendment. Ranking Member Markey
offered something similar as well, which was defeated
overwhelmingly.
Last year, there were many individuals that provided
testimony in the Senate talking about the problems with
speculation. Mr. Tillerman, the boss of ExxonMobil, admitted
last week that the price--and this was back in 2011, early 2011
or in May--that the price of oil based purely on supply and
demand should be $60 to $70 a barrel. The reason it is above
$100 a barrel, Tillerman explained, is due to the oil majors
using futures contracts to lock into high prices. And we see
article after article--the Commodities Future Trade Commission
plans to issue a report next month talking about these
problems. If we are serious about doing something now, we
should tap the reserves we have and crack down on speculation,
Mr. Chairman. And I think that enough is enough with the
rhetoric. Let us do something real. We can get this done
together, and there is support from all sides.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Hall. I accept your yielding back and I admire you
as a good Member and as a member of a great family of public
servants from your State. I don't agree with you very much on
your analysis of the President, though, and you don't expect me
to, do you?
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, I think that is why we are
friends. As the good Governor King from New Mexico used to say,
some of my friends are for it and some of my friends are
against it, and I will support my friends.
Chairman Hall. There you go.
I now recognize a very patient--probably might be the best
Member over here who looks around and scolds me when I go over
and I am trying not to do that. But I recognize Ms. Adams for
10 minutes.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Hall. Well, I am trying to get along with you.
Mrs. Adams. I appreciate it.
Secretary Chu, I sit here and I listen and that is what I
do probably most intently because of my background as a law
enforcement officer. I tend to listen to all the words being
said. So I am going to ask you some questions and I would just
appreciate a simple yes or no. We don't need to do a back-and-
forth or anything like that. I listen with great intent. As the
Chairman asked you if Yucca Mountain was completely left out of
the equation during the Committee, you said ``not in the
charge.'' Would that not mean, yes, it was left out?
Secretary Chu. The intent of Yucca Mountain was----
Mrs. Adams. I--again, yes or no. It is just simple
questions.
Secretary Chu. Yes or no----
Mrs. Adams. Okay. Let's move on to something a little bit
easier since these are your words. I heard Chairman
Sensenbrenner ask you some questions and I just wanted to know
for the record do you still agree with your statement back in
2008, ``Somehow, we have to figure out how to boost the price
of gasoline to the levels in Europe.'' Do you agree with your
statement you made in 2008 or have you changed your mind? Yes
or no?
Secretary Chu. We are working--I am working to decrease the
price in--whatever tools we have----
Mrs. Adams. Secretary Chu, do you stand by your statement,
yes or no, in 2008?
Secretary Chu. I do not want to raise the price of
gasoline; I want to lower the price of gasoline. And all my
actions as Secretary of Energy----
Mrs. Adams. Did you not say last Tuesday to Congressman
Alan Nunnelee's question that it was not the goal--overall goal
of the Administration to lower gas prices?
Secretary Chu. That is incorrect. What I had said if you
would read the full statement--what I said was we are working
very hard to lower the gasoline prices with the tools the
Administration has, but in addition to that, specifically in
the Department of Energy, we are trying to diversify the supply
so that that will help the American consumers--the American
families who are feeling terrible pain to actually----
Mrs. Adams. Well, currently, in----
Secretary Chu [continuing]. Have other choices.
Mrs. Adams. You are right; they are feeling the pain and I
hear about it when I go back to my district. We have got
hardworking taxpayers who will put more money into their gas
tanks. Would you not agree that when the fuel costs go up,
everything goes up for our American people, everything from
food to electricity to everything? Would you agree with that?
Yes or no?
Secretary Chu. I would agree that when the price of oil and
the price of gasoline and diesel go up, that affects our
economy in a very deep way, and that is why when----
Mrs. Adams. And it affects every aspect of Americans'
lives.
Secretary Chu. And we are--that is why we are so focused on
developing alternatives----
Mrs. Adams. Well, then, you said earlier--and again, I am
listening; I am trying to write as quickly--not to lower gas--
you were talking about gas prices, not to lower it, then
certainly we want to lower it, but we want people to use less.
So when you go back to your 2008 comments about having it rise
up to the levels of Europe and then you go back to two days ago
when you made your comment about it was not the
Administration--the goal--overall goal of the Administration to
lower gas prices. Then today, when you are in here saying not
to lower--but certainly you want it to be lower, but you want
people to use less. Doesn't that go back to the original
statement that in 2008 when you said somehow we have to figure
out how to make gasoline prices--boost the price of gasoline to
the levels of Europe?
Secretary Chu. It absolutely does not go back to that
statement. As you look at all my actions and all that we are
trying to do in the Department of Energy----
Mrs. Adams. Well, that is just it. I have looked at your
actions. I have looked at your actions and I have seen where
taxpayers' money--hard-earned taxpayer money in this economy
was sent to Solyndra when everyone, all the emails that--
everything that I have seen showed that there was a problem.
Yet we have gas prices on the rise and I heard my colleague say
100 percent. I have at least figured out it is over 89 percent.
And I have a Secretary who is in one Committee saying one
thing, two days later telling me a different statement, but
back in '08 basically along the same lines of what you were
saying two days ago.
So I appreciate your comments, Secretary, but the actions
and the words are not going together, and I am really concerned
that your 2008 comments and statements are coming to fruition
for the American people, and that worries me. I know from
talking to people back home their electricity has gone up,
their gasoline has gone up, and they are concerned that this
Administration is not taking that seriously. So I would like
for you to take that back with you to the Administration.
People are hurting, and they want this Administration to do the
right thing.
We have sent them bill after bill, to the Senate. to allow
for the drilling of our own resources. We have sent them and
the Administration has denied the Keystone Pipeline. These are
things that would help the American people today--today,
Secretary Chu.
And I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady yields back.
Recognize Mr. Tonko, the gentleman from New York, for five
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And Mr. Chair, allow me to
associate my comments with those of Representative Lujan, who I
thought was spot on about the issue.
And Secretary Chu, welcome and thank you for responding in
professional capacity and enduring.
Secretary Chu, I understand the Administration made some
tough choices in this budget, and I have a question related to
one of those tough choices, cuts that impact our Brookhaven
National Lab, an important facility in New York State. I
understand the number of operating hours of the Relative Heavy
Ion Collider, or RHIC, will be cut in half compared to the
facility's operating hours this year. Even this year, it will
not be running to full operating capacity. As you know, this is
an important research facility for the nuclear physics
community. And in addition to the reduced operation time, the
funding reduction will also impact facility maintenance and
upgrades to ensure its long-term productivity. We have a long-
term investment in this facility and I know these are tough
times, but I do not believe we should jeopardize our ability to
continue use of important research tools like the RHIC. This
does not send a positive message to our students and scientists
who rely on access to these community facilities to do their
research.
So my question would be what plans are there at the
Department to ensure that the continuity of the research being
done by students and researchers there can be maintained under
reducing operating hours?
Secretary Chu. Well, as you pointed out, RHIC, the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider, is an important part of our
Nuclear Physics portfolio, but as you also pointed out, we face
tough decisions and the tough decisions on all the worthy
projects we have to fund. And so we will have to look at these
things very carefully, but certainly the past discoveries of
RHIC are applauded and I have met their very exciting team. But
again, it is one of these very hard things. We haven't made
specific plans on specifically going forward, but all the
things and all the benefits and all the opportunities of RHIC
do get weighed with all the other things. But, you know, we
have a budget deficit, and we also have to act responsibly.
Mr. Tonko. Um-hum. Well, it seems unlikely that we would be
able to afford to build a new facility to do this work, so
should we not be maintaining the RHIC and other unique DOE
facilities to make the most of our investment? I would hope--I
hear what you are saying, but I would hope that we could see
the dividends that come because of this investment and how
critical they are to our innovation into the future.
Secretary Chu. I am not sure how to--because is there a
question that I can respond to?
Mr. Tonko. Well, you know, some have suggested, well, we
might be able to build a new facility to do this work but I
would think that would deny the efforts made to date and the
outstanding track record that exists there.
Secretary Chu. I am not sure who said that or anything but
I think we want to use the facilities we have and as we
contemplate new facilities, I mean, these are tough budget
times. So we--again I am not sure who made that statement but I
don't think this is being seriously considered but I can
certainly get back to you on that.
Mr. Tonko. Okay. And again thank you for the thoughtful
dialogue. I think it is what we need these days with so many
complex issues. And I just think that it needs--and can be
done--in an atmosphere of respect. So thank you for responding
in sound professional and thoughtful----
Secretary Chu. Right.
Mr. Tonko [continuing]. Manner here this morning and
afternoon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Chairman Hall. And I thank you for yielding back a minute,
very thoughtful of you and appreciate it.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Hultgren, State of Illinois.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, in 2006 you testified before the Rising
Above the Gathering Storm panel. You said, ``In funding ARPA-E,
it is critical that its funding not jeopardize the basic
research supported by the Department of Energy's Office of
Science. The Committee's recommendations are prioritized and
its top recommendation in the area of research is to increase
the funding for basic research by 10 percent per year over the
next seven years.'' Mr. Secretary, you said that. That is your
quote; those are your words that you said. So I want to take a
look at the charts that we are going to put up on the screen
breaking down your budget request, and I believe the Committee
can also put a copy up so everybody can see it here.
This is a chart that we put together. It is maybe a little
bit difficult to see, but I will walk through it with you
quickly. It shows your request for percentage changes in
various programs on the vertical axis, and on the horizontal
axis it shows the range of research activities from basic
research, which is on the right below the line, to applied
research bordering on State industrial policy on the left.
Those numbers show a pretty clear story. Fundamental science
research is cut and the President's industrial policy is
boosted. How can you with a straight face tell me that you
haven't funded the President's pet projects in industrial
policy at the expense of fundamental research?
Secretary Chu. Well, as your chart shows, we are seeking a
2.4 percent increase in the Office of Science. The Office of
Science is what we call our basic research program within the
Department of Energy. The request is for roughly $5 billion.
ARPA-E is just a beginning new program and their request was
for a much smaller amount, $350 million. And so if one puts
into perspective those two budgets, we still remain very
committed to funding the Office of Science, which is our more
basic research program.
Mr. Hultgren. Well, again, I think as you go through the
ones on the right and going further to the right I see
Fermilab, which is very important to me, I have heard my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle also talking about
research facilities being slashed, Fermilab, eight percent cut.
Other pet projects again getting that increase. But again this
discrepancy of almost a 30 percent increase versus two percent
versus ^8 percent. I don't know how you justify that with your
own statement that says you were looking to increase basic
scientific research, which is our national laboratories by 10
percent per year, and yet here you are cutting it by eight
percent.
Secretary Chu. Well, you are now talking about the Fermilab
specific request budget. What we are trying to work through is
a plan to go forward in terms of the long baseline experiments
and also what we are trying to work out and how to go forward
in the Deep mine in South Dakota. And so again if you--you can
look at percentage increases or you can look at absolute
dollars, and when we look at the absolute dollars of the Office
of Science, we have increased that budget and I am very, very
supportive of increasing that budget. ARPA-E, again, it is very
small compared to the Office of Science.
Mr. Hultgren. Well, I want to work with you on making sure
that we follow through on that. What I see with some of the
projects there specifically dealing with South Dakota is it is
on life support right now. I mean it is barely enough to keep
it operational. And then with--we were talking about this with
Dr. Holdren last week. The steps of this budget--it is on
crutches right now and we are breaking the crutches away from
that project with this budget. I am fearful of that because I
really think we are going and taking something valuable away to
our kids and our grandkids the great opportunities that we have
had to pursue science and basic scientific research. We are
failing our future if we undercut that with these projects.
I am passionate about Fermilab, but I am passionate about
other laboratories that I don't represent as well and want to
see that same commitment there. I recognize the fiscal year
2013 budget is constrained with so many pressures,
discretionary spending caps, but this imbalance seems to
represent a definite and indefensible trend to retrench on
discovery science and promote more applied research. You
neglect to balance the portfolio, which leaves the fundamental
discovery science in disarray.
And I just wonder is this the proper direction for the
Department when investments in basic scientific research really
underpin the Nation's science and technology enterprise?
Secretary Chu. Well, very quickly, I would say I agree with
you. The Office of Science is a very important part of our
program, and we want to see that budget grow and increase and
it does form the underpinnings of everything that leads to it,
including all the underpinnings of the companies that are using
discoveries in the Office of Science and in energy--clean
energy, renewable energy, ARPA-E. And the Office of Science
does form the basis of all that.
Mr. Hultgren. Well, I hope we can follow through on that
and see--I think we are seeing that clearly there is money
there, and there is money that doesn't have to be taken away
from some of this basic scientific research and we can bulk up
that amount.
Mr. Secretary, I do thank you for your service, and I do
appreciate the ability to be able to discuss things, but it
really does seem clear to me that this is an anti-science
budget aimed at pushing short-term political agendas. I really
do believe it is going to hurt our long-term economic
competitiveness, our scientific enterprise, and our country.
With that I yield back.
Chairman Hall. Gentleman yields back.
Chair recognizes Mrs. Lofgren, lady from California, five
minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And Dr. Chu, it is good to see you as well.
You know, in 1995 when I was a brand new Member of the
House of Representatives, there was a very conservative
Republican Congressman for the East Bay, Congressman Bill
Baker. I am sure you remember Bill, and he recruited me and
other people into an effort to pursue the National Ignition
Facility at the Lawrence Livermore lab. And even though Bill is
no longer a Member of Congress, that bipartisan support for the
project has continued to this very day. And as you know, the
project, the National Ignition Facility, has a key role to play
in terms of our stewardship, and it is the lead effort in
inertial confinement fusion. Are you aware, Dr. Chu, that if
you look at the NNSA budget rules that will be applied, the
bottom line for NIF is that if this budget remains as it is,
they will essentially have to close and ``mothball'' next year?
Secretary Chu. No, I don't believe that is true. Certainly,
we do not want that to happen. They have--it is--construction
has been completed. They are entering--over the last year
entering into very exciting----
Ms. Lofgren. Two shots a day.
Secretary Chu [continuing]. Exciting experimental stage and
we are looking forward to when they can actually prove that you
can get what we call ignition, that more energy is going to
come out than went in.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, if I can, Dr. Holdren was here a couple
of weeks ago. I asked him the same question, and he was honest
enough to say he didn't know. And he called me back afterwards
to follow up, and he agreed that the funding and mothballing
the experiment after we spent over $4 billion on the capital,
equipment, and to get to where we are would not be a smart
thing to do. I called out--I mean the labs are not allowed to
call us and lobby, but they do have to answer us when we call
out there. And I was told that the net result would be
mothballing NIF if this budget is retained by the lab.
And so I am looking at ITER, which is--you know, we are 10
percent of that effort and it is a long ways away if ever from
getting--so we are proposing to increase their budget by $45
million; at the same time we are going to shut down NIF and
hundreds of American scientists will be laid off while we are
sending money to this international effort that may never get
started. How could that be--how can that be a smart decision?
Secretary Chu. Well, first, let me--my knowledge of what is
happening with the NIF program, it is--as you pointed out, this
is a very important part of our NNSA budget. It enables us to
more deeply understand the physics we need to understand going
forward for our nuclear security. And so I know of no plans. To
the best of my knowledge, and we can get back to you on this,
the funding is adequate for NIF to continue because we need
that facility. It has just been constructed.
Ms. Lofgren. I know that. I was at the opening, as were
you.
Secretary Chu. Right. And under no circumstances do we have
plans to mothball a facility that is working and just been
constructed.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, if I may, Mr. Chairman, I believe--I
mean obviously I wouldn't have raised this if I hadn't been led
to believe that that is in fact the case. So what I would like
to do if I may is follow up with you. If necessary, we will do
a bipartisan effort to defund the ITER contribution and
redirect it to this effort if we need to. And I have already
been talking to my friends on the other side of the aisle. I
think we would have a bipartisan effort if we have to do that.
But perhaps we can pursue this further off-calendar.
I wanted to do a quick question on the advanced computing.
There is a reduction of 4.6 percent in the High-Performance
Computing and Network Facilities subprogram. I am not sure how
that is going to work. Can you explain the impact on the whole
program from that reduction?
Secretary Chu. What we are doing--there has been a growth
phase. We think high-performance computing is one of the keys
to what the Department of Energy does, because high-performance
computing enables industry to actually----
Ms. Lofgren. We are for it.
Secretary Chu [continuing]. Skip design cycles very much--
--
Ms. Lofgren. Absolutely important.
Secretary Chu. We are laying plans to do to the next step.
For example, the high-performance computer at Oak Ridge, the
Jaguar computer, will go from probably like several petaflops
where it is today to perhaps as much as 20 petaflops. In the
meantime, we are laying plans to go to exascale, because we
think this simulation high-performance computing is showing
repeatedly it can help U.S. industry avoid design engineering
steps.
Ms. Lofgren. No, I get all of that. The question, though,
is what is the impact of the proposed decrease, the 4.6 percent
decrease? Is it not a problem? And also is the exascale
proposal put forward by the Berkeley lab, is that funded in
this budget?
Secretary Chu. The exascale--I mean an exascale is being
developed in the Department of Energy.
Ms. Lofgren. Right.
Secretary Chu. We haven't made any determination about
where it is going to go. And indeed we are working with
industry because as we improve the petaflop scale computers we
have in the Department of Energy, we are also looking and
getting positive feedback from industry to actually partner----
Ms. Lofgren. Right.
Secretary Chu [continuing]. With industry to develop
radically new technologies for this next----
Ms. Lofgren. I wonder, Mr. Chairman, I know my time is up,
but if we could just ask Dr. Chu what the impact of the 14
percent--4.6 percent decrease would be, which was my original
question.
Secretary Chu. Right. We can get back to you on the
details.
If the Chairman will allow me just 20 seconds on ITER?
Chairman Hall. I don't know how I could keep you from it.
Secretary Chu. Well----
Chairman Hall. Yes, the Chair will make that--I went a
minute-and-a-half over. Be my guest.
Secretary Chu. I just wanted to respond--to point out----
Chairman Hall. Sir, you are entitled to----
Secretary Chu. Okay, thank you.
Chairman Hall [continuing]. Testify.
Secretary Chu. That the ITER project, over 80 percent of
the funds will be spent in the United States and on contracts
in companies and national laboratories in the United States.
And it is an international obligation we have and so--and we
don't see it as actually in conflict with NIF.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I have supported ITER in the past, but
it is premised on a robust scientific effort here in the United
States. And if the information I have is correct that we would
be mothballing NIF, I could no longer support, you know,
increasing our funding to ITER. And it is decades away from
beginning operation. So you know, there are plenty of
scientists who have told me without regard to the budget that
they no longer have confidence that the project is even going
to succeed because of the political support and the budget
problems. But that is a separate question.
I thank the Chairman for letting me have a little more
time.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady yields back.
Mrs. Biggert, Illinois, five minutes.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As usually happens,
the last two members have skirted around the issues that I
wanted to ask questions about but not quite the same.
The budget repeatedly highlights President Obama's
commitment to doubling the budget of key basic research
programs at the Office of Science, along with NIST and NSF. But
the budget request for the Office of Science is proposed to
increase by only 2.4 percent, and at that rate, it is going to
take about 30 years to double the budget and doesn't account
for inflation. Meanwhile, the programs such as EERE and ARPA-E
are proposed to increase by 29 percent and 27 percent. Do you
think, then, that funding for the Office of Science really is a
low priority for DOE?
Secretary Chu. No, it is not a low priority. It is a
priority. It is a high priority. As you well know, I spent my
life doing fundamental science, and I know the value of
fundamental science and what it leads to.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay. Then--and then going to the Exascale
Computing Initiative and it is a joint program between science
and NNSA----
Secretary Chu. NNSA.
Mrs. Biggert [continuing]. And it seems that there appears
to be an uncertainty regarding the funding for the NNSA's
matching participation with no firm number in the budget
request, and I hope that the Administration is committed to
this joint venture and all the progress that the United States
has made in supercomputing. But does the Department--do you
think that that budget--that they are going to commit to a
certain budget? And does the Department intend to deliver its
exascale report to the Hill soon?
Secretary Chu. Well, we--the Department of Energy is very
committed to developing exascale computing because we see
clearly all the advantages it will give not only the scientific
community, but the industrial base in the United States. The
NNSA, as you well know, is under significant budget strain. Our
first responsibility in NNSA is to tend to the nuclear security
of the United States and we hope that they can continue
participation. But we do remain committed to making sure that
we lead in exascale computing.
Mrs. Biggert. But you don't have any figures yet----
Secretary Chu. No.
Mrs. Biggert [continuing]. For NNSA.
Secretary Chu. But the Department does think that exascale
computing is one of the frontiers that the United States should
certainly invest in.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay. And then the 2012 appropriations had--
for the study, and do you----
Secretary Chu. Yes.
Mrs. Biggert [continuing]. Know when that will be?
Secretary Chu. I can get back to you on exactly when----
Mrs. Biggert. Okay.
Secretary Chu [continuing]. They expect it delivered.
Mrs. Biggert. All right. Then just one other quick
question--the budget request, $10 million from a Nuclear Waste
Fund in fiscal year 2013, what is the purpose of this request
and what is it going to be used for?
Secretary Chu. Yes. First, we have commenced this study
within the Department to look at the recommendations of the
Blue Ribbon Commission. And also we would love to work with
Congress in those recommendations as well. One of the things
that the Blue Ribbon Commission felt was very important is we
have out of our 200--we have roughly 104 operating nuclear
reactors, but there are a number of sites where the reactors
are no longer operating and yet we still have spent fuel there.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay.
Secretary Chu. And what we wanted to do was to begin to
have the spent fuels put in dry cask storage with an envelope
and get it licensed by the Nuclear Regulatory Agency so that
they can be safely transported out of those now-dormant reactor
sites because of all the security and issues that--at least to
consolidate those few sites.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay. Then one more quick question. And this
is--involves Keystone. I am really worried about the fact that
we are not going to have Keystone, and I cannot understand how
we would let this go. And right now the Canadians are over in
China negotiating with them to send the oil there. And I think
that is such a mistake when we are trying to reduce our
dependence on foreign oil and particularly the hostile
countries that provide it. And we would just let this go when
we--I know that you have already talked about working on the
bottom part of this and going forward with that, and yet we
have no resolution or the Administration has vetoed it.
Secretary Chu. The Administration did not veto it. When
Congress said you have to make a decision at this time, the
State Department said we have to look at the environmental
impacts at this time. And so it has not been vetoed. The
Administration and we in the Department of Energy have
applauded the fact and it was well known that the first
bottleneck in this----
Mrs. Biggert. And that was taken care of.
Secretary Chu. It is being taken care of by several
companies Cushing to Houston and Louisiana. The second
bottleneck is between Chicago and Cushing. Those plans are also
underway----
Mrs. Biggert. I understand that.
Secretary Chu [continuing]. And it is very important to
clear up these domestic bottlenecks because then we can
continue to develop the oil in North Dakota----
Mrs. Biggert. If we have--if we will have the oil by the
time that all these things are cleared up.
Secretary Chu. Well, as I said, you know, the--you know
that the same Keystone people are now working with, for
example, the State of Nebraska on the crucial parts of the
pipeline being built in the United States, which are going
forward.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Yield back.
Chairman Hall. I thank the gentlelady.
Recognize Mr. Miller, gentleman from North Carolina, for
five minutes.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Chu, I congratulate you for your modesty in not
wearing your Nobel medallion to appear today. I am not sure it
would have made any difference in how you were treated, but if
it had been me, I think I probably would have worn it.
There have been--well, one of the most spectacularly
successful government programs is DARPA, not just doing
research that nobody else would have done but getting
transformational research to the marketplace. One of the
proposals of the Augustine report, Rising Above the Gathering
Storm, there was bipartisan support for in this Committee.
Chairman Boehlert supported it, Bart Gordon supported it, was
ARPA-E, a program modeled after DARPA for energy to do the kind
of research that otherwise would not get done because it is
more likely than not that any given research would be
fruitless. But the research that did work out could change
things in a dramatic way.
But there is also criticism that ARPA-E projects duplicate
other research at the front end of their research and that it
crowds out private sector funding at the back end, and it is
hard to get things to the marketplace unless there is some
overlaps, some kind of handoff to private sector funding. How
do you identify--and also it is kind of hard to find research
in which nobody has done any research to see that as a
promising area of research. How do you identify the research
that ARPA-E will do? Do you duplicate research that is being
done or has been done by the private or by the public sector?
And then how do you make that pass-off to private sector
development? Do you crowd out public investment?
Secretary Chu. Well, thanks for the question. First, there
is a big distinction between the research that ARPA-E funds and
the research, for example, that the Office of Science funds.
The Office of Science funds research that lays foundational
science that could lead to energy innovations. ARPA-E is
focused on very short-term grants, typically two years, and
modest amounts of money that can push something over the top.
In some of those grants, they go to universities. Other grants
go to small startup companies where there is a melding of
public and private dollars. But we also tried to identify those
things where a small starting company would not have the
resources to take a next step. And in many cases--in most cases
what we try to do--or a large company says, all right, you
know, this is too much to swing for the fences, but if we are
willing to get some assistance from ARPA-E, we will try these
dramatic attempts.
And that was the philosophy of DARPA and that is the
philosophy of ARPA-E, something where you could not possibly
imagine, for example, some way of--a global positioning
satellite system. It is a great triumph of DARPA to look very
far into the future and say, you know, it might be possible to
use this system in military applications, but it now turns out
to have fantastic commercial applications. But in ARPA-E, those
things that we fund are these very short-term--now. There are
certain spaces. We identified in ARPA-E, for example, power
electronics. These are the electronics that convert high
voltage to low voltage or DC to AC or AC to DC. For whatever
reason, the university system wasn't investing in power
electronics to build up a base of that. And if you talk to any
companies, they would love to hire people trained in power
electronics. We identify power electronics as a real growth
industry. About 30 percent of electricity goes through some
sort of power electronics today, but in 15 years or so we are
expecting 80 percent to go. The industry wants this and we are
helping companies develop power electronics and we are also
trying to get universities to fund power electronics faculty.
So the ARPA-E funding in power electronics says if we can
make a transistor--not a silicon transistor but like a silicon
carbide, we have entered in funding with a company making
fantastic power electronics, very high voltage, high current so
you can regulate power much more efficiently, much more
inexpensively. Again, we see this as a great opportunity for
American prosperity because these things are things we think
the United States should be leading in. And again, it is a very
identified target.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time is expired.
Chairman Hall. I thank the gentleman. Now, probably you
save the best for the last normally, but I don't ever like to
say anything until the last at my age for today I am talking
about.
I recognize you, Mr. Harris, and I am going to ask for a
minute or so to visit with Ms. Johnson. Okay with you?
Mr. Harris. Certainly. Anything you want, Mr. Chairman.
Listen, thank you, Dr. Chu. And I--you know, I share the--
what my colleague from North Carolina says. I appreciate a
Nobel Prize winner coming in front of us, especially one in
physics. I told you before I never understood it. I was a
physiologist, not a physicist. You know, I respect that. But
that does give us--and I know from personal experience that
sometimes scientists like that kind of get a little tunnel
vision. To someone with a hammer, everything looks like a nail.
You talked about breakthroughs and of course that should be
what I think the Department of Energy is all about. I am going
to ask you a question. Would you agree with me that the biggest
energy breakthrough in the last three years and one month has
been that the cost of natural gas is one-half of what it was
when the President took office, yet the price of gasoline is
twice as high so that in fact there is a breakthrough that has
led to a hugely important energy source. Would you agree that
that really is--to someone looking objectively, that is really
the largest breakthrough that has occurred in energy in this
country?
Secretary Chu. I would agree that that it certainly has
been a breakthrough but it had a long birth period.
Mr. Harris. Sure, but I mean the halving of a price----
Secretary Chu. Um-hum.
Mr. Harris [continuing]. In one energy source while another
source is doubled now and we think is still going up--and by
the way, you know, I thank you--I hope that your bias from
before when you were Secretary and said we should have
European-style prices, I hope you had an epiphany, you and the
President and that, in fact, that is probably not a good thing
now. But let's look at what the Department does. The
Department's budget next year has one-fifth of one percent of
its spending on natural gas, one-fifth of one percent. It is
smaller than the increase in solar spending. Would you say that
the Administration kind of missed the boat on this natural gas
phenomenon that really some people look at and say is the
future and the real breakthrough in American energy?
Secretary Chu. Well, I agree with you that the ability to
capture natural gas from shale rock was wonderful--is
wonderful. The Department of Energy funded this from about 1978
to 1992.
Mr. Harris. And how much in the last three years?
Secretary Chu. Well, right now, what we are doing is we are
going to the next new thing in gas. We are funding methane
hydrates. This is in collaboration with industry but we also
have helped bring Japan on board because we think methane
hydrates might be another form. It is too early to tell. Just
as we funded drilling and hydraulic fracturing many, many years
ago when industry did not think it was viable----
Mr. Harris. Sure. What is your budget level on methane
hydrates?
Secretary Chu. It is very small but we----
Mr. Harris. Okay. So it is even less than one-fifth of one
percent?
Secretary Chu. Yes.
Mr. Harris. So this huge new energy source, the real
breakthrough, the Department is spending one-fifth of one
percent. All right. Well, your time is precious. I appreciate
that. You can't spend all your time on everything, so I am
going to ask you about this email--this June 2011 email where a
Solyndra employee described what they learned from Bank of
America financiers involved in that Prologis loan negotiation.
A quote from the email is, ``on three occasions this week, he
thought that the deal was dead but Secretary Chu''--so he being
the financier--``but Secretary Chu personally pulled it off.
Chu shared with the team that this deal went to higher levels
in the Obama Administration to gain approval than any other
transaction in the Loan Guarantee Program and that he
personally committed to seeing it through to successful
conclusion.'' Now, is that kind of true? I mean is what that
person says kind of a realistic summary of what went on? And of
course remembering that Prologis at that time was going to
contract with Solyndra at a time when Solyndra was
renegotiating its whole deal with the government and in fact
got, you know, was secondary in--you know, that whole--and you
know the whole deal. Is that a pretty accurate summary, that
you were personally involved at a level different from other
deals?
Secretary Chu. I strongly supported the Prologis loan
application because I thought it was a wonderful way of
financing in a measured way--financing--letting warehouses use
their rooftop space----
Mr. Harris. Sure. Was there a breakthrough new technology
involved?
Secretary Chu. No.
Mr. Harris. No, there was no breakthrough. And this was how
big a loan guarantee?
Secretary Chu. Well, it was going out in stages.
Mr. Harris. Yeah, and what was the total? Wasn't it over a
billion dollars?
Secretary Chu. Pardon?
Mr. Harris. Was it over a billion dollars?
Secretary Chu. No, it was not a billion.
Mr. Harris. And how--so how much total?
Secretary Chu. I think $750 million.
Mr. Harris. Oh, I am sorry, only three-quarters of a
billion. Okay. So what specific actions did you take with
regards to this loan different from the actions you took on
other loans? Because, again, this is not breakthrough
technology. And you know, I have been a supporter of ARPA-E. I
think that is where the Department ought to be concentrating.
So when it--so when things happened with Solyndra which, again,
Solyndra is not breakthrough technology. Let's be honest. You
know, hydrofracturing is breakthrough technology. Solyndra
really was just, you know, a little bit better than what we
have had. So what it appears has happened is that your time,
which is of basic science, I would think would be saying, look,
let's make some really innovative changes in energy. Instead,
it appears to have been taken up to forward a deal where
Solyndra is involved, where, you know, the objective person
would look and say, you know, it looks kind of like what you
are doing is you are, you know, saving Solyndra from an
embarrassment to the Administration by in fact interjecting
yourself into the Prologis negotiation at a different level
than you have interjected yourself into any other one. And
again that is what this person says.
Secretary Chu. That is untrue. I----
Mr. Harris. Which part?
Secretary Chu. Solyndra--the fact that Solyndra had a
minor, minor role in that--in fact, I was quite the opposite. I
wanted Prologis. It was an innovation in a business model, as
you know, can really revolutionize things. My concern was that
we thought that--I thought that this was a very, very good
business model to put wholesale generation of electricity on
warehouse rooftops. My concern actually was to not having
anything to do with the future of Solyndra--it was completely
different. In fact, I voiced concerns; shouldn't we be looking
for alternatives to Solyndra for the first little bit? And so
it was quite the opposite from what might be portrayed.
Mr. Harris. Did you attempt to stop the negotiation between
Prologis and Solyndra?
Secretary Chu. No. That was between two companies. But what
I did raise is my concern that I wanted Prologis to go forward
and was concerned if Solyndra could supply those things. But
again the good news is that solar modules are essentially a
commodity--and as the prices are going down--and the good news
about this, again, is that the price of solar modules has
dropped fourfold in the last three years.
Mr. Harris. But Mr. Secretary, the cost is still far more
because one of the statements--and Mr. Chairman, I will wrap it
up--one of the statements in your testimony is that one goal is
to bring down solar energy prices by the end of the decade to
be the cheapest source of electricity.
Secretary Chu. As cheap as any other source of energy.
Mr. Harris. Correct. Now, Secretary Chu, at $2.50 a million
BTU for natural gas, you really think that solar by the end of
this decade, the point where you were unwilling to invest in
natural gas, you still think that is the best investment we can
do to keep our energy prices low in this country? You think you
can achieve that at $2.50 a million cubic foot? And again since
we are going to control it, it is not going to be at the
vagaries of an international market to some extent.
Secretary Chu. Well, if you look at projections made by,
for example, the EIA or projections made by Bloomberg New
Energy Finance, they are projecting the price of natural gas-
generated electricity be something on the scale of 5.5, 6 cents
a kilowatt hour.
Mr. Harris. Do you know what their projection is for
natural gas last month? Their last projection from 2010 was
where natural gas prices----
Secretary Chu. I know what the Bloomberg New Energy
Finance's projection for the cost of electricity from the
generation of natural gas. That was first quarter 2012 and that
is the one--the number----
Mr. Harris. I will let you in on it. A year and a half ago,
they projected--this is how good we are at projecting prices.
They thought it was going to be $5 a million cubic foot. It is
$2.50.
Secretary Chu. Right.
Mr. Harris. The Administration, at many different levels,
is just behind the curve on this. But I respect you and I thank
you for being here and I just hope that you take the view that
natural gas is important enough to invest in it.
Thank you very much.
And thank you. I am sorry I ran way over, Mr. Chairman, but
thank you for your indulgence.
Chairman Hall. Well, at least you waited a long time to do
it. Thank you for good questions, and thank you for your
answers.
And I indicated in an opening statement that I was going to
answer Ms. Johnson but I know when I am overmatched. I am going
to put something in the record if she doesn't object to it. It
is the primary scenario and the analysis I am asking to put in
the record was by Senator Bingaman. It was in the Senate and
shows electricity prices would rise nationally by 21 percent in
2035 and regionally by as much as 69 percent. That is one
person in one body's idea on it. And without objection, I want
to put this into the record. It is so ordered.
[The information may be found in Appendix 2.]
Chairman Hall. And I want to thank you very much. I don't
sound like I appreciate you near as much as I do, but you have
answered our questions and we have agreed and disagreed. You
said that the pipeline wasn't cancelled but its head is down in
the water and it's down there bubbling and it is going to drown
if--you give me hope that he is going to reconsider and I am--
between the two of us here, I am going to make you a prediction
if you don't mind, and you can hold me to it. I think this
President is going to listen to the American people and I hope
he does. I think he is political enough to. I predict he is
going to recapture this pipeline for us because it is the thing
that he ought to do and the people are going to demand it. And
I think he is going to do that.
I also think where he knocked out ANWR--and that is 60
years of energy--quickly did that and it has been going down
every since, really and truly that is a hard, cold fact. I
predict that we are going to--he is going to open up some
drilling because the people are going to demand it, and the
President is very political. I think he is going to answer. I
predict that he is going to. Now, I owe you a beer or a dinner
or whatever if my predictions are wrong, but maybe you will owe
me one if I am right, okay?
Secretary Chu. I would be glad to share a beer with you.
Chairman Hall. All right. I thank you, of course, for your
very valuable testimony and Members for their questions.
And Members of the Committee might have additional
questions for you, Mr. Secretary, and we will ask you to
respond to those in writing. And the record will remain open
for two weeks for additional comments from Members.
I thank all of you for your patience. Thank you, Ms.
Johnson, for your good work and your good questions. And once
again, Mr. Chairman, thank you and God bless you. Thank you,
sir.
Secretary Chu. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:04 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Steven Chu,
U.S. Secretary of Energy

Questions Submitted by Chairman Ralph M. Hall,

Committee on Science, Space and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


