- A REVIEW OF NASA'S SPACE LAUNCH SYSTEM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A REVIEW OF NASA'S SPACE LAUNCH SYSTEM

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, JULY 12, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-29

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

67-253 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2012

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DAVID WU, Oregon
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 PAUL D. TONKO, New York
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JERRY McNERNEY, California
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
Tennessee                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY

C O N T E N T S

Tuesday, July 12, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Ralph M. Hall, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     7
Written Statement............................................     9

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking
Minority Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
U.S. House of Representatives..................................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Witnesses:

The Honorable Charles F. Bolden Jr., Administrator, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    16

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

The Honorable Charles F. Bolden Jr., Administrator, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration...........................    60

A REVIEW OF NASA'S SPACE LAUNCH SYSTEM

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 12, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m., in Room
2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ralph Hall
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

A Review of NASA's Space Launch System

tuesday, july 12, 2011
10:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

Hearing Purpose

The original intent of the hearing was to examine NASA's selection
of a heavy-lift launch system (``Space Launch System'') that will be
used to launch future crew and cargo flights beyond low Earth orbit.
Members would have had an opportunity to ask questions regarding cost,
schedule, capabilities, and justification for the selected design.
However, on July 7, a senior NASA official publicly stated that a final
decision on SLS won't be announced until ``late this summer.'' In light
of NASA's continuing delays (the NASA Authorization Act of 2010
required a decision and report by mid-January 2011), the hearing will
instead provide an opportunity for NASA to explain why it has failed to
reach a decision, what analyses still need to be completed, and when
the Space Launch System decisions will be forthcoming.

Witness

The Honorable Charles F. Bolden Jr., Administrator,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Background

The Bush Administration and the NASA Authorization Acts of
2005 and 2008
In the aftermath of the Space Shuttle Columbia accident the Bush
Administration proposed a new vision for space exploration, following
the retirement of the Space Shuttle, which would extend human
capabilities beyond low Earth orbit for the first time since 1972. In
the NASA Authorization Act of 2005 Congress directed NASA to
``establish a program to develop a sustained human presence on the
Moon, including a robust precursor program, to promote exploration,
science, commerce, and United States preeminence in space, and as a
stepping-stone to future exploration of Mars and other destinations.''
[P.L. 109-155]

Subsequently, NASA created the Constellation program (consisting of
the Ares 1 rocket and Orion crew capsule, the Ares 5 heavy lift
launcher, and the Altair lunar lander) that was designed to accommodate
this stepping-stone approach, and was Congressionally-authorized by the
NASA Authorization Act of 2008 ``to ensure that activities in its lunar
exploration program shall be designed and implemented in a manner that
gives strong consideration to how those activities might also help meet
the requirements of future activities beyond the Moon'' and a range of
future destinations ``to expand human and robotic presence into the
solar system, including the exploration and utilization of the Moon,
near Earth asteroids, Lagrangian points, and eventually Mars and its
moons.'' [P.L. 110-422]

The Obama Administration
In NASA's FY 2010 budget proposal the Obama Administration
maintained the Congressionally-authorized policy of returning Americans
to the Moon and noted that, ``Funds freed from the Shuttle's retirement
will enable the Agency to support development of systems to deliver
people and cargo to the International Space Station and the Moon,''
and, ``The Agency will create a new chapter of this legacy as it works
to return Americans to the Moon by 2020 as part of a robust human and
robotic space exploration program.'' Yet in spite of these assertions
the Administration eliminated funding for continued development of the
Altair lunar lander and the Ares 5 heavy-lift launch vehicle, and cut
more than $3 billion from NASA's five year Exploration Systems budget,
relative to the FY 2009 budget request.

At the time of the FY 2010 budget proposal the Administration
established an independent review committee chaired by retired Lockheed
Martin executive Norman Augustine. The Review of Human Spaceflight
Plans Committee delivered its final report in October 2009 with the
overarching conclusion that `` Meaningful exploration beyond low-Earth
orbit is not viable under the FY 2010 budget guideline'' but that
``Meaningful human exploration is possible under a less-constrained
budget, increasing annual expenditures by approximately $3 billion in
real purchasing power above the FY 2010 guidance.''

Despite the Augustine Committee's finding that the FY 2010 budget
profile was insufficient for meaningful human space exploration, the
next year the administration reduced the FY 2011 Exploration Systems
budget to $4.3 billion, which was $1.8 billion below the FY 2010 runout
plan. Hence, it appeared that `` Funds freed from the Shuttle's
retirement.'' would not be provided by the Administration to ``enable
the Agency to support development of systems to deliver people and
cargo to the International Space Station and the Moon.''

In NASA's FY 2011 budget request the Administration proposed
canceling the Constellation program, claiming it was `` trying to
recreate the glories of the past with the technologies of the past.''
Then at a speech at the Kennedy Space Center on April 15th 2010, the
President said that with respect to the Moon, `` the simple fact is, we
have been there before. There is a lot more of space to explore . . .
'' He announced that the U.S. would send humans to an asteroid by 2025,
followed by a human mission to orbit Mars by the mid 2030s.

On July 6, 2011 during a Twitterr Town Hall webcast, President
Obama expressed his vision for exploration this way, ``. . . let's
ultimately get to Mars. A good pit stop is an asteroid. I haven't
actually--we haven't identified the actual asteroid yet, in case people
are wondering. But the point is, let's start stretching the boundaries
so we're not doing the same thing over and over again. But rather,
let's start thinking about what's the next horizon. What's the next
frontier out there and you know, but in order to do that we're going to
need some technological breakthroughs that we don't have yet.''

In lieu of Constellation, the Administration's FY 2011 budget
sought to fund development of ``commercial crew'' transportation
services (three or four, according to NASA), and postpone construction
of human exploration systems for a least five years, instead pursuing
additional propulsion research and technology development. Despite
repeated requests by both the House Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, and the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation throughout 2010, NASA failed to provide a credible plan
justifying their proposal. As a result, after extensive review and
debate, Congress in its 2010 NASA Authorization Act reversed the
Administration's approach and directed the agency to build upon the
capabilities of the Shuttle and Constellation programs and immediately
begin developing the SLS and MPCV.

The NASA Authorization Act of 2010 [P.L.111-267]
Last year Congress passed the NASA Authorization Act of 2010, which
was signed by the President on October 11, 2010 [P.L.111-267]. The Act
provided policy guidance and recommended funding levels for three
years, and called for a National Academy ``review of the goals, core
capabilities, and direction of human space flight, using the goals set
forth in the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, the NASA
Authorization Act of 2005, and the NASA Authorization Act of 2008, the
goals set forth in this Act, and goals set forth in any existing
statement of space policy issued by the President.'' The review is to
be completed by next year.

Congress again reaffirmed the policy of the NASA Authorization Act
of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 16761(a)), ``that the United States shall maintain
an uninterrupted capability for human space flight and operations in
low-Earth orbit, and beyond, as an essential instrument of national
security and of the capacity to ensure continued United States
participation and leadership in the exploration and utilization of
space.'' [Sec. 201(b)]

Section 202 (a) stated that, ``The long term goal of the human
space flight and exploration efforts of NASA shall be to expand
permanent human presence beyond low-Earth orbit and to do so, where
practical, in a manner involving international partners.'' Section
301(a)(1) stated, ``The extension of the human presence from low-Earth
orbit to other regions of space beyond low-Earth orbit will enable
missions to the surface of the Moon and missions to deep space
destinations such as near-Earth asteroids and Mars.''

Section 2(9) of the NASA Authorization Act of 2010 states, ``While
commercial transportation systems have the promise to contribute
valuable services, it is in the United States' national interest to
maintain a government operated space transportation system for crew and
cargo delivery to space.''

As a result, the Act provided $10.8 billion (through FY 2013) to
continue developing a Shuttle- and Constellation-derived launch system
(newly designated the Space Launch System and Multi-Purpose Crew
Vehicle) that would also assure a national capability to access the
International Space Station for the U.S. and our international partners
in case commercial proposals fail to materialize or Russian Soyuz
vehicles are unavailable. The Act also directed NASA to proceed
immediately with its development with the goal of making the system
operational by 2016.

Congress envisioned that the Space Launch System (SLS) and Multi
Purpose Crew Vehicle (MPCV) would get maximum benefit from the more
than $10.3 billion that had been spent (up to that time) on the
Constellation program. Constellation had achieved a number of
developmental milestones including the successful flight tests of the
Ares 1-X and the Orion launch abort systems, and a ground demonstration
of the new five-segment solid rocket motor that was to power the Ares 1
and Ares 5 launchers. The SLS and MPCV were to continue to focus on
developing the advanced human safety features of the Orion project, and
be capable of evolving into a heavy lift launch system that could
eventually carry 130 tons to orbit to enable human exploration beyond
Earth orbit.

NASA was directed to provide a report to Congress by January 9,
2011, describing the SLS and MPCV including ``. . . the assumptions,
description, data, and analysis of the systems trades and resolution
process, justification of trade decisions, the design factors which
implement the essential system and vehicle capability requirements.the
explanation and justification of any deviations from those
requirements, the plan for utilization of existing contracts, civil
service and contract workforce, supporting infrastructure utilization
and modifications, and procurement strategy to expedite development
activities through modification of existing contract vehicles, and the
schedule of design and development milestones and related schedules
leading to the accomplishment of operational goals established by this
Act.'' [Section 309]

In November 2010, NASA issued a series of small ($650,000) study
contracts to 13 companies to provide industry inputs to the heavy lift
studies. Initial responses were obtained in late February 2011 and
final replies in late April 2011.

In January 2011, Administrator Bolden sent a letter to the
Committee that said, ``Unfortunately, a 2016 first flight does not
appear to be possible within projected FY 2011 and out year funding
levels, although NASA is continuing to explore innovative procurement
and development approaches to determine whether it can come closer to
this goal.''

According to briefings by senior NASA officials in May 2011, the
report is expected to include, 1) the basic framework for a
``capability driven architecture'' and concept of operations that
provides the ``strategic context for exploration of multiple
destinations,'' 2) an analysis of the cost and benefits of proposed
vehicle designs for the SLS and MPCV and alternatives, 3) analysis of
the current Ares, Shuttle and Orion contracts for the applicability to
the future development program, and 4) analysis of potential
acquisitions approaches.

NASA has contracted with Booz Allen Hamilton to perform an
independent cost assessment. The results were due in May 2011 for
inclusion as part of the final report. In May 2011 senior NASA
officials expressed confidence that the final report would be completed
by June 20th, this was later changed to July 8th. NASA's report to
Congress is now more than six months late. NASA is awaiting final
approval from OMB.

Continuing delays have already resulted in the loss of thousands of
highly skilled aerospace jobs, and threatens to do costly damage to the
U.S. industrial base. On March 30, 2011 in testimony before the Space
and Aeronautics Subcommittee hearing on A Review of NASA's Exploration
Program in Transition, the Chairman of the Corporate Membership
Committee of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
testified that, ``. . . the space industrial base is not FACING a
crisis; we are IN a crisis. And we are losing a National Perishable
Asset.our unique workforce.''

FY2011 Full Year Continuing Resolution
On April 15, 2011 a full year continuing resolution established
spending levels for the balance of FY 2011. As noted in the table
below, for the Space Launch System, amounts provided are slightly above
authorized levels. Subsequently, on June 15th NASA provided Congress
with an operating plan based on the continuing resolution (FY11 CR
column below) and gave notice that ``(A)dditional information on NASA's
progress in selecting an architecture and acquisition strategy will be
provided to Congress in the Updated Report on MPCV and SLS in summer
2011.'' Agency officials are now suggesting that the information won't
be available until late summer at the earliest.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Recent FY 2012 Appropriation Activity
On July 7th the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce,
Justice, Science, and Related Agencies reported an FY 2012
appropriations bill providing a total of $3.65 billion for Exploration
Systems, that included the following provision: `` Provided, that not
less than $1,063,000,000 shall be for the multipurpose crew vehicle to
continue existing vehicle development activities to meet the
requirements described in paragraph (a)(1) of section 303 of Public Law
111-267, and not less than $1,985,000,000 shall be for the heavy lift
launch vehicle system which shall have a lift capability not less than
130 tons and which shall have an upper stage and other core elements
developed simultaneously.''
Chairman Hall. Charlie, are you ready? Everybody ready down
the road here? Committee on Science, Space, and Technology will
come to order. Good morning. Welcome to today's hearing
entitled, ``A Review of NASA's Space Launch System.'' In front
of you, of course, are the same packets contained in the
written testimony, biography, and truth in testimony disclosure
for today's witness, Administrator Charles F. Bolden.
And we will have opening statements. I recognize myself for
five minutes for my opening statement.
Good morning, and today's hearing is entitled, ``A Review
of NASA's Space Launch System,'' and our witness is NASA
Administrator Charlie Bolden.
As a preface to the formal portion of my statement, I want
to first congratulate all the men and women at NASA and its
contractors for the successful launch of STS-135. The Shuttle
launch was viewed by tens of thousands of people on hand in
Florida and millions more around the world, including a packed
crowd in this hearing room, and it was a bittersweet moment to
watch the last flight of the Shuttle Atlantis lift off from
Kennedy Space Center.
General, your team did an outstanding job, and we all look
forward to welcoming this crew safely home probably some time
next week.
Several weeks ago as our Committee began planning for this
hearing, we had every expectation that NASA would have
announced its Space Launch System architecture well before
today, with the goal that the Committee Members would have the
opportunity to ask questions regarding cost, schedule,
capabilities, and the like. Indications we had received from
NASA throughout the spring clearly suggested that a decision
would have been rendered prior to today. Sadly, such is not the
case.
Nine months ago the President signed the NASA Authorization
Act. Provisions in the bill clearly directed, clearly directed
NASA to provide us with decisions to tell Congress of their
decisions on the selection of the crew vehicle and the launch
system design by January 9, 2011. That date was considered
attainable given the previous investment and substantial
progress made by NASA in vehicle engineering, design, and
demonstrations that had already been achieved by the
Constellation Program.
The Act also included the goal of reaching operational
capability for the core elements not later than December 31,
2016, because that date seemed realistic for the now-canceled
Constellation System, and it also reflected Congress' deep
concern that we needed to have a back-up capability in place
should commercial launch vehicles fail to materialize.
Instead, on January 15, Congress received a ``preliminary
report,'' that emphasized its selection of prototype vehicle
designs but did not commit the agency to their construction.
The report was careful to note, and I quote, ``NASA hopes to
finalize its acquisition decisions as early as spring of 2011,
details that will be included in a follow-on report to
Congress.'' We are well into summer, and no such report has
been sent.
So today, 6 months later, and with the final space shuttle
mission now underway, instead of an informed discussion on the
attributes and trades on the selection of a Space Launch
System, we will be left with little more than an explanation of
decision-making processes still to be completed.
Our letter of invitation asked you, Charlie, to describe
the design of the launch system, how much it would cost, the
budget profile, its performance, when it would be ready, and
the types of missions it would enable. General Bolden, the fact
that we do not have a final decision on the SLS and the
supporting documents that the invitation letter requested
represents almost an insult to this Committee and to Congress.
We will try our very best throughout this hearing to
accommodate the agency's failure and the failure of the White
House to answer congressional requests and to give us the
information that we are entitled to have. But to be clear, this
failure reflects poorly on the Administration and its space
program. I can't help but feel that this Administration has let
down the thousands of men and women who have devoted their
careers to the space program as well as heroes such as Neil
Armstrong, Mike Collins, Buzz Aldrin, Gene Cernan, Tom
Stafford, and they go on and on and many, many others, known
well to all of us, who risked their lives blazing the trail of
space exploration and some who lost their lives and others who
continue to maintain an unwavering dedication and devotion to
the cause.
We have a record littered with requests by Congress for
information over the last two years. We have waited for answers
that have not come. We have pleaded for answers that have not
come. We have done our best to be fair with you and with this
President, who set out to delay the next step in our Nation's
human space exploration program and by doing so has jeopardized
the Space Station in the process.
It is a shame that for many of us that simply want to
preserve, protect, and defend our leadership in space, that is
all we ask for, that is what we want, that we see NASA paying
for rides to the Space Station from countries that may not have
our best interests at heart.
We have run out of patience. I realize and I believe that
you are the person who has to bear the brunt of this
President's bad decisions. I would like to believe you have
told him what he ought to do, and I would like to believe that
he didn't pay any attention to you. The White House has done
you wrong. But nonetheless, you have to answer for these
continued failures. I would like to point out today that this
Committee reserves the right to open an investigation into
these continued delays and join the investigation initiated by
the Senate. It is a shame we have to even consider or be
thinking about doing that.
Moving forward I think that it is important to note that we
support all of the people engaged in developing the next heavy-
lift vehicle as well as those who are working on the commercial
cargo and crew contracts; people who are working every day to
keep America at the forefront of human spaceflight. It is these
engineers, these technicians and scientists who, despite the
absence of good leadership from the White House, strive to
dream big and carry on the legacy of those that came before us,
before them and before us.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hall follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Ralph Hall
Good morning. Today's hearing is entitled ``A Review of NASA's
Space Launch System'', and our witness is NASA Administrator Charlie
Bolden.
As a preface to the formal portion of my statement, I want to first
congratulate all the men and women at NASA and its contractors for the
successful launch of STS-135. The Shuttle launch was viewed by tens of
thousands on hand in Florida and millions more around the world,
including a packed crowd in this hearing room, and it was a bittersweet
moment to watch the last flight of the Shuttle Atlantis lift off from
Kennedy Space Center.
General, your team did an outstanding job, and we all look forward
to welcoming the crew safely home next week.
Several weeks ago as our Committee began planning for this hearing,
we had every expectation that NASA would have announced its Space
Launch System architecture well before today, with the goal that
Committee Members would have the opportunity to ask questions regarding
cost, schedule, capabilities, and the like. Indications we had received
from NASA throughout the spring clearly suggested that a decision would
have been rendered prior to today. Sadly, such is not the case.
Nine months ago the President signed the NASA Authorization Act.
Provisions in the bill clearly directed NASA to provide Congress with
decisions on the selection of the crew vehicle and launch system
designs by January 9, 2011. That date was considered attainable given
the previous investment and substantial progress made by NASA in
vehicle engineering, design, and demonstrations that had already been
achieved by the Constellation program.
The Act also included the goal of reaching operational capability
for the core elements not later than December 31, 2016 because that
date seemed realistic for the now-canceled Constellation system, and it
also reflects Congress' deep concern that we needed to have a back-up
capability in place should commercial launch vehicles fail to
materialize.
Instead, on January 15, Congress received a ``Preliminary Report''
that emphasized its selection of prototype vehicle designs, but did not
commit the agency to their construction. The report was careful to
note, and I quote: ``NASA hopes to finalize its acquisition decisions
as early as Spring of 2011--details that will be included in a follow-
on report to Congress.'' We are well into summer and no such report has
been sent.
So today, six months later, and with the final space shuttle
mission now underway, instead of an informed discussion on the
attributes and trades on the selection of a Space Launch System, we'll
be left with little more than an explanation of decision-making
processes still to be completed. Our letter of invitation asked you to
describe the design of the launch system, how much it would cost, the
budget profile, its performance, when it would be ready, and the types
of missions it would enable. General Bolden, the fact that we do not
have a final decision on the SLS and the supporting documents that the
invitation letter requested represents an insult to Congress.
We will try our best throughout this hearing to accommodate the
agency's failure and the failure of this White House to answer Congress
and give us the information that we are entitled to have. But to be
clear, this failure reflects poorly on the Administration and its space
program. I can't help but feel that this Administration has let down
the thousands of men and women who have devoted their careers to the
space program as well as heroes such as Neil Armstrong, Mike Collins,
Buzz Aldrin, Gene Cernan, Tom Stafford, and many, many others who
risked their lives blazing the trail of space exploration. Some who
lost their lives, and others who continue to maintain an unwavering
dedication and devotion to the cause.
We have a record littered with requests by Congress for information
over the last two years. We have waited for answers that have not come.
We have pleaded for answers that have not come. We have done our best
to be fair with you and this President, who set out to delay the next
step in our nation's human space exploration program and by doing so
has jeopardized the Space Station in the process.
It is a shame that for many of us that simply want to preserve,
protect, and defend our leadership in space that we see NASA paying for
rides to the Space Station from countries that may not have America's
best interests at heart.
We have run out of patience. I realize that you are the person who
has to bear the brunt of this President's bad decisions. This White
House has done you wrong. But nonetheless, you must answer for these
continued failures. I would like to point out today that this Committee
reserves the right to open an investigation into these continued delays
and join the investigation initiated by the Senate. It's a shame we
have to consider doing that.
Moving forward I think that it is important to note that we support
all of the people engaged in developing the next heavy-lift vehicle as
well as those working on the commercial cargo and crew contracts;
people who are working every day to keep America at the forefront of
human spaceflight. It is these engineers, technicians and scientists
who, despite the absence of good leadership from this White House,
strive to dream big and carry on the legacy of those that came before
them.
I now recognize the Gentle-lady from Texas for her opening
statement.

Chairman Hall. I now recognize the gentlelady from Texas
for her opening statement.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning, and let me welcome you, Administrator Bolden. I want
to congratulate you and the entire Shuttle team on the truly
spectacular launch of the Space Shuttle Atlantis. I watched
video right here in this room last Friday, and I can assure you
that the room was packed with enthusiastic supporters of all
ages, and I know I speak for all of my colleagues when I say
that we wish the crew of Atlantis a safe and successful
mission.
As you know, you have been called to testify on NASA's
plans to develop the vehicles that will enable future human
exploration beyond low-Earth orbit, vehicles that have been
authorized and funded by Congress. However, as you also know,
and will testify today, that you still don't have an approved
plan to share with us.
As a result, I expect that you will be on the receiving end
of a lot of unhappiness and irritation expressed by many
Members here today, and that includes me. It is unfortunate
because the fault doesn't lie with you. It is my understanding
that you have had a plan ready to announce for some time, but
you haven't been able to get the final okay to make it public.
And that said, it is now past time for a decision and a plan to
be announced.
Three successful NASA Authorization Acts enacted by
Democratic and Republican Congresses and Presidents alike over
the past six years have directed NASA to undertake a program of
human exploration beyond low-Earth orbit, and the most recent
of those Authorization Acts directed NASA to move expeditiously
to develop the heavy-lift launch vehicle and crew capsule
needed to enable those exploration missions, as well as to
provide back-up capability in support of the International
Space Station.
In short, Congress is not asking NASA to build a rocket
without a mission as some have claimed. Instead, we are asking
NASA to build the system this Nation will need to carry out the
exploration program authorized by successive Congresses and
Presidents.
As I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks, the Shuttle
Program is drawing to a close. There are many talented men and
women who have worked on that program and on the now cancelled
Constellation Program who want to continue to contribute to our
Nation's leadership in space exploration, but they don't know
what, if anything, is going to be there for them to work on in
the coming years. There are impressionable young people,
students, some of whom were here last week, looking with so
much inspiration and hope in their eyes, but now we don't know
whether there is even going to be a human spaceflight program
when they get out of school. I even talked with some about
their wishes of becoming an astronaut, and there are
international partners who wonder why the United States appears
to be adrift and ready to walk away from this global leadership
in human spaceflight.
I suspect that this state of affairs pains you as much as
it does me, but I have been around long enough to believe that
we can do better, and I think that you believe that we can do
better as well. So I hope that when this hearing is over, you
will strongly convey to those in the Administration who are
dithering that this is time to move forward and let NASA get on
with the task that the Nation has asked to be undertaken.
I have been asked by many news outlets about the future,
and sitting on this Committee they certainly expect me to know
the answer, but I do not. At this critical juncture we need to
move ahead expeditiously to build a Space Launch System and
Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle in a way that makes use of the human
spaceflight skills and knowledge base that NASA has worked so
hard to achieve over the years and to inspire the next
generation of explorers, engineers, and scientists.
I firmly believe that if we lose this talent, it won't be
just to another State or another agency. It will be to another
country, and to those of my colleagues on the Majority side who
are critical of the Administration's stewardship of NASA, I
also hope that you will convey to your colleagues in Congress
that NASA cannot do what we have asked it to do if its budget
keeps getting cut. The proposed appropriations level for NASA
is one that if enacted will simply add more stress to an agency
and dedicated workforce that is already trying to do more with
less. At the end of the day, this will put America on a path to
relinquish its space leadership. I would hate for that to
happen, and I don't believe that you want it to happen as well.
But we all need to recognize that votes on funding have
consequences. Chairman Hall, I am so glad that you are
supportive of this program, and I appreciate you calling this
hearing today. Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Johnson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson
Good morning, and welcome Administrator Bolden. I first want to
congratulate you and the entire Shuttle team on the truly spectacular
launch of the Space Shuttle Atlantis. I watched a video feed of that
launch in this same hearing room last Friday, and I can assure you that
the room was packed with enthusiastic viewers of all ages. I know I
speak for all my colleagues when I say that we wish the crew of
Atlantis a safe and successful mission.
Administrator Bolden, as you know, you have been called to testify
on NASA's plans to develop the vehicles that will enable future human
exploration beyond low-Earth orbit-vehicles that have been authorized
and funded by Congress. However, as you also know-and will testify
today-you still don't have an approved plan to share with us. As a
result, I expect that you will be on the receiving end of a lot of
unhappiness and irritation expressed by many Members here today. That's
unfortunate, because the fault doesn't lie with you. It's my
understanding that you have had a plan ready to announce for some time,
but you haven't been able to get the final okay to make it public.
That said, it is now past time for a decision and a plan to be
announced. Three successive NASA Authorization Acts-enacted by
Democratic and Republican Congresses and Presidents alike over the past
six years-have directed NASA to undertake a program of human
exploration beyond low Earth orbit. And the most recent of those
Authorization Acts directed NASA to move expeditiously to develop the
heavy-lift launch vehicle and crew capsule needed to enable those
exploration missions-as well as to provide backup capability in support
of the International Space Station. In short, Congress is not asking
NASA to build a rocket without a mission, as some have claimed.
Instead, we are asking NASA to build the systems this nation will need
to carry out the exploration program authorized by successive
Congresses and Presidents.
As I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks, the Shuttle program
is drawing to a close. There are many talented men and women who have
worked on that program and on the now-cancelled Constellation program
who want to continue to contribute to our nation's leadership in space
exploration-but they don't know what, if anything, is going to be there
for them to work on in the coming years. There are impressionable young
students-some of whom were in this hearing room last week to see the
Shuttle lift off-who were inspired by the space program to study math
and science, but who now don't know whether there is even going to be a
human space flight program when they get out of school. And there are
our international partners, who wonder why the United States appears to
be adrift and ready to walk away from its global leadership in human
space flight. Administrator Bolden, I suspect this state of affairs
pains you as much as it pains me.
But I've been around long enough to believe that we can do better,
and I think you believe that too. So I hope that when this hearing is
over, you will strongly convey to those in the Administration who are
dithering that it is time to move forward and let NASA get on with the
tasks that the nation has asked it to undertake. At this critical
juncture, we need to move ahead expeditiously to build the Space Launch
System and Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle in a way that makes use of the
human spaceflight skills and knowledge-base NASA has worked so hard to
achieve and that inspires the next generation of explorers, engineers,
and scientists.
And to those of my colleagues on the Majority side who are critical
of the Administration's stewardship of NASA, I also hope that you will
convey to your colleagues in Congress that NASA cannot do what we are
asking it to do if its budget keeps getting cut. The proposed House CJS
appropriation level for NASA is one that, if enacted, will simply add
more stress to an agency and dedicated workforce that is already trying
to do ``more with less'', and at the end of the day will put America on
a path to relinquish its space leadership. I would hate for that to
happen, and I don't believe you would want it to happen either, but we
all need to recognize that votes on funding have consequences.
Chairman Hall, I am glad that we are holding today's hearing, and I
look forward to Administrator Bolden's testimony. Thank you, and I
yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Hall. And I thank you for your good opening
remarks, and I agree with you on the budget cuts.
Now, I am going to take advantage of being the Chairman to
make a statement. Some time many years ago when I was a
Democrat, and I was a ranking Democrat, and I think Mr.
Sensenbrenner might have been the Chairman then, the Republican
Chairman, Al Gore, who was Vice-President, told us we had to
cut the budget 25 percent. He told everyone that, and I talked
to Al, and I said, I doubt seriously that the Chairman nor do I
know how to cut the budget on people whose lives are in danger.
Who could we get to help us?
And I think he suggested Administrator Goldin, I believe
was the Administrator at that time, and we talked to him and
told him we had to have a 25 percent cut. This is just my
recollection. I can be wrong, because I am 88 years old, and I
wake up every morning in kind of a new world sometimes, but I
remember this conversation very well when we asked Mr. Goldin,
and he said, yes, he would cut it.
Mr. Goldin did cut it, but he didn't cut it 25 percent. He
cut it 34 percent. Really and truly. NASA hasn't been the same
since that time. So you can have too dang many cuts, and I am
like that senator that said don't tax me, tax that man behind
the tree. They cut the wrong budget, and we are suffering from
it today. We got to work together and try to work a way out of
it.
I thank you, Ms. Johnson, for your statement.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
And at this time----
Ms. Johnson. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. Yes.
Ms. Johnson. Before we proceed.
Chairman Hall. Go ahead. Sure.
Ms. Johnson. I would like to ask unanimous consent that
Representative Sheila Jackson Lee be allowed to sit on the dais
today and participate in questions. She hasn't arrived yet, but
she made this request after our Committee Members finished
their questions.
Chairman Hall. When she gets here, we will let her sit
down.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. And let her ask questions.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. After our Members. Okay.
At this time I would like to introduce our witness, Charles
F. Bolden, Jr., a friend of mine for a lot of years, a man I
have admired and respected. Was appointed NASA administrator by
President Obama and sworn in on July 17, 2009. He is an
astronaut having flown on four Shuttle missions, including the
mission that deployed the Hubble Space Telescope. Prior to
being appointed administrator, Mr. Bolden served in the United
States Marine Corps for 34 years. During his service he was an
aviator, having flown 100 missions in South East Asia during
the Vietnam War.
And he was a test pilot. He held a number of commands. Mr.
Bolden retired from the Corps with the rank of major general.
He is a true patriot. We are glad to have him before us here
today, and we welcome you, Charlie.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES F. BOLDEN, JR., ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL
AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Bolden. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much and Members
of the Committee. I thank you all for the opportunity to appear
here today to discuss the future of NASA's human spaceflight
program, a future that I believe is very bright.
And before I continue with my formal comments, I do have to
say you have the correct person here to cast blame. I want to
make that very clear. I really appreciate everybody's
continuing willingness to excuse me for our shortcomings, but
it is really important for everybody on this Committee and
everybody watching this hearing to understand that I am the
leader of America's space program. I am the leader of the
greatest space program in the world today, and so I am here in
that capacity to testify and to try to be as honest and open as
I can with you and answer as many questions as I can. I
understand everybody's frustration, but you have the right guy
here to criticize. It is not the President. It is me.
Our new system will stand on the shoulders of the
successful Shuttle Program to which thousands of American men
and women have contributed their passion and expertise to
ensure America's preeminence in space exploration. I appear
before you today 4 days after an historic milestone in
America's spaceflight program; the launch of Atlantis on the
STS-135 mission, the final flight of the Shuttle Program.
The brave men and woman of STS-135 safely docked with the
International Space Station on Sunday, joining the list of
dozens of American astronauts who have been living and working
in space continuously for the past decade aboard the orbiting
outpost. The station is the pinnacle of our current
achievement, a stepping stone to the rest of our solar system.
Some say that this final Shuttle mission will mark the end
of America's 50 years of dominance in human spaceflight. As a
former astronaut and the current NASA administrator, I am here
to tell you that American leadership in space will continue for
at least the next half century because we have laid the
foundation for success, and as we say at NASA, failure is not
an option.
The NASA Authorization Act of 2010 gave NASA a clear
direction and in line with our 2011 Appropriations Bill, we are
moving aggressively and enthusiastically to plan future
exploration. We appreciate the significant bipartisan effort
behind the law and look forward to working with you to shape a
promising future for human spaceflight.
Our post-Shuttle human spaceflight plan also focuses on
utilization and operation of the ISS, establishing a U.S.
commercial cargo and crew capability to reach this national
laboratory and making critical, prioritized investments in the
technologies that will help us win the future.
We have to get out of the business of owning and operating
low-Earth orbit transportation systems and hand that off to the
private sector, exercising sufficient insight and oversight to
ensure safety of our astronauts.
As you all know, our next generation human spaceflight, the
Space Launch System, or SLS, and the Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle
or MPCV, will transport astronauts to multiple destinations
beyond low-Earth orbit.
Our first goal is to target an asteroid by 2025. Our
destinations could include cis-lunar space such as the Earth-
Moon Lagrange points, the lunar surface, and eventually Mars
and its moons.
I understand the interest of many Members of Congress,
including Members of this Committee, in seeing that we move
quickly. I share that interest and urgency as do the thousands
of NASA employees and contractors who stand ready to build a
new system, but we cannot rush a critical decision that will
drive NASA's activities for several decades. We must be
respectful stewards of taxpayer dollars.
As I have said time and time again, our new systems must be
affordable, sustainable, and realistic. One of the most
important lessons we learned from Constellation is that a Space
Launch System will only be successful if multiple Congresses
and multiple Administrations provide adequate funding.
In late May after careful analysis and deliberations by my
senior management team, I accepted the Orion-based reference
vehicle design first outlined in NASA's January, 2011 report to
Congress as the agency's MPCV. Orion was already being built to
meet the requirements of a deep-space vehicle, and our contract
with Lockheed Martin Corporation maps well to our capsule
requirements.
We have also been working expeditiously to complete
assessments of SLS design options and develop a final
integrated proposal for it and the MPCV Orion. Of course, we
were constrained in this work to some degree by the 2010
Appropriations Law, which required us to continue funding
Constellation Era contracts.
We are making progress towards selecting a technical design
approach that will be evolvable over time to meet our goals and
be consistent with the law. In parallel to technical decisions
we are developing new ways of doing business to keep costs down
and insure agility, efficiency, and sustainability. We are
revising the management of our requirements, contracts, and
projects and incorporating approaches to ensure affordability
in the near term and over the long run.
To accomplish all this is required--all that is required to
mount MPCV and SLS, NASA put together a series of teams to
evaluate and compare various options and evaluate the risks,
uncertainty and relative advantages and disadvantages of
alternatives for this integrated system.
We have also sought input from industry and are considering
an early flight program for SLS to make the most of what we
know early on. We know that SLS must be capable of accessing
many regions of space beyond LEO and be capable of lifting the
MPCV. It also must be able to initially lift 70 to 100 metric
tons to LEO while ultimately being evolvable to a lifting
capacity of 130 metric tons or more.
The SLS must also have commonality of systems between core
and upper stage and modularity of elements. The system should
also be flexible and strengthen our industrial base. On June 20
I approved a specific design that our experts believe is the
best technical path forward for SLS. That was an important step
but not a final decision. Our experts, as well as an
independent team from Booz Allen Hamilton, are now developing
cost estimates. We need a credible path to preliminary design
review or PDR on our best, most flexible approach based on
budget assumptions and our best estimates on what its cost,
what this cost and how it fits with projected budgets.
It would be irresponsible to proceed further until we at
least have good estimates. I have shared that design with the
Office of Management and Budget and others at the White House.
Like me, they are eager to see the results of our cost
estimates. We know that this program will likely cost tens of
billions of dollars over many years, so this will likely be the
most important decision I make as the NASA administrator, and I
want to get it right.
We must first pin down the cost of specific technical
design that I have proposed. Just as importantly we must then
see how these costs fit into the larger NASA budget so that we
can continue to do exceptional work in robotic exploration,
science, and aeronautics.
Last week's House Subcommittee mark of our 2012
Appropriations Bill was another stark reminder that we are
making this critical decision in exceptionally challenging
fiscal times.
I commit that we will re-double our efforts to keep this
Committee informed of our progress. While I would hope to have
a final decision to announce this summer, the absolute need to
make sure our SLS program fits within our overall budget
constraints suggests that it may take longer. While we are
going through the process on that decision, we are continuing
to make investments such as the following.
Assembly of the Orion Ground Test Article was recently
completed, and it is being prepared for a series of ground-
based, environmental tests to validate the Orion design and
computer models.
The former Ares project has focused their development
efforts on technologies and processes that could be utilized in
the eventual SLS configuration, including vehicle avionics, J-
2X engine testing, first stage motor testing, the developmental
motor 3, and installation of upper-stage tooling applicable to
large diameter tanks.
The J-2X engine is fully assembled and installed in the A-2
Test Stand at NASA's Stennis Space Center. The engine began a
series of ten test firings on July 6.
Significant progress has been made in the modifications to
Pad B at Launch Complex 39. There are new fiber optic cables
replacing the copper wire, and by the way, we recovered
$621,000 from scrap copper. New digital control systems for the
pad utilities and a state-of-the-art lightning protection
system that helped us clear the Shuttle during STS-135
processing. This has been done in continued preparation for a
clean pad multi-user capability, including SLS.
Although NASA must still finalize an integrated test flight
plan, based on the President's fiscal year 2012, budget
request, NASA is currently targeting the first uncrewed SLS
development flight for late 2017 to support a crewed mission by
the early 2020s and a visit to an asteroid in 2025.
We look forward to working with the Congress as we finalize
our strategy for achieving human spaceflight to many
destinations in our solar system. I share your sense of urgency
about moving forward but ask for your continued patience as we
together build an affordable, sustainable, and realistic Space
Launch System.
Mr. Chairman, I would be pleased to respond to any
questions you or other Members of the Committee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bolden follows:]
Prepared Statement of The Honorable Charles F. Bolden Jr.,
Administrator, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Chairman Hall and Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the future of NASA's
human spaceflight program, and in particular the progress NASA is
making on developing the next-generation human spaceflight
transportation systems known as the Space Launch System (SLS) and the
Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle (MPCV), as well as their associated mission
and ground support elements and other programs.
With passage of the NASA Authorization Act of 2010 (P.L. 111-267)
on October 11, 2010, NASA has a clear direction for our human
spaceflight programs. NASA appreciates the significant effort made in
advancing this important bipartisan legislation, and we look forward to
working with you to shape a promising future for our Nation's human
spaceflight programs. With the enactment of the FY 2011 Full-Year
Continuing Appropriations Act (P.L. 112-10), NASA is aggressively
moving forward with our next-generation human spaceflight system
development efforts as authorized.
The President's FY 2012 budget request continues to focus Agency
efforts on a vigorous path of innovation and technological development
leading to an array of challenging and inspiring missions to
destinations with an incredible potential for discovery, increasing our
knowledge of our solar system, developing technologies to improve life,
expanding our presence in space, increasing space commerce, and
engaging the public. The request supports an aggressive launch rate of
about 40 missions from FY 2011 through FY 2012, including U.S. and
international flights to the International Space Station (ISS) as well
as science missions flown to Earth orbit and beyond. Within the human
spaceflight arena, our foremost priority is safely and productively
conducting our current human spaceflight endeavor. The FY 2012 budget
request also maintains a strong commitment to human spaceflight beyond
low-Earth orbit (LEO) via a capability-driven architecture that will
focus on increasingly complex missions as we develop the technical
expertise to reach destinations ever deeper into our solar system. At
present, as designated by the President, our initial destination for a
human mission is a crewed flight to an asteroid by 2025, followed by a
human mission to Mars in the mid-2030s. Our post-Shuttle human
spaceflight plan also focuses on utilization and operation of the ISS
and on establishing a U.S. commercial cargo and crew capability to
reach this National Laboratory. It establishes critical priorities and
invests in the technologies and excellent science, aeronautics
research, and education programs that will help us win the future.
In terms of our next-generation human spaceflight system, the SLS
and MPCV will be capable of transporting astronauts to multiple
destinations beyond LEO. The capabilities provided by these two vehicle
systems are necessary for all activities beyond LEO. While our plan
calls for the initial destination for human flight beyond LEO to target
an asteroid by 2025, other destinations could include cis-lunar space
such as the Earth-Moon Lagrange points, the lunar surface, and
eventually Mars and its moons. All of these places hold incredible
information for us--information that we probably do not even know
exists at this point. Compelling missions to advance exploration will
be enabled by coupling these spacecraft systems with others needed for
particular missions. This journey begins with the SLS and MPCV as the
first important core elements of the evolutionary exploration approach
to accomplishing a broad spectrum of missions.
To date, as NASA has reported to the Committee, the Agency has
determined that the beyond-LEO version of the Orion Crew Exploration
Vehicle is NASA's new MPCV, and as such, the current Orion contract
with Lockheed Martin Corporation is being used through at least the
development phase of the vehicle.
NASA has been working expeditiously to complete assessments of SLS
design options and develop a final integrated proposal for MPCV/Orion
and SLS. NASA has been conducting detailed technical analysis since the
enactment of the NASA Authorization Act of 2010, and is working towards
selecting a technical approach that will meet the intent of the SLS
configuration described in the NASA Authorization of 2010 and enable
the Nation to conduct a sustainable program of exploration. NASA's
intent is that the design would evolve over time to meet the end goals
of the SLS configuration in the Authorization Act. NASA is exploring
strategic approaches that would be adaptable to modifications in annual
funding and still make significant progress toward the end design. The
SLS and MPCV teams are continuing to develop an integrated development
plan that will be affordable in the near term and over the long run. In
doing so, we are striving to design an evolvable and interoperable
human spaceflight transportation system that will serve us for decades
to come as we explore multiple compelling mission destinations. Due
diligence will ensure the best value for the taxpayer with respect to
cost, risk, schedule, performance, and impacts to critical NASA and
industrial skills and capabilities in this multi-billion dollar
endeavor.
While NASA has made significant progress to date on both the SLS
and the MPCV, much work remains ahead for the Agency, as we finalize
development plans and acquisition decisions per normal Agency processes
for the SLS-decisions that must remain consistent with NASA's Strategic
Plan and Agency commitments, as well as the NASA Authorization Act of
2010.
In a constrained budget environment, NASA knows how important it is
to identify ways to make our programs and projects more efficient, so
finding and incorporating these efficiencies remains a primary goal. We
have embraced the challenge to deliver human spaceflight systems for
lower cost, and the opportunity to become more efficient, innovative
and agile in our programs. For example, we are revising the management
of our requirements, contracts, and projects and incorporating
approaches to ensure affordability in the near term and over the long
run. This includes the use of focused insight/oversight, specifying to
industry--where appropriate --what we need instead of how to build it,
designing for cost-effective operations, increasing the use of common
components and parts, and wisely consolidating infrastructure.
The remainder of my testimony will address progress made to date on
the SLS and MPCV Programs, as well as outlining the work ahead of us in
order to ensure that we develop systems that reflect the NASA
Authorization Act of 2010 using an affordable, sustainable and
realistic approach.
However, before I explore those topics, I would like to take a
moment to personally recognize the thousands of NASA civil servants and
industry team Members who have worked selflessly for countless hours,
often under difficult circumstances and in a turbulent environment, to
make our human spaceflight programs and projects productive and
successful. In the days ahead, these incredible and talented employees
will continue to do whatever it takes to make sure that the United
States remains the world's leader in human spaceflight. After all, they
do not know how to commit to anything less. I would also like to thank
the Committee for its continued strong support for NASA's human
spaceflight programs and their value to the Nation, especially as we
work hard to finalize details of a well-thought-out strategy for our
next-generation human spaceflight programs.

An Integrated Launch System: A Work in Progress

Over the last several months, NASA has been evaluating options for
developing an integrated and incremental development approach for the
SLS, MPCV and the associated ground operations that will be capable of
achieving progress in an incremental manner while also reflecting the
goals and objectives of the NASA Authorization Act of 2010, the FY 2011
Full-Year Continuing Appropriations Act (P.L. 112*10), and in a
sustainable manner.
In order to accomplish this task, NASA put together a series of
teams to develop an Analysis of Alternatives (AoA) that would meet
future human spaceflight goals established by law and by Administration
policy. In general, an AoA is a study intended to aid decision making
by comparing various options and illuminating the risk, uncertainty,
and the relative advantages and disadvantages of alternatives being
considered to satisfy a mission need.
The AoA process produced many important results that will help
inform NASA's final decision for the architecture approach for SLS by
evaluating various technical designs. This SLS process has also sought
to incorporate input from industry via a broad area announcement which
collected industry suggestions and comments that have proven to be very
useful in the design development process. NASA's goal is to develop an
SLS architecture that represents the best ideas from industry and NASA.
NASA is currently evaluating the potential options for future
missions that could enable continued progress toward longer-duration,
beyond-LEO destinations. NASA is strongly considering an early flight
test program, not unlike that we are conducting with our commercial
partners for the evolving LEO capability. Such a program has many
benefits, such as earlier access to data that could inform future
design iterations or be applied to other programs, etc. and could also
mitigate gaps in the current NASA industrial base and workforce skills.
If implemented, NASA believes that this early mission strategy could
effectively utilize and evolve existing capability (workforce,
hardware, and contracts) to begin the next human exploration venture
quickly. Over the next months, NASA will continue to evaluate this type
of integrated strategy, including cost and schedule, through normal
Agency program formulation activities, and we will continue to keep
Congress apprised of our progress. Final acquisition decisions for the
SLS are expected in the next couple of months, and we will provide
those to Congress as soon as they are available.
Very early on in this process, I directed that we complete an
Independent Cost Assessment (ICA) of our integrated SLS/MPCV
development approach--particularly in terms of the Agency's initial
cost and schedule estimates for the SLS. This ICA work is ongoing. I
want to have a sanity check on our cost and schedule estimates before
we make a final commitment to what will be a critical, but expensive
venture for our nation. NASA has contracted with the firm of Booz Allen
Hamilton, Inc. to perform this work, and final results from the company
are expected in late July/early August. To be clear, the ICA will only
have the fidelity that reflects the maturity of the SLS architecture
concepts described above. I have also chosen not to do comparative cost
estimates of all the alternatives to enable the assessment to focus on
some of the most promising alternatives. Since the SLS proposal is
still considered to be in the pre-formulation phase, the initial
assessment will be a rough order of magnitude (ROM), which is typical
of pre-formulation planning that occurs before a decision is made to
baseline and fund a program. Official baselining of a program occurs
upon successful completion of the Preliminary Design Review, when
system requirements are fully defined and system design concepts are
mature. It is at this point that the Agency will commit to an
established life cycle cost and schedule.

The MPCV Program

The NASA Authorization Act of 2010 directs that NASA develop an
MPCV that continues the advanced development of the human safety
features, designs, and systems in the Orion Project.
The MPCV will transport the crew from the Earth's surface to a
nearby destination or staging point and return the crew safely back to
the Earth's surface at the end of a mission. The MPCV will provide all
services necessary to support a crew of up to four for up to 21-day
missions (for very long beyond-LEO missions, such as exploration of
near-Earth asteroids or other planetary bodies, additional elements--a
space habitation module for example--will be included to provide long-
duration deep space habitation capability).
Mounted on top of the SLS for launch and ascent, the MPCV will be
capable of performing abort maneuvers to safely separate from the
launch vehicle and return the crew to the Earth's surface. The MPCV
will also be capable of performing in-space aborts if conditions
require the immediate safe return of the crew. MPCV will include the
necessary propulsive acceleration capability to rendezvous with other
mission elements and return the flight crew from the destination to the
Earth's surface. In-space operations, such as rendezvous and docking
and extravehicular activities, will be performed with the MPCV in
conjunction with other mission elements.
The NASA Authorization Act of 2010 requires that the MPCV be
capable of efficient and timely evolution--something that has been in
practice throughout the design process for the Orion vehicle.
Continuing this process for MPCV will allow for an incremental or
``block'' development and mission capability approach. This will allow
for early progress to be made on the fabrication of key design aspects,
depending on available funding, while utilizing early testing to buy
down risks associated with subsequent block configurations. Each test
cycle will also provide an opportunity to on-ramp or off-ramp
capabilities as the design evolves.
In late May, and after careful analysis and deliberations by a
senior management team, I decided to accept the Orion-based reference
vehicle design, first outlined in NASA's January 2011 report to
Congress, as the Agency's MPCV. As part of my decision process, I
determined that the Orion was already being built to meet the
requirements of a deep-space vehicle and that the Agency's current
Orion contractual partnership with Lockheed Martin Corporation maps
well to the scope of the MPCV requirements outlined in the NASA
Authorization Act of 2010. Therefore, the current contract will be used
at least for the development phase of the MPCV.
Moving forward, work on the MPCV will focus only on the deep-space
design. While the MPCV could be called upon to service the ISS--a
backup requirement established by the NASA Authorization Act of 2010 --
it should be well understood that utilizing the MPCV for routine ISS
transportation would be a very inefficient and costly use of the MPCV
deep-space capability. NASA is confident in the ability of our
commercial and international partners to provide all currently foreseen
support for the ISS. Therefore, there is no intention to conduct
routine LEO missions with the MPCV.
It is important to point out that my decision regarding MPCV does
not reflect a ``business as usual'' approach for the Agency. Over the
last year, the NASA/Lockheed Martin team has shown exceptional
creativity in finding ways to keep costs down by implementing new
management techniques, technical solutions and innovation within the
Orion Project. Since the NASA Authorization Act of 2010 was signed into
law, the Orion government and industry team has assessed and
implemented additional affordability initiatives that have reduced
Design, Development, Test and Evaluation costs and enabled schedule
acceleration. These initiatives include but are not limited to:

Furthering the incremental approach to building and
testing vehicle capabilities;

Streamlining Government oversight and insight;

Reducing formal deliverables and simplifying processes
while retaining adequate rigor;

Utilizing high fidelity engineering development units in
lieu of flight-equivalent hardware in test facilities and labs;

Consolidating test labs and re-use of test articles; and,

Enhancing the approach for spacecraft processing by
employing applicable Space Shuttle processes and certified Shuttle
personnel.

Over the last year, NASA developed and executed plans for an
incremental development approach for the Orion, due in large part to
the constrained fiscal environment. This approach deferred work on some
systems while focusing on core components and systems that could be
applicable to MPCV, with the aim of attempting to enable incremental
test flights and subsequent upgrades to full operational capabilities
as quickly as the budget profile allows. In doing so, NASA deliberately
prioritized Constellation funds, including those for Orion, to maximize
their use in support of transition to SLS and MPCV. Examples are listed
below.

Assembly of the Orion Ground Test Article (GTA) was
recently completed, with the GTA being prepared for a series of ground-
based environmental tests to validate the Orion design and computer
models. The GTA is undergoing vibration and acoustic testing this
summer, and will undergo drop testing at Langley Research Center Water
Basin Facility in Virginia this fall. Data collected from GTA testing
will be incorporated into MPCV development efforts so as to result in a
safe, reliable and affordable human-rated crew capsule. Design work for
the subsequent test article is also proceeding, including conducting
periodic technical reviews. In FY 2012, testing on the GTA will be
completed. Fabrication work and assembly work for the following test
article will also be well underway.

A new sensor technology has been developed that will
allow easier, safer, and more affordable on-orbit rendezvous and
docking to the ISS for future spacecraft, including the MPCV as well as
commercial cargo and crew providers. The Orion Vision Navigation System
(VNS) is an advanced Light Detection And Ranging (LiDAR) -based
relative navigation sensor with performance specifications unmatched in
today's relative navigation sensor market. The VNS uses cross-cutting
technology that has been developed in partnership with commercial
vendors and is applicable to future spacecraft requiring rendezvous and
dockings, as well as terrestrial commercial applications. In May 2011,
NASA tested the VNS system aboard STS-134. During this test, a
prototype docking camera provided a resolution 16 times higher than the
current Space Shuttle docking camera. Once completed, the VNS system
should be able to provide rendezvous data to approaching vehicles as
far away as three miles, which is three times the range of the current
Shuttle navigation sensor.

During the last year, progress continued on the
construction and outfitting of Orion support facilities. NASA is now in
the process of deciding how and when these facilities will be used by
the MPCV Program.

NASA is hoping to be able to launch an initial uncrewed test flight
of an integrated early version of the SLS and the MPCV as early as
2017.

The SLS Program

The SLS will be the Nation's first exploration-class, heavy-lift
launch vehicle since the Saturn V and will serve as the critical next
step beyond the Space Shuttle and three decades of LEO operations.
The NASA Authorization Act of 2010 directs that NASA develop an SLS
that is capable of accessing cis-lunar space and other regions of space
beyond LEO. The Act also states that the SLS must be capable of lifting
the MPCV, and that the SLS must be able to initially lift 70-100 metric
ton (mT) to LEO, while ultimately being evolvable to a lifting capacity
of 130 mT or more. As such, the SLS flights will be capable of lifting
the MPCV and other exploration flight elements into space for missions
to the Moon, Lagrange points, asteroids, and ultimately to Mars. The
MPCV design will be optimized for beyond-LEO exploration, and while
contingency utilization for the ISS is a possibility, consistent with
the Authorization Act of 2010, doing so would represent a highly
inefficient vehicle usage.
In January 2011, NASA announced that it had chosen a Reference
Vehicle Design for the SLS derived from Ares and Space Shuttle
hardware. That concept vehicle utilized a LOX/LH2 core, five-segment
solid rocket boosters, and a J-2X-based Upper Stage as the 130-mT
version of the vehicle--evolvable from the 70-100-mT version. As
envisioned, this Reference Vehicle Design would allow for use of
existing Shuttle and Ares hardware assets in the near term, with the
opportunity for later upgrades and/or competition for eventual upgrades
in designs needed for affordable production. However, NASA has
continued to study other alternative architectures as part of its due
diligence. In so doing, NASA has identified several characteristics
that the ultimate SLS design may include.

Evolvable development: While our initial development
efforts would focus on the 70-100-mT lift capability, in parallel, we
would plan to capitalize on synergies between Core Stage and Upper-
Stage design and manufacturing, thereby allowing us to develop some of
the upper-range capabilities for an eventual 130-mT vehicle at the same
time, as funding permits. Doing so is actually a fairly natural,
evolvable progression in terms of developing these capabilities.

Commonality of systems: The use of common elements (e.g.,
common propellants, common manufacturing, and common avionics and
control systems) across the entire SLS can enable the same or similar
equipment and manufacturing to be used for both systems. This makes
more efficient use of the infrastructure and increases throughput
through manufacturing. This ultimately can lower costs.

Modularity of Elements: With the availability of three
stages (Core, First, and Upper) to work with, NASA could structure each
specific launch vehicle to achieve specific requirements such as thrust
capability. Doing so would allow NASA to capitalize on cost savings.
For example, if a specific mission did not need 130 mT in thrust
capability, NASA could potentially save funds by not having to use
booster stages on that mission. In addition, modularity offers the
benefit of metering development costs commensurate with available
funding levels.

Industrial Base: We would work with the space launch
community in general in an effort to help strengthen the overall
industrial base.

Flexibility: Although the SLS is expected to be costly to
fly, it will have an unmatched payload capacity. The ability of the SLS
to carry either the MPCV or large cargo also allows the SLS to carry
robotic payloads for science or national security missions, although
there are currently no requirements for such large payloads. The
additional volume and lift capability could allow designers to either
simplify the spacecraft by choosing to reduce deployments or eliminate
the need for costly weight reductions;, to take advantage of the
additional volume and lift capability to enable more capable missions;
or to increase the duration and frequency of launch windows for
planetary missions. To ensure that we have kept other agencies informed
with our future plans for launch systems, we have provided periodic
briefs on the progress of our SLS and MPCV deliberations to their
senior leadership.

To be clear, as previously stated, much work remains ahead for the
SLS team. We are working hard to finalize the analysis on the best
option for venturing beyond LEO as quickly as possible and at the
lowest near-term development cost.
Currently, NASA has procurement teams mapping SLS requirements
(those outlined in the NASA Authorization Act of 2010 and those we are
currently developing). For the SLS, NASA is reviewing each element of
Ares (First Stage, Upper Stage, Upper Stage J-2X engine, and avionics)
and Shuttle Program contracts (Space Shuttle Main Engines, External
Tank, SRB) to determine whether the new SLS requirements would be
within scope of current contracts. At the same time, NASA is assessing
SLS competition options, including the potential degree of competition.
Although NASA must still finalize an integrated test flight plan,
based on the President's FY 2012 budget request, NASA is targeting that
the first uncrewed SLS developmental flight or mission could take place
in late 2017 to support a crewed mission by the early 2020s and a visit
to an asteroid in 2025. This target date also depends on how quickly
acquisition decisions are made so that physical development work can
begin on SLS elements and integration processes.
NASA is strongly considering an early mission/test flight strategy
that would include early flights that would begin with a lift capacity
in the 70-100 mT range, sufficient to get out of LEO with meaningful
mission content, with the first flight targeted for the end of 2017 and
the second flight targeted for 2021. Therefore, the 70-100 mT flight
configuration will offer early development of the Core Stage,
continuation of the Orion-based design as the MPCV, an Upper Stage/kick
motor capability that will enable a series of development missions/test
flights beyond LEO, and use of existing solid rocket boosters.
Early test flights for the SLS, if carefully planned, could enable
NASA to reduce development risk, drive innovation within the Agency and
in private industry, and accomplish early exploration objectives. I
have stressed to the SLS team that we must make every test flight count
in a constrained budget environment; that is why the NASA teams are
still working to develop an integrated SLS/MPCV test flight schedule
that will be part of an overall incremental development approach
consistent with anticipated cost constraints.
Moving forward on the SLS, one of NASA's greatest challenges will
be to reduce the development and operating costs (both fixed and
recurring) for human spaceflight missions to sustain a long-term U.S.
human spaceflight program. We must plan and implement an exploration
enterprise with costs that are credible and affordable for the long
term under constrained budget environments. As such, our development
efforts also will be dependent on a realistic budget profile and
sufficiently stable funding over the long term, coupled with a
successful effort on the part of NASA and our eventual industry team to
reduce costs and to establish stable, tightly-managed requirements.
Additionally, the SLS Program will continue to examine ways to
increase efficiency and agility to deliver an affordable and achievable
heavy-lift system as soon as possible. Examples being considered in
formulating SLS plans include the following:

Consolidating infrastructure wisely;

Using common parts and common designs across the
Government to reduce costs;

Ensuring requirements are appropriately specific and also
that requirements applied to NASA crew launch vehicles are similar to
those provided to our eventual commercial crew partners, thereby
ensuring that NASA vehicles are not required to meet more substantial
requirements than commercial crew vehicles and vice versa;

Conducting insight/oversight activities of our contract
partners in a smarter way, thereby using our resources more
appropriately to focus on the high-risk items; and

Ensuring that there are no unique configurations or
developments that do not end up directly supporting the final system.

NASA has continued to make progress on developing a crew launch
vehicle over the last year. Due to legal restrictions that have since
been rescinded, NASA had been prevented from terminating any
Constellation-related work. However, in the meantime, the Agency was
able to prioritize Constellation work that had a high likelihood of
feeding forward into the new SLS and MPCV Programs.
For example, during FY 2011, the former Ares Project worked closely
with SLS planning team to focus their development efforts on
technologies and processes that could be utilized in the eventual SLS
configuration, including vehicle avionics, J-2X Engine testing, First
Stage motor testing (Development Motor-3), and installation of Upper
Stage tooling applicable to large-diameter tanks. At the same time, the
former Ares Project deferred activities that were Ares-I-dependent,
including a ground vibration test article and design of Upper Stage
component hardware, such as the reaction control system.
The J-2X engine is an example of significant progress made during
FY 2011 that could be directly applicable to the SLS Upper Stage
engine. The J-2X engine is fully assembled and installed in the A-2
Test Stand at NASA's Stennis Space Center and has been readied for its
first round of testing. The engine began a series of 10 test firings on
July 6 and testing will occur over several months. Collected data will
verify the engine functions as designed.

Conclusion

In conclusion, Americans and people worldwide have turned to NASA
for inspiration throughout our history--our work gives people an
opportunity to imagine what is barely possible, and we at NASA get to
turn those dreams into real achievements for all humankind.
With the passage of the NASA Authorization Act of 2010, NASA has a
clear direction and is making plans for moving the Agency forward.
Today, we have a roadmap to even more historic achievements that will
spur innovation, employ Americans in fulfilling jobs, and engage people
around the world as we enter an exciting new era in space. NASA
appreciates the significant effort that has gone into advancing this
bipartisan legislation.
Let me assure you that NASA is committed to meeting the spaceflight
goals of the Nation and fulfilling the requirements of the NASA
Authorization Act of 2010. As such, we are committed to developing an
affordable, sustainable, and realistic next-generation human
spaceflight system that will enable human exploration, scientific
discovery, broad commercial benefits, and inspirational missions that
are in the best interests of the Nation. We look forward to working
with you and other Members of Congress as we finalize our strategy for
achieving human spaceflight to many destinations in our solar system.
Chairman Hall and Members of the Committee, I would like to
conclude my remarks by thanking you again for your continued support
for NASA and its human spaceflight programs. I would be pleased to
respond to any questions you or the other Members of the Committee may
have.

Chairman Hall. I thank you, and I tell the Members that we
did not set a 5-minute request of you because of the importance
of this meeting and the importance of the questions and the
answers we ask.
Mr. Bolden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. We are at a crossroads trying to preserve
our Space Station, and we are going to take all the time we
really need. I would remind the Members of the Committee,
though, that we are limited to five minutes, and try to stay
within five minutes, and I will stay within my five minutes.
So the Chair recognizes himself for five minutes. Mr.
Bolden, recently a senior NASA official, I think it was Ms.
Garver, NASA Deputy Administrator, was talking about the
agency's human spaceflight program. It was quoted in the press
as saying, and I quote, exact quote, ``We have a program, we
have a budget, we have a destination. We are just putting finer
points on the rocket design.''
That was in the Washington Post, July 2, 2011, and I am
trying to reconcile these comments with your testimony this
morning, and it leaves me a little confused. Your testimony
highlights work still to be done.
Let me reread her announcement. ``We have a program. We
have a budget, we have a destination. We are just putting fine
points on the rocket design.''
Your work is still to be done, including cost assessments.
It will take a couple of months to complete probably. Yet
another senior agency official suggests virtually all the
decisions have been made except for a couple of minor tweaks to
the rocket's design.
Can you reconcile these two views? You both just can't be
right.
Mr. Bolden. Mr. Chairman, unfortunately we are all right,
and I will try to explain that. We do have a program, and we
have a very well-defined program right now for space
exploration. It is a program that features a Space Launch
System or a heavy-lift launch or heavy-lift rocket that will
start at a 70 to 100 metric ton capability evolving to 130 to
150 metric tons. It has an MPCV which is already--the design
for which has already been selected, and it has a ground launch
system that we--I tried to point out some of the things that
have already been done with that system at the Kennedy Space
Center.
We have engines on the pad at Stennis that will be involved
in this system. We have a budget because you all gave it to us
in the form of the 2010 Authorization Act supplemented by the
2011 Appropriations Budget.
So with that budget and the President's 2012 proposal to
you is what we are basing our program and our timelines on, and
those timelines include what I gave to you. The President
continually says that he has laid down the gauntlet for me. He
has told me that he wants humans around an asteroid in 2025. I
am going to put a satellite called DAWN around this--the
Asteroid Vesta the end of this week as a precursor for sending
humans there. Not that asteroid. We don't know what asteroid we
are going to visit in 2025. It is too far out, but we will
determine what that is. But we do have a program, we do have a
plan. You have given us a budget, and I am very confident that
we are going to be able to execute.
Chairman Hall. Well, our confidence is shaken some by the
inaction, not just this year but last year. The NASA
Authorization Act of 2010 directs NASA to design the Multi-
Purpose Crew Vehicle to, ``provide an alternative means of
delivery of crew and cargo to the International Space Station
in the event of other vehicles, whether commercial vehicles or
partner-supplied vehicles, are unable to perform that
function.''
However, since your announcement last May I have heard
conflicting reports about NASA's compliance with this
requirement. So is the Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle being
designed as backup crew support for the Space Station?
Mr. Bolden. Mr. Chairman, it is not being designed as
backup crew support, however, it is as a vehicle that is
designed for deep-space exploration, it can function as a
backup for crew rescue.
Chairman Hall. It is not being designed, but it is being
designed.
Mr. Bolden. No, no, no, sir. You asked if it was being
designed as a backup for low-Earth orbit operations, and my
response is it is not being designed as such. Its design is as
a deep-space exploration vehicle. What that means is when we go
to deep space and return to Earth, having to go through its
atmosphere, the energy that we have to absorb or dissipate, the
speed at which we reenter, the pressures on the vehicle are
much higher than they are on a low-Earth orbiting vehicle.
So if I design it for low-Earth orbit operations, it can't
function in deep space. If I design it for deep space, it can
function in low-Earth orbit, very inefficient, a waste of the
government's money, but it will be able to do that. So it will
have the capability of serving as a backup should it be needed.
I would not advise that, and if we have to use it that way,
it means one of two things have happened. Either all the
commercial entities have gone bankrupt and quit, or we have had
an accident involving a commercial vehicle. Those are the only
two reasons that I can foresee using Orion as a low-Earth
operating vehicle, and I don't--I hope neither of those
happens.
Chairman Hall. My time is up. I yield back and recognize
Ms. Johnson for her five minutes.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bolden, I am still a little bit confused, but let me
just ask this. How will the decision on the final SLS
architecture affect the government and contractor aerospace
workforce? Will we require more people? Will a lot of people be
laid off, or will the decision stabilize the current workforce
and potentially create new jobs? Or what is your projection?
Mr. Bolden. Congresswoman, the sooner we make the decision,
the more I can say we will stabilize the workforce at whatever
level it happens to be then. We are in the process of a seven-
year, very well thought out transition plan from phasing out
the Shuttle, which was decided by the previous Administration,
not this one. My job is to execute a decision made by my
predecessors, and I am on the verge of doing that next week
when we land STS-135, and when people hear wheels stop, it will
mean I have done my job.
And I will be a very happy camper because my pledge when I
became the NASA Administrator was to safely fly out the
Shuttle. That is not done yet. So I still have work to be done.
Once we put the next program into place, jobs will begin.
We will begin to bring people back on at some rate. Right now
we are trying to help people transition to other places in the
aeronautics, in the aerospace workforce, and we are having
success at that. We placed 1,000 workers with the Embraer down
in Melbourne, Florida. We have put some other workers with an
automobile company in Melbourne, Florida. That is work that
NASA is trying to facilitate, but we don't do that.
I am trying to get people in Brevard County in the State of
Florida to go out and recruit to bring businesses into the
space coast. I am trying to get people around the country, in
Houston, in Salt Lake City, other places, I need help, you
know. My job is not to go out and recruit. I need for the
states to do a little bit also.
Ms. Johnson. One other question. The Space Station has been
a wonderful achievement. Are we going to leave all of that
maintenance to Russia, or how are we going to handle it?
Mr. Bolden. Congresswoman, we have budgeted in all of the
budgets that you all have approved for us and in the
President's proposed budget for 2012, we have budgeted to fly
the Space Station through 2020. We have done technical
evaluations to determine if we can fly it longer, and we think
we can. Americans will be in space operating at least through
2020.
So I need to clarify once and for all, I hope, we are not
abandoning human spaceflight. We have a big job to do in
operating the International Space Station for the next nine
years at least. I just selected or just approved the assignment
of American astronauts to fly on the International Space
Station through 2015, 2016. We have more astronauts to be
assigned, and in fact, they asked me, Houston asked if they
could go out and recruit more astronauts to operate on the
International Space Station because they anticipate they are
not going to have enough.
So anybody who thinks we are abandoning human spaceflight,
that is not the case. The kids you talked about who want to be
astronauts, they are not going to make Shuttle because it is
going, but they will walk on Mars, you know, provided we work
together. I hope I am not the only optimist in the room. I have
faith in American industry, and I know we can do this. So if it
seems like I am naive or Pollyannaish, I am not. I am just
optimistic, and I have faith in American industry.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you. I am depending on you not to let me
down.
Mr. Bolden. I won't.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Rohrabacher, for five minutes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. One thing is for sure. The United States
Marine General is not Pollyanna.
Mr. Bolden. Thank you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. All right. General, it is rather
disconcerting to take a look at the NASA budget over the years.
I have been here 22 years, and I have seen so many decisions
that led to nothing frankly, except the expenditure of billions
of dollars, and I remember the X-33 Venture Project that there
was big decisions made. We were going to do that over the DCX,
and what we ended up with was spending a lot of money and
getting nothing out of it. And there are other programs like
that. And a number of these times that we have seen decisions
made based on, frankly, pressure from Congress, not just
decisions made by the Executive Branch.
Right now we are trying to make some fundamental decisions
that will carry our country forward for over a long period of
time. The Russians I understand have been using the Soyuz since
1966, and it still is a very viable system, transportation
system. We have Delta, Atlas, EELVs. These rocket systems are
still very capable of conducting space missions, are they not?
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, they are very capable, but I would
point out the Soyuz spacecraft, which looks the same on the
outside, the last two flights on Soyuz with our astronauts
aboard have been new spacecraft for all intensive purposes.
They have new avionics. One of the reasons we could not do a
fly-around to take a picture of the stack when we had every
vehicle known to man there was because we were not--we could
not bring ourselves to be comfortable that a brand new vehicle
could be backed off, flown around the stack and--to take
photographs before we had had some more in-depth study.
So it is a new vehicle.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And their approach has been to perfect it,
perfect the vehicle.
Mr. Bolden. Their approach is unlike ours. We do
revolutionary stuff.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right.
Mr. Bolden. They do evolutionary stuff.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And sometimes evolutionary stuff may be
actually more cost effective than doing revolutionary stuff
that doesn't work.
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, I don't disagree with you, and if
you look at the SLS and the MPCV, it is a hybrid of evolution
and revolution.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. Let us just note that when we are--
we are now being, you know, stampeded into building this mega
new rocket rather than utilizing the systems that we have, you
know, and trying to find a way to accomplish the same mission
with the rockets that we do have. In other words, putting
things into orbit and doing the work up there and then moving
on rather than to keep doing everything in one big rocket.
If we spend money that might be done more cheaply by
utilizing the systems we have, is this what--is the price that
we are paying things like the telescopes and the cleaning up
the space debris and maybe even some deep exploration projects,
are we not spending money that should be going to some of those
other goals in space?
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, I don't think so. If you look at
the Hubble Space Telescope, I am partial you know, I cannot
put--you can't put a dollar sign on the value of Hubble and
what it has done for humankind and our understanding of our
universe. We rewrite textbooks every day.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, one dollar sign you can put on it,
General, is if we spend all of our money on a huge vehicle that
may or may not be absolutely necessary, the money won't be
there for the--what is the modern version of the Hubble
Telescope.
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, I am not going to go back and
forth, but, you know, if I don't build a heavy-lift launch
vehicle, we don't have an exploration program. This President
has given us an opportunity to hit the restart button.
Mr. Rohrabacher. No. You don't have a human exploration
program.
Mr. Bolden. I am a big fan of human exploration.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, I would suggest that we may want to
explore with human beings in the far, in the distant future,
but if insisting on exploring deep space with human beings eats
up billions of dollars that we don't have for Hubble Telescopes
and cleaning space debris, which is a vitally-important
mission, that needs to be looked at. We are then chasing after
goals that are so far in the distance that we are cutting out
the things that we can do today.
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, in preparation for this hearing I
listened this morning, I went to the web, the Kennedy Center,
Kennedy Library website, and I listened to the debate, again,
you have heard me tell this story, but between Kennedy and
James Webb, a Marine, who was the NASA Administrator at the
time, and this debate took place on September 16, 1963, and it
was about where NASA should go because President Kennedy said,
and I quote, ``Space has lost a lot of its glamour,'' and he
asked the NASA Administrator what we should do, and
Administrator Webb said we should focus on science. And they
argued. They literally yelled and screamed, and it came down to
moon versus Mars versus science.
Guess who won? The President and we went to the moon.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, and who knows what we would have
done with the science in the meantime.
Mr. Bolden. We have done the science.
Chairman Hall. Would the gentleman yield? The gentleman
from California yield to me?
Aren't you saying that continue to go the Station and keep
our program there and plan those long voyages but not spend the
money on them other than planning, and planning can cost
whatever the Congress says we can spend? We can't go to the
moon until our folks can go to the grocery store. That is just
hard-cold facts, and kind of what you are saying is the economy
is going to tell us when we can do that.
Mr. Rohrabacher. We are right now at a point where we have
to make tough decisions here at home, Mr. Chairman, and there
are some things in space that are absolutely necessary for us
to do, and by the way, I happen to believe space debris is one
of them, although nobody seems to be paying attention to that.
And if we instead set our goals on spending money for goals
that are 20 years down the line in terms of sending a man to
Mars or something like that and ignore those absolute necessary
costs that are right on us today, we are doing a big disservice
to this generation and future generations because we won't
accomplish those long-term goals.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Wu.
Mr. Wu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you very much,
Major General Bolden, for being here. I thank you for your 34
years of service in the Marine Corps and your very able service
now as NASA Administrator and also congratulations on a very
successful launch.
I find it very commendable that you are taking
responsibility for many of the decisions that have been made in
the last couple of years, but I think that we are all aware
that just as President Kennedy prevailed in the discussions
with Mr. Webb, that there is a President that you answer to
just as your parallel space agency had, and Russia answers to
someone in Moscow, and that his Chinese compatriot or colleague
listens to someone at the head of the government in Beijing.
And I think that some of those decisions that have been
made do go up a little bit higher in the chain, and I am not
completely onboard with some of them. I see my job, part of it,
I have been a passionate advocate for making sure that in the
relationship of competition and cooperation between different
countries, as I have said before, that the dominant language of
space or that the language of space be English and not Russian
or Chinese, just as the language of aviation is English.
I think it is very, very important that we continue to have
that vision and so I don't want to encourage you to be anything
other than a loyal soldier, but I do ask this of you; to either
today or soon give me, give this Committee a high-end number,
not what the Administration has asked for, not what the
Congress has authorized, but what is a high-end number for what
NASA needs to fully fund a deep-space human exploration
program.
Because I am not sure that this Committee has seen that
number yet, and it is not that we will ultimately be able to
fund at that number, but it is very, very important to have
that goal. Because just as you have taken responsibility,
General, I think that it is incumbent upon us in the United
States Congress to know that we are ultimately responsible for
not fully funding space exploration at the levels that you all
can use, and if you would care to comment on that or if you
have a number in your head today, I am happy to hear it.
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, I don't have a number in my head
today, and I will take it for the record, and I will be glad to
get that to you, but you do point out several things.
Decisions with reference to our space program are in three
baskets. There is technical, and I generally am the one that
makes those. There are policy decisions, which generally go to
the President, and he--and I act as one of his consultants, and
then there are budget decisions, and you and the President work
those in consultation as we are seeing over these past weeks.
Mr. Wu. He hasn't asked me very recently, but I look
forward to it.
Mr. Bolden. Well, I think you have some representatives
with him, so my job is a little bit easier right now I think.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman's time, he yields back.
Recognize the older gentleman, Mr. Bartlett, for five
minutes.
Mr. Bartlett. Younger than you, though, sir. Thank you very
much.
I am going to be the devil's advocate for a moment, and I
want to put my context--my comments in context. I was involved
a bit more than a half century ago in the first suborbital
primate flight with Monkey Able and Monkey Baker. I was at
Pensacola, Florida, then. I was involved with training of the
first astronauts as they came to Pensacola for the slow
rotation room in the human centrifuge, and when they came to
the Navy Yard in Philadelphia for work with pressure suits and
so forth.
There were three huge benefits to our country as a result
of putting a man on the moon, and the first of these was
national image. That was enormously important. Second of those
was spin-offs, and you can point to a large number of spin-offs
in the technology developed in putting a man on the moon. And
the third and maybe the most important benefit to our country
was that it captured the imagination of our people and inspired
our young people to go into careers of math, science, and
engineering.
I do not know how much that contributed to our winning the
Cold War, but those millions of young people that were inspired
to go into the science, math, and engineering, at least some of
those were available to our military efforts that permitted us
to bury the Soviet Union with our progress in armaments.
Help us make the argument, sir, that we need to continue
funding these programs, because today if there are spin-offs, I
don't hear of any of those, sir. And clearly nobody is
capturing the imagination of our people, inspiring our young
people to go into careers of science, math, and engineering,
because this year the Chinese will graduate seven times as many
engineers as we graduate. We face huge deficit problems in our
country. Our deficit is a half trillion dollars more than all
the money we vote to spend. We are laboring to try to come up
with cuts that equal the deficit, but the cuts would be over
ten years. The deficit is just this year. Even the Ryan budget
doesn't balance for 25 years and balances then only if you
assume what I think are unrealistic assumptions about cost
growth because we are up against a world ceiling at 84 million
barrels of oil a day.
Help us, sir, to go out to our constituents and convince
them that we still ought to be spending money in spaceflight
for humans.
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, I appreciate that, and I think we
should be, and I can tell you that if you look at spin-offs,
there are thousands still each year that come from space
exploration.
Mr. Bartlett. I don't know of those, sir, and I don't
think--we are doing a terrible job of messaging this. You know,
these are very dangerous missions. If one out of every 60 times
I got in my car I died, I don't know how often I would get in
my car, sir, but that is--we have had, what, 120 some missions.
Two of them have ended up killing everybody on the mission. We
have made this seem so darn ho hum that people hardly turn on
their television anymore to watch these really spectacular
things. We have done a very bad job of messaging this, have we
not?
Mr. Bolden. We have done a great job of making it look
easy----
Mr. Bartlett. Yeah.
Mr. Bolden. --which is detrimental to----
Mr. Bartlett. We have indeed, but that it is not easy, sir.
Mr. Bolden. It is not easy at all.
Mr. Bartlett. One out of every 60 times you get in your car
you die, how often would you get in your car? This is tough
stuff, sir.
Mr. Bolden. It is.
Mr. Bartlett. And we have made it seem very ho hum.
Mr. Bolden. But when you ask about spin-offs, if I just
look at medical imaging, we have a young researcher out at Jet
Propulsion Lab working on synthetic aperture radar for the Mars
Lander. The technology there has now been parlayed into use for
discovering breast tumors. Never expected to use it that way,
and the list goes on and on of things like that.
We are working diligently in NASA to try to facilitate
other agencies' ability to talk to young kids about the fun of
math, science, engineering. We are really focused on STEM
education and trying to instill a desire for young people to
get into that type of work. We send people into schools, we
downlink every, almost every day, conversations between
astronauts on the International Space Station and students in
some school around the country. We do that because we
understand how critical it is to get our kids interested in
science and math. We are failing as a Nation.
You know, I wish I could take the blame there alone but I
can't. We are failing as a Nation in inspiring kids to want to
get into science, engineering, and math. They all want to be
business people, because they all want to become millionaires
right away, and they can't do that. They want it bad, and they
get it bad.
Mr. Bartlett. You know, I have a lot of constituents who
have lost their jobs, and if they haven't lost it, they know
somebody who has, and I have a tough time selling to them that
we need to spend billions putting a man--you know, I think we
do, sir, because I think we need to have the best image in the
world. I think we need to capture the imagination of people and
inspire our young people, but, you know, you need to help us
make this sale to the American people, because we have a tough
time doing it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Ohio, Mrs. Fudge.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
so much for being here, Mr. Bolden.
Two quick questions. Under the plan that is being devised,
Mr. Administrator, will NASA Glenn and another entities
maintain the same role and responsibilities they currently have
with SLS as we did under Ares I and we were supposed to do
under Ares V?
Mr. Bolden. Congresswoman, as I mentioned to you before, my
plan right now is that the programs that--the tests that would
be conducted at Glenn particularly for MPCV, Orion will still
plan to be conducted there, so I don't--I see Glenn staying as
strong and important as they have been in the development of
future exploration systems.
Ms. Fudge. Okay, and just to follow up on the MPCV, you
received the letter, and we thank you for responding to the
Ohio Delegation, and you stated that scheduling costs are now
going to drive the MPCV testing as opposed to safety
requirements which drove the testing before.
Could you please just clarify that for me?
Mr. Bolden. If I said that in a letter, then I misspoke. I
hope I did not tell you that scheduling costs was going to
out--override safety.
Ms. Fudge. No, not override it but, well, I mean, you
stated that the scheduling costs would drive how MPCV is
tested, and this does represent a shift from Constellation
because during--which safety requirements really drove testing.
And if I--I may have read it incorrectly, Mr. Administrator.
Mr. Bolden. I hope so.
Ms. Fudge. We can talk about it.
Mr. Bolden. Yes, ma'am, but safety is always paramount, and
we do testing to try to enhance safety, enhance reliability,
and the quality of our system. So you will not see a derogation
or a degradation in our emphasis on safety.
If I talked about scheduling costs having an impact, it is
because as we, as I alluded to earlier, the less money I have
to put on a program means the longer it is going to take me to
do that program unless I can significantly de-scope it to get
it done in the timeframe that I originally identified for you.
One of the reasons that I am being very cautious about bringing
numbers to this Committee or to any other Committee of the
Congress is because I don't want to end up where we were with
Constellation. I don't want to bring you an un-executable
program. I am very confident that the path on which we are
presently proceeding I will be able to bring you a program that
is affordable, sustainable, and makes sense. I am not there
yet, to be quite honest.
I am the one that asked, when I talk about my
responsibility, to give me a sanity check, for example, when we
started this whole thing, I told my team that I wanted
independent cost assessments, ballpark figures, not detailed
numbers because we don't ever know details. Another lesson we
learned. You don't--I should not give you a hard number on cost
and scheduling until I get what is called PDR, preliminary
design review. If I give you a hard number before that stage, I
can almost guarantee you I am wrong.
Congresswoman Edwards is shaking her head because she has
been there, and she knows. So don't let me bring you a number
that is a hard number on anything prior to us getting the PDR
on any system, particularly multi-billion dollar system. If I
come in and tell you that, then you throw me out because I am
lying. Or I am really pulling it out of you know where. So I am
not going to do that, and it frustrates everybody.
I am trying to get a ballpark figure right now, a random
order of merit for what this program is going to cost, and I am
just not there yet. I need to have--we have Booz Allen looking
at the SLS, and we have a plan for them giving us a, you know,
an independent assessment of whether we are in the ballpark. We
may have missed something. I don't think so because preliminary
word is they think we--what we plan and the way we plan to
approach it is pretty good.
But we have a ways to go before I can bring you hard
numbers, so don't let me do that.
Ms. Fudge. Is there anything else you would like to say? My
questions are complete. I thank you for your answers, and I
thank you for your service. It is always a pleasure to have you
testify before this Committee. I know that your task is
difficult.
Mr. Bolden. It is fun.
Ms. Fudge. You call it fun. When I go home, I call it
difficult.
Mr. Bolden. Nobody is shooting at me, and I don't have a
100-pound pack on my back.
Ms. Fudge. Well, that is true.
Mr. Bolden. So this is fun.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you so much, Mr. Administrator.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Fleischmann, the gentleman from
Tennessee, for five minutes.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General, it is a
privilege to be here today to hear this from you. I thank you.
I also want to thank you. NASA personnel have come to my office
and have already met with me to help bring me up to snuff on
this. I am a lawyer by profession, but I really, really love
this stuff, so I thank you for their visit and your presence
here today.
I have a few questions, sir. You were talking, I think,
about the human mission into deep space and mentioned Mars and
perhaps some other locations, an asteroid. It seems to me that
a lunar trip, a moon trip, might be a little bit easier, it has
been done before. Where is that in the pecking order, and what
is NASA's plans with regard to a lunar trip, sir?
Mr. Bolden. Under the flexible path approach that we intend
to use, we have very hard destinations and set by the
President, an asteroid in 2025, Mars in 2030, but there may be
reasons, I anticipate there will probably be reasons to go back
to the lunar surface for a period of, a short period of time
just to make sure that we have everything we need before we
head off to Mars.
You know, the moon is a couple of days away, and today with
technology rovers that we have developed and tested in the
desert over a number of years now, we can put a couple of
astronauts on the surface of the moon and have them roam and
range over the moon to do research or experimentation and then
get them back, you know, in a couple of days. When somebody
heads off to Mars, I can't turn them around and bring them back
in a couple of days.
So it is unlikely that we will experience an Apollo 13 if
we have that kind of failure on the way to Mars.
Mr. Fleischmann. Yes, sir. Are there any other
destinations? We talked about Mars, the moon, an asteroid.
Anything else, sir?
Mr. Bolden. We talk about--things that we talk about with
our industry, as a matter of fact, are what we call
geosynchronous orbit as a stepping stone to going to some of
these distant places for things like satellite repair. Those
are technological developments. If you can get to
geosynchronous orbit, then you can, you know, you can get to
deep space.
So but we don't need a 130-metric-ton vehicle to do that.
You could do that with a 70-metric-ton vehicle. You could do
that with some of the vehicles that we have today, but they are
not human rated, so, you know, there are a number of places.
Mr. Fleischmann. Yes, sir. The President in his State of
the Union was kind enough to mention ORNL, that is the lab in
my district in Oak Ridge, fascinating place, and it is
wonderful to represent the lab. Do you know of any role that
they may have in deep space research, or is there any plans for
our national labs to----
Mr. Bolden. Sir, let me take it for the record. I do not
know personally of what Oak Ridge is doing. When I think about
national labs, we are always collaborating with them in one way
or another, and I am certain there is something, but I don't
know, and I will get back to you.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you. It is a pleasure. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes Mr. McNerney, the gentleman from
California, for five minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am over here. Good
morning. Thank you for coming and testifying. I know you
realize this wasn't going to be an easy session, and I
appreciate your emotional attachment to the Space Shuttle
Program. It means a lot.
I am a little confused about what was submitted by NASA to
the OMB versus what was submitted to Booz Allen. Could you kind
of go into that a little bit so we will get an understanding in
the Committee here?
Mr. Bolden. What we submitted to OMB as a part of the
decision making process was a decision memorandum from me that
outlined the technical design of a vehicle that I would
propose. Booz Allen is the consulting firm that I have asked to
take a look at that technical proposal and tell me whether or
not the schedule and cost that I have--that my folk have made
is reasonable, whether it makes sense.
And they go, you know, so they are in work right now trying
to help us determine an independent cost assessment.
Mr. McNerney. So was what you submitted to OMB sufficient
in terms of information for them to make an assessment of the
cost?
Mr. Bolden. I would like to think so.
Mr. McNerney. And have they----
Mr. Bolden. You would to ask----
Mr. McNerney. --given you an estimate of when they will
give you their numbers?
Mr. Bolden. Well, it is not, Congressman, it is not that--
it is not just like that. We are working back and forth just as
we work with the Committees, and we work with your staffs. We
are actually coming up and briefing the staffs every time.
Every time I make a preliminary decision, a technical decision,
I generally try to have somebody come up here and sit with the
staffs and tell them, you know, here is what we are doing or
where we are going. I can't give you details because, as I
said, every decision has three pieces to it; the policy, the
budget, and the technical part.
Mr. McNerney. So you don't and can't really give us an
estimate of when OMB's numbers will be available?
Mr. Bolden. That was what I said in my testimony. As much
as I would love to say I am going to do that by the end of this
month or the end of next month, I am not comfortable making
that commitment to you right now because I don't have the
results of the independent cost assessment that I asked for.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. I am going to change directions a
little bit.
Some folks criticize the SLS Program as a rocket to
nowhere. Could you give us a roadmap of what we might
accomplish with that hardware when it is available that would
be noteworthy and make us proud?
Mr. Bolden. Early in the program even before we have a
capability of putting humans on it, we are hopeful, and that is
the 2017 timeframe that I mentioned before, we would like to
use that to boost an early version of the MPCV into space and
get it to speeds faster than it would be going when it came
back from the International Space Station, for example, so that
we can do the same thing that I required Elon Musk and SpaceX
to do back last December, you know. Put his rocket, put his
capsule into orbit, have it orbit Earth a few times, come back,
and survive. That is what I required him to do before I would
go any farther, and he did that.
I am now requiring me to put my MPCV, not into orbit, but
put it somewhere, whether it goes around the moon and comes
back, but I need it to accelerate, I need to accelerate it to a
velocity that is equivalent of what it would be going when it
comes back from the moon, from an asteroid, from Mars and be
able to survive reentry and safe splashdown.
Mr. McNerney. Well, those are good scientific goals, but
they are not something that is going to sparked the
imagination.
Mr. Bolden. Yes, they do, sir.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I hope you are right.
Mr. Bolden. They spark the imagination of a young kid that
wants to be an aeronautical engineer and figure out, you know,
hypersonic--who wants to be involved in hypersonic research to
determine whether a vehicle can survive reentry from speeds in
excess of 17,500 miles an hour. If a kid is interested in that,
that is pretty exciting.
Mr. McNerney. What fraction of the population?
But, you know, there is always a certain tension between,
as Mr. Rohrabacher explored there a minute ago, between manned
and unmanned space programs, and I think you are probably
biased in that from your experience.
Could you give us a little bit of, from your perspective,
of what the advantage of human space exploration and
expenditures are?
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, I wouldn't say I am biased. I
would say I am informed, and my--what I have learned in my time
is that, for example, when we went to the moon, the astronauts
had been highly trained in geology. They knew exactly what
rocks to look for. However, some of the more interesting rocks
that they brought back were not ones they were sent to get
because a robot, while it has capability of doing anything we
tell it to do, and we can train them to do pretty good stuff, a
robot does not have intellect yet. A robot can't look around
and see a piece of rock and say, boy, that is really
interesting. They didn't tell me to bring this back, but I
think I am going to take it anyway.
We have to have robotic precursors. You know, I am going to
launch the Mars Science Laboratory to Mars in November. That is
going to do an incredible amount of work. We are doing things
with our international partners that are going to go ahead of
humans. It will be some time before we are capable of putting
humans on--in any of these places that I am sending precursors
right now. I would not send a human to Vesta, for example, even
if I could. That is why DAWN is going there in less than a
week.
Mr. McNerney. I think I have expired here.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yield back.
Mr. McNerney. I yield.
Chairman Hall. All right. The Chair at this time recognizes
the Chairman of our Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee, Mr.
Palazzo, from Mississippi, for five minutes.
Mr. Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your
leadership. I also share your sentiments and concerns on SLS,
the delays, but it was encouraging to see the American people
focus on the final launch of Atlantis. It demonstrated that our
Nation does love our space program, they love the American
exceptionalism that it brings. I do think that the--a lot of
the American people were left with a lot of questions, and that
is what, where, when, and how, and hopefully with this
Committee and others and along with NASA and the rest of
Congress will be able to help find those answers with the
Administrator.
Sir, you said many times that we need to test before we
launch. What then is the agency's fiscal year 2012 test
infrastructure plan?
Mr. Bolden. In fiscal year 2012, right now we will continue
a lot of engine testing, both on commercial rocket engines as
well as the engines that we are developing. As a part of my
proposal on a heavy-lift system, America does not have the
expertise that we once had in what is called LOX rocket fuel or
LOX-RP propulsion systems.
So I have asked that we try to find money to begin
development of a LOX-RP system. There are a lot of people that
would love to see us use LOX-RP instead of LOX hydrogen. We
don't have that capability anymore, and when we talk about
stepping back for awhile and waiting for things to catch up,
the reason we don't have the expertise is because when we got
ready to build Shuttle, the Nation made a critical decision,
and it decided it was going to go with LOX hydrogen as its
focus, and we put LOX-RP aside. Russians do it very well,
because they chose that system.
So those are some of the things I hope to do.
Mr. Palazzo. Can you just elaborate on why it is important
to test before you launch?
Mr. Bolden. Because you don't want to have something
happen--it is sort of the way people put it. I would much
rather be on the ground wishing I were in the air than in the
air wishing I were on the ground. When I test on the ground, as
we did with the AJ-26, we have had incredible success testing
the AJ-26 for aero jet and orbital. We had a mishap with the
AJ-26 engine. I would much rather have that occur and find out
that there is something wrong than have it occur on the test--
on the launch platform at Wallops where the Nation has a
significant investment in the infrastructure there.
You know, so it is really important that we test things to
see if we can wring out all the potential problems before we
put it on a vehicle or try to put it in space.
Mr. Palazzo. I have a question regarding the fiscal year
'11, operating plan that was recently sent to Congress. The
three-page spreadsheet noted as enclosure one indicates that
the Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle and the Space Launch System are
due to receive amounts that are quite close to amounts
stipulated in the continuing resolution, but details provided
in enclosure two suggests that resources will be moved out of
the Space Launch System line to other projects and activities.
It is unclear to me even being a CPA exactly where and how
much money is actually moving from SLS to support activities
and other accounts. So for the record I request that NASA
provide a detailed accounting of exactly how much money will be
expended on development of SLS hardware, how many money is
being moved to other accounts, the distribution of funding by
center, the names of those accounts and for what purpose, and
how much money is planned to be rolled into fiscal year 2012.
Would you please provide this information?
Mr. Bolden. Sir, I will take that for the record and
provide it. As a precursor, however, what you are talking about
is ground systems for SLS, and unlike Constellation where we
had separate programs, in the SLS the ground systems are rolled
into the program, so the cost is in SLS, not any separate
program the way it was with Constellation.
Mr. Palazzo. But you will provide that?
Mr. Bolden. But we will provide the information that you
requested.
Mr. Palazzo. All right, because, you know, of course, I
make that request, Mr. Administrator, just because, you know,
we have to capture America's imagination, and we also need to
ensure the public support and Congressional support, and we
need to be able to back that up, and it must be earned.
And I do have a little bit of time left. I would just like
to--why an asteroid?
Mr. Bolden. Well, why an asteroid? Asteroids tell us a lot
about Earth, tell us about our own Earth, but the most
important reason an asteroid is because one of these days, I
will go back to what my friend, Mr. Rohrabacher, talks about,
and we do need to be aware of the fact that one of these days
one of these rocks that is orbiting the sun that we don't know
a lot about is going to come perilously close to Earth, and one
of these days it may actually hit Earth. And you all laugh when
I tell you about it, but I don't want any of us to be
dinosaurs, because I think we all know that if an asteroid
makes it through our atmosphere of any significant size and
impacts Earth, then it is going to be a dark day, and it could
spell the end of civilization as we know it in the greatest, to
the greatest extent.
So when people talk about near-Earth objects and needing to
understand what they are and what they can do, they are not
crazy. They are people who just have a concern about the
planet, as do I. In the National Space Policy one of my charges
with the Secretary of Defense is to determine how we protect
the planet against near-Earth objects, how we protect the
planet against things.
We live in a big universe, and some people live under the
big sky theory or the big space theory that there is a lot of
stuff out there but none of it will ever hit us. You have heard
more in the last two weeks about near misses on the
International Space Station than you have probably heard in
your life, and that is just because people are becoming aware
as we wind down the Space Shuttle Program, you know, that there
are threats to the International Space Station, there are
threats to anything we put in orbit because there is a lot of
stuff out there.
Mr. Palazzo. Well, thank you, and I yield back what time I
don't have left.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back his time.
For your information, 10 or 15 years ago we had a hearing
on asteroids, and we found out for the first time that sometime
in the '80s, mid '80s, an asteroid just missed Earth by about
15 minutes, and no one knew it until it was here and gone. Go
back and read that, and you will get some information on it.
Thank you. At this time I think I want to recognize Mrs.
Edwards. Yeah. I am going to. For five minutes.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am not really sure
what to make of that. I will say thank you, Administrator
Bolden, and I just want to share with you. I was, over the 4th
of July holiday I was out at Assateague, just camped out under
the stars with five year old, ten year old, you know, six year
olds, and we were looking up at the sky, and we were looking at
the constellations, and we were just chatting, this group of
young people who were so excited to be able to see out there in
all of its wonder. And one of the little boys said, I want to
go out there. That is what I want to do. That is who I want to
be, and without any prompting at all, and it made me think as
we then approached the last launch of the Shuttle Program, that
there is so much more to do.
And I know that you share that passion, and I do, too, and
so when you say to this Committee that we are not abandoning
our human spaceflight program, I want that to be true to those
young people who were looking up at the stars, and not just
because of the sheer joy of being out in space, but because our
space exploration program tells us something about ourselves,
it helps us to see ourselves and our relative place in this
universe in a very different kind of way.
And so I am concerned, and I think the timeliness of this
hearing is really appropriate, in another part of the Capitol,
the House Appropriations Committee right now I think is
considering the 2012 appropriations budget for NASA. So it is
appropriate that we are talking about this program and the
fiscal responsibilities that we share for it, but at the same
time that same Committee is looking at the elimination of the
James Webb Space Telescope, and that is the next area of
exploration for us that like the Hubble will tell us so much
about our universe.
And so on the one hand we have some who argue for the
continuation of human spaceflight, but on the other hand,
others say, well, we should invest more in things that are not
part of the human spaceflight program but that are science, and
we can't have it every way. I think that we--I happen to be one
of those who believe that we need multiple legs of a stool to
investigate our universe.
So I understand that you approved the decision on the SLS
design and you are basically ready to go and your plan was
delivered to OMB. Can you tell me which engineers, scientists,
aerospace people over at OMB are holding up their decision to
get it over here and over to you so that you can begin work?
Mr. Bolden. Congresswoman, I wouldn't say anybody is
holding up a decision. I would say they are evaluating just as
we always do in this deliberative process, and there are
engineers at OMB, by the way. They are pretty smart people. I
hate to say that, but there are.
Ms. Edwards. I guess my point, though, is that there was a
promise that we would have, you know, something that was a
workable plan that you could move forward on and so that there
was some certainty and stability both within the agency and in
the private sector. We were told that would be the spring, and
then it was later in the spring, and then it was closer to the
launch of the Atlantis, and now we are hearing perhaps, I don't
know, some time this summer.
And we are months and months away from the report of the
Augustine Committee, where we knew that it was time to
construct or some thought a different direction. There have
been multiple hearings here on Capitol Hill. We have looked at
an authorization.
I mean, when are we go going to be ready to go?
Mr. Bolden. Congresswoman, I hope I can bring you something
with all deliberate speed, but with all deliberate speed in
this town sometimes is not as fast as we would like. I would
say if you compare the delivery of the decision, the ultimate
decision on MPCV, that was relatively fast in the grand scheme
of the way that we generally operate with major programs like
that, and I think while everyone is impatient and thinks we are
not moving on SLS, we have made incredible progress. You know,
we are almost there. We are getting there, but in the course of
starting this effort to today, our budget has, I think as
everybody in this Committee recognizes, it has constantly
deteriorated. When we started this, the President's 2011
budget, I would have been at $20 billion next year. We are not
going to be there, and so we have had to go back, and I have
had to de-scope, I have had to put--I put a ceiling on my
technical team that put them under a lot of pressure. There are
some of them sitting in this room right now who wish that
Congressman Wu's request that somebody could find me all the
money in the world because they are really working hard to try
to find a way to live within our means, to live within the 2012
proposed budget of the President, which has already been, if
you look at the House proposal I got to go back again to the
drawing board and figure out what to do.
So we are working with all deliberate speed, but when
things keep changing, then we have to go back and make
adjustments. Otherwise I can't bring you an affordable,
sustainable, realistic program.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I hope we can
bring the Administrator back because five minutes is just not
long enough.
Mr. Bolden. Congresswoman----
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I have to
yield.
Mr. Bolden. Oh. Okay. I thought you were going to let me
talk about James Webb. Okay.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady finally yields back. Good
questions, though, and we always appreciate you. You are a good
Member.
The Chair at this time recognizes Mr. Cravaack for five
minutes.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Major General, it is refreshing, sir, to have you here
today and with your military perspective with coming in and
saying it is not the President, it is me, the buck ends with
me, and I just can't tell you how much I appreciate that, sir,
and you are bringing that military perspective to the table.
I also appreciate your need for good information in means
good information out. So I understand your diligence on what
you are trying to do to ensure that we have the right answers
to the questions that we are bringing you up here today and
making sure that you don't arbitrarily misguide us on what your
vision is. So I commend you for that, sir, and I definitely
appreciate that as well.
One of the big things I think a lot of us are asking
themselves in the back of the mind in these critical financial
straits we are in is the return on the investment of going into
space. And I still remember as a young kid watching the launch.
I am a pilot as well. Wendy Lawrence is a classmate of mine
from the Naval Academy, Brent Jett, both classmates. So I
understand space, and I understand the need to go into space,
but in this critical situation I am looking for that return on
investment.
And in your statement you mentioned that you had been
working with other agencies, and they are interested in the SLS
Program. I was wondering what is your relationship with the
DOD, and is the DOD interested in the SLS Program and what it
can bring to bear for them?
Mr. Bolden. I had a discussion with a representative from
DOD this morning to make sure I did not overstep or over-speak,
and so while I would not say that they have definitive plans
for SLS, what they are most impressed with and what they are
encouraging us to press on and make a decision soon is because
of its importance to the Nation's space industrial base.
That is not trivial. You know, we are seeing our space
industrial base erode, sometimes slowly, sometimes more
rapidly, and that is important for me and for DOD and for the
entire national security establishment because the people that
are affected worse are the sub-tier subcontractors. The primes
have lots of stuff to do, but it is the sub-tier people that we
are concerned about. People that make instruments, for example,
or make strain gages, or circuit breakers.
Mr. Cravaack. So what do you think is the chief threat to
our national security in space right now?
Mr. Bolden. Our economy.
Mr. Cravaack. Interesting.
Mr. Bolden. I agree with my classmate Mike Mullen, the
chairman. National--our economy is the biggest threat to the
Nation right now. We have got to--one of the reasons that I
struggle every day is because I know what I want to do, and I
know what my agency can do, but I am realistic, and you know,
although we represent less than half of a percent of the
federal budget, we have got to take our share of cuts like
everybody else. I hate to say that, but I want to do it
smartly, and I want to be able to, you know, for people to feel
proud of what we do.
Mr. Cravaack. I appreciate that, sir, and I want to support
you any way I can. Thirty-four years in the Corps, I would
follow you anywhere, sir, but----
Mr. Bolden. Thank you for your service.
Mr. Cravaack. --you know, based on your assessment, how can
Congress help you to overcome your challenges? I understand the
economy, I understand the nature of making sure you get the
right money, but how can we best help you in achieving these
goals, because I do believe that in the national security
interest that these goals need to be achieved.
Mr. Bolden. It goes without saying that a firm, consistent
budget is always helpful. The biggest thing, you know, I have--
I can't fix a problem that started eight years ago and
persisted over eight years. I don't care how much you give me,
you know. We in the Administration, this Congress, the American
people, we all stood back and watched the Constellation Program
just die a slow death, you know. I can't correct that. I would
love to. President Obama can't correct that. But he set us on a
course right now that I think is the right course. I support
the course we are on, you know, or I would be gone. I could be
with my grandkids. People don't like it when I say that, but,
you know, there are other things I could do, but I love this. I
love what I do, and I love my people.
You know, we have got tough choices to make, and as a
Nation, but what I tell people is as long as I am the NASA
Administrator, we are not going to back down from human
spaceflight. Now, I may not be able to do it the way I want to
do it, but we will find a way to do it, and it will be safe and
efficient and we will live within our means, but we cannot
forsake science, and I spend pennies on aeronautics. So, you
know, I am always torn because I--if you give me $100 million
for aeronautics tomorrow, let me tell you, if you want to see
return on investment, I can do that, but I don't even have time
to talk about aeronautics because, you know, everybody is
focused on SLS and stuff like that.
Mr. Cravaack. Well, sir, thank you very much for your
service and thank your grandkids for us because we are glad you
are here, and I yield back, sir.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back his time.
The Chair now recognizes Mrs. Wilson, the gentlelady from
Florida, for five minutes.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome. Good morning.
How are you?
Mr. Bolden. Doing fine. Thank you.
Ms. Wilson. It is good to see you.
Mr. Bolden. Always good to be here.
Ms. Wilson. I don't know if you remember but back in, it
might have been '92 or '93, you were in Miami with a bunch of
school kids at Miami Northwestern Senior High School.
Mr. Bolden. My aunt was the librarian.
Ms. Wilson. Yes.
Mr. Bolden. Yes.
Ms. Wilson. And----
Mr. Bolden. I do remember.
Ms. Wilson. I was a school board member sitting next to you
and then the next day we were on the front page of the
newspaper. So being a principal from Florida and because of the
proximity, space travel is very relevant in the school
districts of Florida, and our children have always been excited
since they take multiple field trips all the time to Cape
Kennedy.
And I just wanted to find out, will there be any
international collaboration with spaceflights, and how have you
set that up, and what can we look forward to with the Russians
and, you know, everyone else being involved in this, and how do
we explain this to the kids in our schools?
Mr. Bolden. International collaboration is critical to
everything that we do, particularly when we talk about long-
term plans for exploration, for deep-space exploration. No
nation, no single nation can explore deep space alone. So it is
going to require international collaboration. All of our
partners, our international partners in the International Space
Station, there are five big agencies. The European Space Agency
has 19 members, so I don't envy them. They are all struggling
as we are financially right now, trying to decide how do we put
collaborative programs together to do Mars exploration as
precursors for human missions there. And we are all working to
that end.
We all collaborate on education because we all suffer the
same problem. It is not--this is not an American calamity, the
lack of interest in STEM-related courses on the part of school
children. It is a world-wide issue.
You know, when the Congressman talked about the thousands
of people going into engineering in China, well, they got
billions more people than we have, so it is not surprising that
they have more going into engineering. They have a bigger pool
from which to draw. It is not that more kids are interested in
engineering. It is the numbers are much more massive, and they
are doing things.
So, yeah, we have got to work hard.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you. Specifically, talk to me a little
bit about Russia. You know, we hear Russia, we know the old
Russia. What is the new Russia?
Mr. Bolden. The new Russia is an incredibly valuable
partner for us. They are a major partner on the International
Space Station. I would say if you want to say how does Space
Station exist today, it exists today because of our
collaboration with the Russians. The first two elements of what
is now the International Space Station were Russian because
their components were ready before we were. When we lost
Columbia on February 1, 2003, we didn't have a way to get
American astronauts to the International Space Station, and we
didn't want to de-person it, de-man it. The Russians were
there, and with Soyuz they took our crews for almost three
years while we went back and worked on making Shuttle
available.
And since that time they have been the primary provider of
transportation for our crews to and from the International
Space Station. So, you know, they are still a very good
partner.
But we also have incredible international partners in the
Europeans and the Japanese and the Canadians. The Canadians
have great expertise in robotics. You are going to see us do
some time soon, we are going to do a refueling exercise,
robotic refueling on the International Space Station. The thing
that is going to do it is going to be Dexter, and Dexter is a
Canadian-built robot.
So, you know, international collaboration is critical.
Ms. Wilson. Just one little follow up. We keep hearing
about Russia and aggression from Russia, and I am just
wondering has there been any thought placed as to what happens
if this aggression becomes intolerable? How will that affect
the Space Station? Is it so entwined that we need their support
forever?
Mr. Bolden. If I do my job and when I was in the military,
if my counterparts there do their job, we won't have the
problem that you perceive, but, you know, as long as we
continue to work collaboratively with the Russians on the
International Space Station, hopefully, you know, we will play
an inadvertent diplomatic role.
You know, the Russians during the end of the Cold War, I
believe, came about partially because of the collaboration that
we had with the Soviet Union in the Apollo-Soyuz test project.
When I talk to my dear friend, Sergei Krikalev, with whom I
flew on Shuttle, my last flight, Sergei, you know, went to
space his first flight as a citizen of the Soviet Union from
Stalingrad and came back to Earth as a citizen of Russia from
St. Petersburg. So things change.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you. I believe I am over.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Hall. Gentlelady is over.
The Chair recognizes Mo Brooks, gentleman from Alabama, for
five minutes. And Ms. Wilson, you were pretty well on time.
Thank you for that.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to focus on something that came out of the
Commerce, Justice, and Science and Related Agencies
Appropriations Subcommittee last week. Are you familiar with
the vote that they had on either Wednesday or Thursday
concerning the NASA budget?
Mr. Bolden. I am painfully familiar.
Mr. Brooks. And as I understand it, NASA would be cut
roughly 1.6 billion, a little bit more than that; James Webb
Space Telescope--if I understand correctly from media reports--
would be zeroed out. Overall, in your judgment, what would be
the impact on NASA if the CJS Subcommittee proposal for NASA
becomes governing law?
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, I try to make a point of not
dealing in conjecture. So I will say a couple of things. One is
all my planning right now is based on the 2010 Authorization
Act as supported by the 2011 Full Year Continuing Resolution
looking to the President's 2012 budget proposal. If what you
say happened, it goes without saying that my efforts to keep
the gap between the end of the shuttle era and an American
capability to take humans to orbit, if not close it, as I think
we are starting to do, I would not be able to do that. The gap
between the end of shuttle and another American capability to
take humans to the International Space Station would increase
and it is untold how much that would increase.
If I had to sacrifice science, which I would not choose to
do, you know, something like the James Webb Space Telescope
that--when we started Hubble, dark energy didn't exist. At
least we didn't know about it. When we launched Hubble, there
was no such thing as extrasolar planets. So those kinds of
discoveries would probably go lacking unless some other nation
stepped forward and did it.
Mr. Brooks. Are you familiar enough with the CJS proposal
to be able to itemize for us the impact it has on specific NASA
programs?
Mr. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Mr. Brooks. Other than James Webb we know would be zeroed
out. But if you would, please, illuminate us.
Mr. Bolden. So I will take it for the record and bring it
back to you, but there--it is across the board.
Mr. Brooks. For the fiscal year 2011 budget, Congress
proposed $1.8 billion for the Space Launch Systems program. How
much of a role is a Marshall Space Flight Center supposed to
play in the SLS?
Mr. Bolden. Sir, Marshall is critical. Marshall is where I
house the program office for the SLS. The SLS program is at the
Marshall Space Flight Center. They will lead the development of
the heavy-lift launch vehicle and its ground system is in
coordination with the Kennedy Space Center. They will integrate
the vehicle or be a part of the integration of the SLS with the
MPCV that heads the program office for the--at Johnson Space
Center so----
Mr. Brooks. Out of that 1.8 billion, how much does Marshall
need in order to fulfill the mission as you envision with
respect to SLS?
Mr. Bolden. Robert Lightfoot was telling me he would tell
me more. I--you know----
Mr. Brooks. More than what?
Mr. Bolden. More than any number I give him. But of the 1.8
billion--the 1.8 billion, again, is for the entire SLS system,
which includes ground systems, everything else, and I will have
to get back to you. I will get to you for the record. While the
SLS program office manages all that money, all of the money is
not spent or obligated in and around, you know, Huntsville. It
goes all over the country so--but I--we can get you a breakdown
on what is going to be in Huntsville and what is going to be in
Florida and what is going to be in Mississippi and other
places.
Mr. Brooks. Well, you shared with us the critical nature of
the Marshall Space Flight Center and SLS program. Are you in a
position today to tell me exactly how much of that 1.8 billion
is scheduled to be spent on Marshall efforts?
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, I am not in a position to tell you
specifically how it is going to be broken out, but as the
program office--with program management responsibility at
Marshall, they will manage all of the money that is designated
in the line item for the SLS. So if it is 1.8 billion, it is
all managed out of the SLS program office at Marshall.
Mr. Brooks. My staff has been receiving information that
out of 1.8 billion it might be as little as 65 million that
would, in fact, be spent at Marshall on the development of
their part of the SLS system. Do you have any insight that you
can share with us on whether that is right or wrong?
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, I doubt that that is correct. I
think that is a misunderstanding, but I will take it for the
record and get back to you.
Mr. Brooks. If you would, I would very much appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentlelady from California, Ms. Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Mr. Bolden, for being here today and for your lifetime of
service to our country. It is really something that we all
admire and we are grateful both to you and to your
grandchildren for continuing to serve us.
We are in a dicey time economically. We know that. We have
a need to get our budgets in order. We know that as a country.
We are having a disagreement on how to do that now, but we will
do that. We will accommodate that. And I believe that there is
every reason to believe we will continue to have a vigorous
science program in this country because otherwise we won't even
have a future economically. And in that science budget, I
certainly include NASA.
As you probably know, I come from Silicon Valley and there
is a lot of innovation going on there all of the time. And so
my question for you is how can, in a strategic sense, we design
with the capacity to incorporate innovations that are already
underway but are not yet ready for implementation? For example,
there is an article in Aerospace America in February of this
year that outlines a program that I have been following now for
several years, which is a paraffin-based fuel that has been
developed with the help of NASA Ames, Stanford University, and
the Space Propulsion Group, and they are about to launch within
the next couple of years with this new paraffin-based fuel.
What the article indicates is that this fuel is going to lower
the cost of a whole variety of systems. It is not going to be
suitable just for replacement of boosters. They are going to be
suitable for building in upper stages a wide variety of
applications, and it is going to affect the lower cost. The
design is different because of the burn rate and the capacity.
I know that SpaceX is--I know they are not necessarily in
Silicon Valley per se--is also doing some innovative things.
So I guess the question is generic. How does the
government, which tends to be--I don't mean this as criticism;
it is just the nature of government--a little more stodgy I
guess than the private sector, incorporate these innovations
without holding up the design overall?
Mr. Bolden. That makes plenty of sense and that is exactly
what we are trying to do. We--I have a chief technologist, Dr.
Bobby Braun, who is a Professor at Georgia Tech and, you know,
still spends time there, but his task or his challenge from me
is to make sure that we don't miss out on technological
development, technological innovations, capabilities that are
out there. Congressman Clarke, I reminded or I pointed out to
him the last time I was here that he and the citizens of
Detroit should be very proud of the fact that they produced
Robonaut 2, R2. That is innovation in the field of robotics. It
is now--R2 is now on the International Space Station and will
live there for the life of the International Space Station. And
that came from a collaboration between General Motors and the
Johnson Space Center. We are always looking for innovative ways
to do things.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, specifically, are you taking a look at
the paraffin-based fuel issue? I know there has been testing
with the Air Force, as well as at NASA Ames as part of the
planning for this?
Mr. Bolden. We at NASA are not looking at alternative fuels
because that is not what we do. What we look at and what I am
certain Ames is probably doing--I am not familiar with the
specific one that you mentioned--but what most of my research
centers like Ames, Langley, Glenn do is they take emerging
technologies and try to help industry develop systems that can
use that. So when you talk about paraffin-based fuel----
Ms. Lofgren. Well, SpaceX is going to use it on their next
launch but----
Mr. Bolden. I don't know. You know----
Ms. Lofgren. Well, that--according to the article. But
could I just do this----
Mr. Bolden. I don't think so. If they are, you know, I----
Ms. Lofgren. I am just reading what the report said in
Aerospace America.
Mr. Bolden. They use a LOX/RP engine and so I don't know.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, could I ask you this? Would you look
into this paraffin-based issue for me and get back to me on it?
Mr. Bolden. Yes, ma'am. We will.
Ms. Lofgren. I appreciate that very much.
Mr. Bolden. We will. Thank you.
Ms. Lofgren. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, Ms.
Adams, for five minutes.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, actually. It is still morning, Administrator
Bolden. And I, too, want to thank you for your service to our
country.
You know, I want to reiterate something that you and I have
just spoken about I am sure several times. I always say it
every time and that is my problem isn't that we cancel
constellation. I understand why that happened. My problem is
that we didn't have a viable plan set forth when we did so. And
in doing so, we lose our preeminence. We lose some ability if
not a lot of ability. And I heard my colleague talk about the
spinoffs. Well, I have the 2010 Spinoff book sitting on my desk
in my office prominently displayed so that people can see the
innovation, the creation, and the advancements, and the jobs
created from this program. So when I sit and listen, I hear you
say comments like ``the sooner we make a decision.'' You are
right. The sooner we make a decision.
You--we go back and forth about affordable, sustainable,
and it has to make sense, but we still haven't made a decision
so we don't know if it is affordable, sustainable, and it makes
sense. The deliberate speed of this town, well, then why the
deliberate speed to end without an Option B? I understand
budget priorities. I understand all of this, but I also
understand that this is the first time in decades--decades that
the United States has no way to get American astronauts flying
on American rockets built by American engineers and scientists
into outer space. And it concerns me that NASA seems okay with
that. That is where I am on this. I--you know, what is the
intention of the Administration to assist our constituents with
imminent layoffs as a reflection of the poor planning after the
Constellation cancellation.
You realize that we have over nine percent unemployment and
we have more and more layoffs coming in Central Florida where I
represent. And I heard you say that you are working with the
communities and the State and I commend you for that.
I would like to know what are you doing with them? Because
I have been speaking with them also. I know of the two programs
you referenced in that, but we still have a lot more people
going to lose their jobs in an economy that is flailing and an
unemployment rate that is 9., what, 2, three percent. Each day
I hear of more unemployment. So I just need to know, when can
we see the plan? When will we see that plan? When will NASA
follow through with last year's authorization bill?
Mr. Bolden. Congresswoman, we are carrying out the
provisions of last year's authorization bill each day. And I
tried to mention some of that in my remarks.
A couple of things. You know, we are proceeding--if you
look at the timelines that I have given you, a capability of
putting humans in space aboard an American spacecraft by the
2015, 2016 timeframe, if you look at where we were with
Constellation at the time that the recommendation went to the
President to terminate Constellation, we were looking at 2016,
2017, maybe 2018. So somehow, we are actually ahead of when we
would have been with Constellation in terms of getting beyond
low Earth orbit. We at least now have a vision that would
enable us to go not only back to the moon with a system that
can get us down to the surface but to other places. We could
not do that with Constellation.
We have made significant changes. In Constellation, we are
going to be relying on two vehicles to get crew--a separate
vehicle for crew and a separate vehicle for cargo. Every time
you introduce another system, that is more risk. And while, you
know, some people say, well, it is safer for the crew, that was
a step that we didn't necessarily need to take. And so when you
look at the SLS, it is a system that carries crew and cargo. So
we went from two vehicles required for a mission to one vehicle
required.
You know, as I said before, the decision that I am working
under now was made more than eight years ago. It was a decision
made by the prior administration.
Mrs. Adams. Again, the SLS, we are still waiting for that
information, and that is why we are having this hearing today.
Mr. Bolden. Yes, Congresswoman. I understand that.
Mrs. Adams. And so when can we truly expect--several people
have asked that question and we kind of have a vague--can you
give us a clear timeframe, something--I mean you say it is at
OMB. Can we have that same information? Can the Committee have
that information? When can we expect to see something?
Mr. Bolden. Congresswoman, there are things that I can
share with this Committee, and I would gladly do that to let
you know where we are. And we will make arrangements to do
that.
Mrs. Adams. Could you do that, please?
Mr. Bolden. But I would say, because some of it is
proprietary to the companies involved, then it is not stuff
that can be shared publicly. It should not be in the New York
Times. But we will work to get that to the Committee.
But you mentioned the fact that for the first time in
decades we have no capability. I would have to remind you that
between Apollo and Shuttle, you know, the last time we flew an
Apollo spacecraft with humans on it was the mid- to late 1970s
and we didn't fly Shuttle until '81. And that was with a plan.
It took us longer than we thought. You know, we were down for
two years after Columbia, down for two years after Shuttle. Had
it not been for the Russians, we would have not had a
capability to get humans in space. So we are looking at a
redundant capability of putting humans in space. With Russians,
we hope to have a couple of American companies that will be
able to do that so that we are not caught again where, when we
lose a vehicle, we don't have an American capability to get to
space.
So we have been here before, unfortunately. It is not the
first time. But we are trying to get us to the point where we
have the capability to do this.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you.
Mr. Bolden. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Adams. I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady makes a good point and yields
back.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Sewell from Alabama for five
minutes.
Ms. Sewell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome. It is great to see you again, Mr. Administrator.
My question is really about the timeline, the budget for
SLS. The proposed budget for fiscal year 2012, as you
indicated, is 1.8 billion. And as you know, the Marshall Space
Center in Huntsville, Alabama, is likely to be very important
in creating those components. And so my question is is it
realistic--is the fiscal year 2012 amount, 1.8 billion,
sufficient to fully fund SLS and the heavy-lift vehicle? And I
know that the timeline has moved a bit, that it was 2016; it is
now 2017. I really want you to talk a little bit about the
achievability of the timeline.
Mr. Bolden. Congresswoman, if I can go back and just make
one adjustment. The time--the 2016 time was the time that you
all told me you wanted to have a capability to do that. And at
the time, I expressed some concern as to whether I could do
that given the budget climate.
Ms. Sewell. Um-hum.
Mr. Bolden. The budget climate has deteriorated since we
had that initial conversation. So 2017 for an initial
capability to fly the vehicle, that is not human-rated. That--
we are still talking about, you know, late this decade, early
'20s, before we have a human-rated vehicle, but we think we are
going to be able to do that. Is the budget sufficient? When we
made the recommendation on what should be in the budget to the
President, I did not take the largest amount. I took the
minimum that I thought we could do the program. I took the
minimum that I thought we could do commercial crew and cargo,
and that has caused quite a bit of consternation that I have
discussed with this Committee and the Science Committee and the
Appropriations Committee before that, you know, I would love to
have more money for commercial crew to give me some assurance
that we can facilitate their success. It is not there, so I--
what I did was I took what I figured was the minimum amount
that would get me to a viable commercial capability, the
minimum amount that I thought would get me to a viable space
launch system and MPCV, and that is what you see in the 2012
budget. So given that level of funding, we can do what we said
we can do.
Ms. Sewell. How will that affect Marshall's Space Center?
How does the bottom line----
Mr. Bolden. If everything goes as planned, Marshall will
have some robust activity coming up. They are anxious to get
back into building rockets and doing that kind of thing. They
recently had a shell-buckling test----
Ms. Sewell. Um-hum.
Mr. Bolden. --that excited everybody there because it
showed us that we overbilled, that--it showed our commercial
partners that perhaps they overdesign and overbill because we
found that, you know, things are stronger than we really think
they are.
Ms. Sewell. Right. I wanted to move a little bit to talking
about components in the SLS. Some have argued that the
development of new components is more expensive and time-
consuming than using existing components for SLS. With the
tight NASA budget, it is cost-efficient to have a competition
on the boosters' phase of the SLS as some individuals have
recently suggested? And would this potential competition impact
cost and the schedule?
Mr. Bolden. One of the things that we have recommended that
I can share in the design, if you will, of the new SLS, in an
effort to try to speed things along and utilize as much as we
can of existing technology while preserving the space
industrial base for some time is a desire to utilize existing
solid rocket boosters----
Ms. Sewell. Right.
Mr. Bolden. --until we can hold a competition, which I have
directed--we try to do as soon as possible--where all comers
can compete to include a LOX/RP capability. And I have said
before I want to find the money to seed money for American
manufacturers to at least take the risk at producing LOX/RP
engines for a booster. So the eventual booster for the final
SLS could be solids, could be liquids of two forms--LOX/
hydrogen, LOX/RP--or if there is paraffin-based, I mean it
might be that. It is going to full and open competition if I
can do what I would like to do.
Ms. Sewell. Thank you very much. I yield back the balance
of my time.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes Dr. Harris, the gentleman from Maryland.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much. And thank you very much,
General Bolden, for all the service you have given to the
country over a long and illustrious career now capped heading
an agency that I think is going to have some very difficult
decisions to make.
First of all, I want to thank the Agency for everything
they are doing at Wallops Island. It is a big boon to the
economy of the First Congressional District of Maryland, which
is only about 10 miles away or so from it.
Let me just follow up with a question that Chairman Hall
asked at the beginning and which I think I am getting the
handle on. In the 2010 authorization, NASA was instructed to
take the MPCV and use it as a backup vehicle to get to the
International Space Station, but your testimony today is that
that is really probably not going to be ready until around
2020, is that correct, for man flight?
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, it is--you know, the date that the
MPCV is ready for a human flight will be sometime between
probably 2017 and 2020.
Mr. Harris. Well, 2017 is when the unmanned flight----
Mr. Bolden. That is when we plan to fly an unmanned
flight----
Mr. Harris. Unmanned. So realistically, it is about 2020.
So--and my understanding is the International Space Station is
really only projected right now to be used through 2020. I mean
it can go until 2028 or so, but only to 2020. So realistically,
the MPCV really will never be a backup vehicle.
Mr. Bolden. If we go beyond--there are a number of ifs----
Mr. Harris. Yeah, if we go beyond----
Mr. Bolden. --that I usually--well, I mean----
Mr. Harris. We don't go beyond 2020. Realistically, it
won't be a realistic backup.
Mr. Bolden. Well, that is probably safe to say that.
Mr. Harris. That is what I imagined. So the Russians now--
we kind of depend upon the Russians for all our manned space
flights it looks like until a commercial alternative--and what
is the--is it realistic that we will have a commercial
alternative to delivering our astronauts to the space station
for 2020?
Mr. Bolden. It is realistic that we will have a capability
by 2015.
Mr. Harris. By 2015. So it looks like for a four-year
window or so we are going to depend upon the Russians?
Mr. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Mr. Harris. And my understanding--I think I read it
somewhere--they are kind of charging us a whole lot more than
they used to on that----
Mr. Bolden. No, sir. They are actually not.
Mr. Harris. Right. Okay.
Mr. Bolden. The latest contract that we signed with the
Russians was essentially what we had signed before plus
inflation. And yet, the thing that I try to keep people--to
help people understand it is not just for a ride. It is for
training because our crewmembers fly as crewmembers of the
Soyuz Spacecraft. Generally, an American will be the flight
engineer. We have never had an American fly as a commander of a
Soyuz, but they do the flight engineer duties. They--one of the
reasons we want to bring the capability of sending humans to
space on an American-made vehicle is just to reduce the amount
of time that I lose an astronaut to Russia for training.
Mr. Harris. Sure.
Mr. Bolden. You know, that is one of the things that is
unattractive, if you will, to a young astronaut with a family
is having to spend two years of their time back and forth to
Russia. You know, that is--it is not attractive.
Mr. Harris. Absolutely. No, thank you very much on that.
But with, again, with regards to the MPCV, it looks like we
are not going to be able to fulfill that, you know, the
requirement of the 2010 law to use--actually have that
available as a backup. We will depend upon the commercial
rockets and, of course, the Russians as backups it looks like.
Mr. Bolden. My hope is that we will have more than one
commercial--more than one American-made capability to take
humans to space by the 2015/2016 time frame.
Mr. Harris. Okay.
Mr. Bolden. Which would give us three alternatives.
Mr. Harris. Well, thank you very much. And again, thank you
for your service.
I yield back.
Mr. Bolden. Thank you. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back.
I say to the very patient Ms. Jackson Lee, if you can wait
five more minutes, the Chair is going to recognize Mr. Clarke
for five minutes.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I would like to yield a minute of my time to the good
gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Wu.
Mr. Wu. I thank the gentleman from Michigan.
Dr. Bolden, I just want to piggyback on two things, one is
the paraffin engine as mentioned by Ms. Lofgren. I met with
Brian Cantwell, the head of Aeronautics and Astronautics years
ago and, you know, his claim is that they have solved a lot of
the problems associated with paraffin technology. I brought
this to the attention of your predecessor and he went right to
those problems and, you know, I just encourage you to
personally take some interest in this because what is momentum
to one person is inertia to another.
The other item is what you mentioned about people wanting
to become millionaires. And I would hope--not NASA but somebody
else--kind of take a look at how many people proportionately
become millionaires when they want to become an investment
banker and anybody else because just as it is kind of seductive
to try to become the next Tiger Woods or a basketball player or
whatever, we need to start drawing people into things like
science and engineering just as NASA drew the best and
brightest back in the '50s and '60s. And I would really like to
see that again. And I just want to throw that out.
And I thank you, Mr. Clarke. I appreciate it.
Mr. Clarke. You are welcome.
Administrator Bolden, I just wanted to follow up on a
question that was posed by the gentlelady from Maryland, Ms.
Edwards, regarding the James Webb Space Telescope. In light of
some of the facts here, there could be huge job losses
throughout 22 States, maybe 8,000 scientist jobs at risk here.
Can you comment on the appropriateness of cancelling the
support of the Webb Telescope?
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, I have tried to explain what I
think is the importance of James Webb in terms of opening new
horizons far greater than we got from Hubble. I would only say
that for about the same cost as Hubble in real year dollars, we
will bring James Webb into operation. You know, it is--we have
made significant changes in management in the program, changes
at the Goddard Space Flight Center. Our contractor has done the
same. Seventy-five percent of the hardware has already been
delivered, and it is in the President's 2012 budget. So I guess
the only other comment I could make was that it is a valuable
commodity in NASA's stable of science projects.
Mr. Clarke. I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back.
I hate to tell Ms. Jackson Lee but I have to follow the
rules.
Chairman Smith, I recognize you for 5 quick minutes.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me follow up, Mr. Bolden, on your last comments about
the James Webb Space Telescope. Isn't the real problem here
that OMB has not given your Agency flexibility when it comes to
the budget? It sort of straight-lined the James Webb telescope
rather than give you all the flexibility to maybe frontload it
since 75 percent of the development has been done?
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, we are still in process of
developing our re-plan for James Webb, which would include a
revision to what we think is needed in the budget. When we
helped develop the 2012 budget, that is where we were marching
with Webb at the time.
Mr. Smith. But you support full funding?
Mr. Bolden. I will support the funding that we will bring
forward in our re-plan, which I have had an opportunity to see
and which we have pre-briefed to our source--to our SRB, our
outside review board.
Mr. Smith. And would it help you if OMB gave you more
flexibility?
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, I always have a certain amount of
flexibility. I go back to the decision-making process. You
know, I have to go to them for consideration of issues
pertaining to the budget that I don't have a full grasp of.
Mr. Smith. I would never admit that, but we will hope you
can do the best you can for the----
Mr. Bolden. Yes, sir. I am doing--I will do the best I can.
Mr. Smith. Okay.
Mr. Bolden. I will.
Mr. Smith. Second question is this: there have been two
independent assessments, I understand, of the Agency's morale
and trust in its organizational leadership. Can you give this
Committee the results of those assessments that have been done?
Mr. Bolden. I am not sure of which ones you speak, so I
will take it for the record and get it back----
Mr. Smith. Okay.
Mr. Bolden. --but I can tell you when I travel around the
Agency, most recently on the afternoon of the launch last
Friday----
Mr. Smith. Right.
Mr. Bolden. --at a cookout at the Kennedy Space Center
where I had an opportunity to circulate among the workforce----
Mr. Smith. Yeah.
Mr. Bolden. --many of whom will not be working several
weeks from now, they were upbeat. Their attitude was very
positive and they----
Mr. Smith. Mr. Bolden, I am sure that is the case. That is
also anecdotal.
Mr. Bolden. Yeah.
Mr. Smith. These assessments, one was done by the former
senior engineer for the Hubble Space Telescope, Charlie
Pellerin, and another by the management consulting firm
McKinsey. Are you familiar with those assessments, those
studies?
Mr. Bolden. I contracted for the one for McKinsey and
Charlie Pellerin used to--I mean still works for us, I think,
so I will--as I said, I will take it for the record and bring
you the results of those----
Mr. Smith. You will give me some results for those
assessments? Okay. Thank you, Mr. Bolden.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Chairman Hall. All right. The Chair is really pleased to
recognize the gentlelady from Houston, Texas, Mrs. Jackson Lee
for 5 or 6 minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, let me thank you and the
Ranking Member, Ms. Johnson, for your kindness in indulging me
on a Committee that I had the privilege of serving on for 12
years and still have a great affection and respect for the work
that is done by this great Committee. And, of course, one of
its jurisdictional responsibility is NASA.
Before I dive into my questions, Mr. Administrator, let me
thank you for your keen hospitality for a very emotional and
moving experience on last Friday as Atlantis pushed past all
doubts, all weather threats, and did what we expected her to
do, which is to launch beautifully, and to the men and women
that are now in space and utilizing the space station. We wish
them well as they by-step space junk and do the great work that
they have done over the years.
I also would like to personally thank Mr. Glenn Posey. I
have never seen a human being work as hard as he did and Karl
Stehmer, who was excellent in his work. And these are the kinds
of personnel that don't say no and recognize the importance of
a Member who is able to see firsthand the work of NASA. And
Members who were there, I know, appreciated their kindness.
Let me follow the line of questioning of my good friend,
Congressman Bartlett, as a strong advocate of human space
exploration. I can't cite the tenure that he has but I am
really concerned the next generation of physicists and
astronauts of many training, whether it is medicine, but just
those who aspire to believe that it is important for men and
women to go into space.
I am concerned about the messaging in what we have said.
And you made a very valid point. We have been down
conspicuously in our recent times with the Columbia and
Challenger and either use another vehicle or we are not
actually going into space. This should be characterized as
that. My understanding is we are in this position because we
did not fully fund Constellation when we had every opportunity
to do so. And so now we are in a period where we are looking at
the Space Launch System, but the message is not getting to the
American people that we are still vibrant, we are still
engaged. Tell me what NASA Johnson--Houston's role is now going
to be with the Space Launch System and, if any, the MPCV. We
are told that there are four contractors in Houston, and what
is their role in filling the gap? Because we will expect
thousands of layoffs in the Fall that are going to come about.
They are mostly contractors. But what will be Houston's role as
we go forward?
And let me ask this other question. I have legislation. We
are still in pain about the choice of the shuttle, and my
legislation is a compromise. It indicates a loaner to be a
partner to the other anchored iconic city or area that was
leading in space that was Florida. There is no competition to
Houston's role in the beginning of our space history. It is
deserving--it would finish the historical story, but I think my
effort--it doesn't have to even be legislation--of loaning--and
I know there is some talk about the remains of--or the remains
of some of the tragedies that occurred. I don't want to speak
for or against that. I welcome that thought. But I am talking
about an actual shuttle being loaned to the Houston Space
Johnson area.
If you can go forward on the first question of Houston's
role now upcoming and then on the space shuttle loaner program.
Mr. Bolden. Congresswoman, thank you very much.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And thank you for your long and ongoing
service.
Mr. Bolden. Thank you. And I appreciate your specific
mention of the employees, particularly, again Posey and Karl
Stehmer who, unfortunately, is in the room when you said that.
So I have no idea what that is going to cost me.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I will put some funding in the budget for
it.
Mr. Bolden. They are two people who represent the 17,000
plus people in the civil service portion of NASA and then the
almost 40,000 contractors who are incredibly dedicated, who are
motivated and come to work every day because they love what
they do.
When you ask about JSC, JSC will continue to play a
critical role in everything that has to do with human space
flight. They have the program office for the MPCV. They will be
working cooperatively with the Kennedy Space Center that will
have the program office for commercial crew. Astronauts will
continue to train at the Johnson Space Center, train and live
in Houston for the foreseeable future. As I mentioned, we just
recently named additional crews for the International Space
Station. They will train and work out of Houston. And the
development of the MPCV, its test profile and everything else,
its integration to the SLS will be headquartered down in----
Ms. Jackson Lee. So will we see the ramping-up of employees
that are now losing jobs?
Mr. Bolden. Over time it is our hope that you will see
everything bottom out and you will see a ramp-up in jobs back
in all of our space communities. What I think you will also see
over time is that as we are able to successfully facilitate the
success of commercial space entities, you will see that those
companies become represented in the Houston area, in the space
coast area, in other areas around the country. You know, we
signed an agreement down at the Kennedy Space Center last week
with Mark Sirangelo, the CEO of Sierra Nevada to utilize the
engineering expertise of the Kennedy Space Center. He had
signed one with Johnson Space Center, with Ames, and with
Langley. And that is what we are looking for is more
cooperation between--among the commercial entities and our----
Ms. Jackson Lee. We are looking for jobs and people with
expertise----
Mr. Bolden. Exactly.
Ms. Jackson Lee. --so that we can----
Mr. Bolden. Exactly.
Ms. Jackson Lee. --continue to be leaders in science and
technology.
Mr. Bolden. There are three things that I tell people all
the time and I promise this Committee. One is that the United
States will maintain its leadership in exploration. The second
one is that we will do everything in our power to facilitate
the success of an American capability of taking humans to space
on American-built rockets using American innovation. That is
critical for us. And then the third thing is that we are going
to do deep space exploration. Given the President's 2012
budget, we have a timeline on which we are going to do that
that I talked about in my comments. If we get less funding, we
will still do that but the time may stretch out.
Ms. Jackson Lee. A loaner vehicle?
Mr. Bolden. I don't really have a comment on that,
Congresswoman. I am waiting--you know, we have a plan in place
and we intend to carry out that plan, but----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, I will just end on this
note. I am continuing to press for Houston's historical
position in space to be rewarded and respected. And so I will
continue to reach the President and anyone else to say that we
need a shuttle, however it can be placed appropriately. And I
thank you for letting me press this issue and I will press it
again with you in the coming weeks.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. And thank you for your patience.
And thank you for coming back to the Committee that you served
long years on.
Ms. Johnson and I have agreed to give Mr. Rohrabacher 1
minute additional.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. Have 10 seconds that is gone.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. Let me just note that I am for human
presence and enterprise and utilization and even human
settlement in space. I am not so sure about human exploration
versus robotic exploration.
But the question I have for you that I wanted to make sure
we got this down, the development costs of actually achieving a
refueling capability, which would give us further capabilities
in space, how does that match up with the cost--the new cost of
developing a new huge rocket? Could we--is it about the same,
is it less, or what is the----
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, I will have to take that for the
record because that is a study that I am certain is somewhere,
you know, over in the headquarters building, but I am not aware
of that. I have not asked for that information, but I will get
it to you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I would appreciate that because it does go
right to the heart of the matter of what strategy we will have,
of whether you have to launch right from the Earth with
everything or whether or not we should start developing the
capabilities of refueling and then going on with further
missions that wouldn't necessarily require a huge rocket that
requires that much fuel.
Mr. Bolden. I don't have the answer and I will get it for
the record. But I will tell you in the ongoing evaluation that
I asked in coming to the conclusion that I did on the SLS, we
looked at multiple scenarios, one of which was, you know,
flight-to-Earth orbit or what we call an Earth-orbit
rendezvous. And it turned out that that was not as economical
nor as reliable as the single flight, beyond-Earth orbit
rendezvous, the way that we envision it now.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much.
Mr. Bolden. But I will get you the information.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes, sir.
Chairman Hall. Gentleman has a promise. Gentleman's time is
up.
Mrs. Johnson has asked for a minute.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I simply want to thank the Administrator and also express
my appreciation for this program and all it has done for the
Nation and the world and for every possible person involved.
And I don't see this, though I am troubled about the ending of
a program, but rather the launching of new horizons and
horizons that we will all see as much benefit as we have seen
in the past of our shuttle system. And I want to thank you
again for being here, for being persistent, and you deserve a
break. Thank you.
Mr. Bolden. Thank you, Congresswoman.
Mr. Wu. And Mr. Chairman, I am not going to ask for a
minute, but I want to thank you----
Chairman Hall. Please don't.
Mr. Wu. But I want to thank you anyway----
Chairman Hall. No, you have a minute.
Mr. Wu. No, no. I want to thank you anyway because I know
you would have given it to me. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. I thank Mr. Bolden for your very valuable
testimony.
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, may I have 30 seconds?
Chairman Hall. I have a closing statement here that I have
to make.
Mr. Bolden. May I ask for 30 seconds before your closing
statement?
Chairman Hall. Sure. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bolden. And, you know, we have--I have said a lot about
who is responsible for what, and I am ultimately responsible to
the President, but, you know, I have served in the Space Agency
under five Presidents, starting with President Reagan, and I
think people need to look at what our present President has
done in terms of support for the space program. You know, I did
not--I can't remember--and certainly this happened--a President
who has taken the personal interest in the program the way that
President Obama has. When he and his family came to the Cape
after we did not launch STS-134 and spent quite a bit of time
with the crew, the families, the workers there, I mean, and we
had cancelled already that day, that spoke volumes. The
commendatory message that he sent to our employees Friday
afternoon after the launch of STS-135 and continued his promise
and his challenge to us to send humans to an asteroid in Mars
is more than I can remember from any of the total of five
Presidents for whom I have worked. So I do like to give credit
where credit is due.
Chairman Hall. I thank you. I don't agree with you, but I
do thank you.
General Bolden, I would just implore you to get a final
decision out as soon as you can, tomorrow, maybe, day after,
whenever you can. But Congress takes a real high priority on
closing the gap and having a backup system, and given all that
has been achieved under the Constellation program, good or bad,
mistakes were made and all that I know, but it shouldn't take a
year's worth of deliberations to come up with an architecture
that at some time, in some respects resemble components of
Constellation or whatever follows Constellation. We have a
workforce, we have an industrial base that is critical to our
Nation's security and economic well being, and their future is
being heavily impacted by NASA's indecision.
And whoever wrote this for me also said I hope you will
take that message back to the White House. I am not saying I
hope you take that message back to the White House because you
opened your statement saying the buck stopped with you. I don't
really truly agree with that, but I do say to you because of
your service and because of your outstanding--your heroic
service to this country, the years you gave, you put your life
in the hands of battling the enemy and people have admired you.
Three times you were strapped to one of our spacecrafts, didn't
know for sure--positive that you were going to get back--four
times. People admire you and almost worship you and you have
always been capable of friendship, and I think that is the
reason that we have tried to be factual with our questions
here, not mean or unkind, but trying to extract--and not
asking, we are begging for information.
As Mrs. Adams said, who represents an area that she is
fearful, you know, and anxious and asking you when, when? And
you said if you look at this or look at that or if you look at
the Constellation, I just urge you to look at Congress and what
Congress has asked you to do already----
Mr. Bolden. Yes, sir.
Chairman Hall. --and has been agreed by both sides. Help
us. And thank you for your time.
Mr. Bolden. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Hall. And at this time, we do close out--Members
of the Committee will have additional questions for you, Mr.
Bolden. I will ask you to respond to them. And the record will
remain open for two weeks for additional comments from Members.
And we thank you.
Mr. Bolden. Congressman, thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:22 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


