- CONFLICTS AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF MOTOR FUEL STANDARDS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CONFLICTS AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
OF MOTOR FUEL STANDARDS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
ENVIRONMENT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2011

----------

Serial No. 112-49

----------

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

CONFLICTS AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
OF MOTOR FUEL STANDARDS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
ENVIRONMENT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-49

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

70-973 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
Tennessee                        FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Energy and Environment

HON. ANDY HARRIS, Maryland, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               ZOE LOFGREN, California
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, November 2, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Andy Harris, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................     8
Written Statement............................................     9

Statement by Representative Brad Miller, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Witnesses:

Mr. Brendan Williams, Senior Director of Advocacy, National
Petrochemical and Refiners' Association
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Dr. Ingrid Burke, Director of the Haub School and Ruckelshaus
Institute of Environment and National Resources, University of
Wyoming; CoChair, National Research Council Committee on
Economic and Environmental Impacts of Increasing Biofuels
Production
Oral Statement...............................................    20
Written Statement............................................    22

Ms. Margo T. Oge, Director of the Office of Transportation and
Air Quality, EPA
Oral Statement...............................................    24
Written Statement............................................    25

Dr. Jay Kesan, Professor and H. Ross and Helen Workman Research
Scholar and Program Leader, Biofuel Law and Regulation Program,
Energy Biosciences Institute, University of Illinois College of
Law
Oral Statement...............................................    29
Written Statement............................................    31

Mr. Bob Greco, Group Director for Downstream and Industry
Operations, American Petroleum Institute
Oral Statement...............................................    35
Written Statement............................................    36

Mr. David Hilbert, Thermodynamic Development Engineer, Mercury
Marine
Oral Statement...............................................    38
Written Statement............................................    40

Mr. Jack Huttner, Executive Vice President, Commercial and Public
Affairs, Gevo, Incorporated
Oral Statement...............................................    41
Written Statement............................................    43

Discussion
...............................................................    45

Appendix 1: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Brendan Williams, Senior Director of Advocacy, National
Petrochemical and Refiners' Association........................    58

Dr. Ingrid Burke, Director of the Haub School and Ruckelshaus
Institute of Environment and National Resources, University of
Wyoming; CoChair, National Research Council Committee on
Economic and Environmental Impacts of Increasing Biofuels
Production.....................................................    61

Ms. Margo T. Oge, Director of the Office of Transportation and
Air Quality, EPA...............................................    65

Dr. Jay Kesan, Professor and H. Ross and Helen Workman Research
Scholar and Program Leader, Biofuel Law and Regulation Program,
Energy Biosciences Institute, University of Illinois College of
Law............................................................    73

Mr. Bob Greco, Group Director for Downstream and Industry
Operations, American Petroleum Institute.......................    80

Mr. David Hilbert, Thermodynamic Development Engineer, Mercury
Marine.........................................................    83

Mr. Jack Huttner, Executive Vice President, Commercial and Public
Affairs, Gevo, Incorporated....................................    87

Appendix 2: Additional Material for the Record

Letter to Chairman Andy Harris from Dr. Virginia H. Dale, Member,
National Academies Biofuels Panel..............................    95

Letter to Honorable Lisa P. Jackson, Adminstrator,Environmental
Protection Agency, and White Paper, from Mitch Bainwol,
President and CEO, Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers........    97

Letter to Honorable Lisa P. Jackson, Adminstrator,Environmental
Protection Agency, from Michael J. Stanton, President and CEO,
Association of Global Automakers, Inc..........................   106

Letters Submitted to Honorable Lisa P. Jackson, Adminstrator,
Environmental Protection Agency, from NESCHAUM, Ozone Transport
Commission, and NACAA..........................................   109

Slide Presentation from Mr. David Hilbert, Thermodynamic
Development Engineer, Mercury Marine...........................   115

Presentation from Mr. David Hilbert, Thermodynamic Development
Engineer, Mercury Marine.......................................   123

Gevo White Paper from the Testimony of Mr. Jack Huttner,
Executive Vice President, Commercial and Public Affairs, Gevo,
Incorporated...................................................   178

Potential Supply and Cost Impacts of Lower Sulfur, Lower RVP
Gasoline, Prepared for the American Petroleum Institute, July
2011, by Baker and O'Brien Incorporated........................   194

Letters from Autobile Manufacturers to Honorable Lisa Jackson,
Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency.................   213

Letters to Representative F. James Sensenbrenner, Jr., from
Briggs & Stratton, Subaru, General Motors, and Mercury Marine..   246

Association of International Automobile Manufacturers, Inc:
Response to EPA Decision to Approve E15 Ethanol Fuel for 2001-
2006 MY Vehicles...............................................   264

National Research Council of the National Academies: Renewable
Fuel Standard: Potential Economic and Environmental Effects of
U.S. Biofuel Policy............................................   266

Letter from Chairman Ralph M. Hall to Honorable Lisa Jackson,
Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency.................   296

Letter to Chairman Ralph M. Hall from Honorable Gina McCarthy,
Assistant Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency.......   300

CONFLICTS AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
OF MOTOR FUEL STANDARDS

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:38 p.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy
Harris [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Conflicts and Unintended Consequences of

Motor Fuel Standards

wednesday, november 2, 2011
2:00 p.m.--4:00 p.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

Purpose

On Wednesday, November 2, 2011, the Subcommittee on Energy and
Environment of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology will
hold a hearing to examine motor fuel standards currently in place at
the federal level and under consideration at the federal or State
level; assess the scientific foundation for such standards; explore the
inherent conflicts and unintended consequences of such standards; and
question whether or not conflicts exist within the standards and the
consequences of such effect the fungibility of, safe use of, and
affordability of the United States motor fuel supply.

Witnesses

Mr. Brendan Williams, Senior Director of Advocacy,
National Petrochemical & Refiners Association.

Dr. Ingrid Burke, Director, Haub School and Ruckelshaus
Institute of Environment and Natural Resources, University of Wyoming,
and Co-Chair, National Research Council Committee on Economic and
Environmental Impacts of Increasing Biofuels Production.

Ms. Margo T. Oge, Director, Office of Transportation and
Air Quality, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

Dr. Jay Kesan, Professor and H. Ross & Helen Workman
Research Scholar and Program leader of the Biofuel Law & Regulation
Program, Energy Biosciences Institute, University of Illinois College
of Law.

Mr. Bob Greco, Group Director, Downstream and Industry
Operations, American Petroleum Institute.

Mr. David Hilbert, Thermodynamic Development Engineer,
Mercury Marine.

Mr. Jack Huttner, Executive Vice President of Commercial
and Public Affairs, Gevo, Inc.

Background

The Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA) of 1970, 1977, and 1990
provided a number of regulatory tools to the EPA to reduce air
pollution across the U.S. These tools can be divided into two types of
approaches: ambient air quality standards and technology standards.
Each approach attempts to address difficulties in attaining air quality
improvements in a variety of ways, utilizing regulatory mechanisms to
focus on stationary and mobile sources, pollution that travels across
state lines, and technology limitations.

National Ambient Air Quality Standards

The regulatory scheme established by the CAAA of 1970 was based
primarily on the concept of nationwide air quality goals and the
development of individual State plans to meet those goals. EPA has
identified six ``criteria pollutants'' for National Ambient Air Quality
Standards (NAAQS): sulfur dioxide (SO
2
), particulate matter
(PM), \1\ nitrogen oxides (NO
2
), carbon monoxide (CO), ozone
(O
2
), and lead (Pb). For each of these pollutants, EPA has
set a primary standard at a level designed to protect the public health
within an ``adequate margin of safety.'' In addition, the statute
allows EPA to set a secondary NAAQS to protect public welfare. At this
point, EPA has not set secondary standards at different levels than the
primary standards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  For the first time, during the 1997 revision of the PM NAAQS,
EPA established separate standards for fine particulate matter (smaller
than 2.5 micrometers or PM
2
) and coarse particulate matter
(smaller than 10 micrometers or PM
2
).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The standards themselves are not directly enforceable. Rather,
NAAQS establish ceilings for concentrations of criteria pollutants in
ambient air. States are required to develop their own State
Implementation Plans (SIPs) that outline source-specific emission
limitations (either stationary or mobile sources) in which the NAAQS
will be ``attained'' or ``maintained.'' SIPs must be approved by EPA.
If EPA determines that a SIP will not be able to attain or maintain the
NAAQS concentrations, EPA can require States to abide by a Federal
Implementation Plan (FIP) until such time that the State develops an
approved SIP.

Mobile Source Controls in the Clean Air Act

Title I of the CAAA directs the EPA to set NAAQS and standards for
other harmful air pollutants and focuses on reducing pollution from
stationary sources such as coal-fired power plants, refineries, and
factories. However, emissions reductions from these sources are
typically not sufficient for States to achieve the goals laid out in
their SIPs, so additional tools are needed. Title II of the CAAA
provides a framework for achieving further emissions reductions through
regulation of mobile sources. Although separate titles, changes to
Title I automatically impact implementation of Title II, and vice
versa. For example, if EPA sets a NAAQS at a more stringent level using
the authority laid out in Title I, the tightened requirements apply to
mobile sources under Title II.
Mobile Source regulation under the Clean Air Act targets engines
and the fuel used to power those engines. The Clean Air Act outlines
categories of engines: on road, those used in the Nation's light duty
and heavy duty vehicle fleet, and off road, those engines used in
locomotives, aircraft, recreational vehicles such as boats and jet
skis, as well as construction and farm equipment, lawnmowers, and
chainsaws. On the fuel side of the equation, the Act provides for the
regulation of not only tailpipe emissions but also evaporative
emissions from motor fuels.

California Waiver

Unique in Title II of the CAA is what is often referred to as the
California waiver, Section 209(b), which provides that the
Administrator may waive the prohibition against a State adopting or
enforcing any standard relating to the control of emissions from new
motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines as long as the State
standards are at least as protective of public health and welfare as
the applicable federal standard. In practice, this permitted California
to continue to adopt more stringent standards than the rest of the
country. Given the State's economic size and market share, California
regulations tend to influence national standards. For example, CAFE
standards negotiated in 2009 included EPA, the Department of
Transportation, California regulators, and the auto industry.

Tailpipe Emissions

The 1990 CAAA expanded EPA's authority so as to require reductions
of emissions previously ignored, including evaporative and refueling
emissions, cold temperature emissions and air toxics. The amendments
outlined new tailpipe emissions standards for light duty cars and
trucks (Tier I) and authorized EPA to set more stringent standards down
the road (Tier II). Tier II standards phased in beginning with the
model year 2004, and attempted to be fuel neutral. Tier II targeted the
refining process as well, requiring refiners to reduce the sulfur
content in gasoline to 30 parts per million (ppm). This requirement was
necessitated by States needing to meet more stringent revised ozone and
particulate matter (PM) standards.

Fuel Specifications

Section 211(f) of the CAA prohibits the introduction of a new fuel
into commerce unless that fuel is certified to be ``substantially
similar'' to an existing fuel on the market. Under the Act, EPA may
waive the prohibition if the manufacturer of the fuel proves the new
fuel or fuel additive (or concentration thereof) will not cause or
contribute to a vehicle's failure to meet existing emissions standards.
In the 1990 amendments, Congress sought to address the problem
summertime ozone increases, by creating the Reformulated Gasoline (RFG)
Program. The RFG Program required that gasoline sold in certain areas
(starting with the nine largest metropolitan areas with the most severe
summertime ozone levels and other nonattainment areas that opt into the
program) be reformulated to reduce emissions of toxics and ozone
precursors including volatile organic compounds (VOCs). VOCs are
released in part due to the evaporative nature of gasoline. In order to
make gasoline cleaner burning, the Act, as part of the RFG program,
specified that RFG include two percent by weight oxygen content. The
oxygenate requirement was initially met by adding the fuel additive
MTBE to gasoline, as ethanol when used as an oxygenate introduced
additional volatility, thereby increasing evaporative emissions. The
Energy Policy Act of 2005, however, eliminated the oxygenate
requirement for the RFG program as the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS)
became the primary driver of gasoline content requirements.
The standard approach used to measure gasoline volatility is in
pounds per square inch (psi) of Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP). The higher
the RVP, the higher the fuel's volatility or tendency to evaporate. The
gasoline standard ranges from 7.0 psi to 9.0 psi for the summer months.
Since as mentioned above, ethanol, increases the volatility of
gasoline, EPA provided a 1.0 psi (one-pound waiver) for gasoline
containing 10 percent ethanol.

Boutique Fuels

Under Section 211(c), the EPA has approved requests for some States
to adopt fuel standards that are more stringent than those required
under EPA's RFG program. These fuels, often called boutique fuels, are
produced for a specific geographic area in order to help States achieve
their NAAQS compliance. Boutique fuels produced for one area may not
satisfy requirements in another area. The Energy Policy Act of 2005
sought to address the proliferation of boutique fuels by limiting their
number.

The Renewable Fuel Standard

The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPAct05) established in law a
renewable fuel standard (RFS). It required that four billion gallons of
renewable fuel be used in the national fuel mix by 2006, rising to 7.5
billion gallons by 2012. The Energy Independence and Security Act of
2007 (EISA) greatly expanded the RFS (RFS2). EISA increased the volume
of renewable fuel to be used in the U.S. to 36 billion gallons by 2022.
Furthermore, in order to promote the use of advanced biofuels, the
amount of corn-based ethanol to be used in meeting the RFS2 was capped
at 15 billion gallons. In 2010, the United States consumed
approximately 13.2 billion gallons of corn-based ethanol. RFS2 created
four categories of biofuels:

Total renewable fuels is the loosest definition, with the
only requirement that the biofuel have a lifecycle greenhouse gas (GHG)
emission profile that is 20% below the estimated lifecycle GHG emission
profile of traditional gasoline. Corn-based ethanol qualifies in this
category.

Advanced biofuels must reduce lifecycle GHG emissions by
50% compared with traditional gasoline. Corn-based ethanol does not
qualify for this category, but ethanol derived from sugarcane
(Brazilian ethanol) does.

Cellulosic and agricultural waste-based biofuels must
reduced lifecycle GHG emissions by 60% compared with traditional
gasoline. These renewable fuels must be derived from cellulose.

Biomass-based biodiesel must reduce lifecycle GHG
emissions by 50% compared with traditional diesel fuel. Qualifying
fuels are any diesel made from biomass feedstocks.

RFS2 nests the requirements for the advanced biofuels. For example,
in 2022, the RFS mandates the use of 36 billion gallons of biofuel
(Table 1). However, only 15 billion can be from corn-based ethanol. The
remaining 21 billion must come from advanced biofuels. Of the 21
billion, 16 billion must come from cellulosic, at least one billion
from biodiesel, and four billion of unspecified other advanced
biofuels.
EPA has the authority to reduce or waive the RFS requirements, in
whole or in part, based on the availability of domestic supply. For
example, in February 2010, EPA waived the 2010 cellulosic requirement
of 100 million gallons to 6.5 million gallons, and in November 2010,
EPA waived the 250 million gallon cellulosic requirement for 2011 to
6.6 million gallons. Even if the adjusted volume of cellulosic biofuel
is not actually produced, the obligated parties (including refiners)
are still required to buy credits to satisfy the adjusted amount.

Unintended Consequences and Potential Conflicts

E15

As a result of approaching the ethanol ``blend wall'' of 10 percent
(E10) and the increasing volumes required by the RFS, EPA, prompted by
an application by Growth Energy in March of 2009, has recently
permitted the use of intermediate ethanol blends (up to E15) in some
vehicles. \5\ Despite technical concerns involving emissions,
reliability, infrastructure, and liability being raised by a diverse
coalition of stakeholders, in October 2010 and January 2011, EPA
partially approved waivers for the use of E15 in model year 2001 and
newer light-duty motor vehicles. In approving the waiver, EPA was
required by Section 211(f) of the CAAA to determine first that E15
would ``not cause or contribute to a failure of any emission control
device or system.'' In making the determination, the Administrator
relied almost exclusively on a set of tests conducted by the Department
of Energy in 2009 and 2010.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  For more background information on E15, see the Subcommittee's
July 7 hearing, ``Hitting the Ethanol Blend Wall: Examining the Science
on E15,'' http://science.house.gov/hearing/energy-and-environment-
hearing-science-e15.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In June, EPA mandated a new label to be placed on service station
fuel pumps when stations choose to sell E15 to ``help reduce the
potential for vehicles, engines, and equipment not covered by the
partial waiver decisions to be misfueled with E15.''

Tier 3

EPA has signaled its intentions to move forward later this year
with so-called ``Tier 3'' standards for light-vehicle emissions and
fuels. This forthcoming action, which would strengthen limits on
gasoline vapor pressure and sulfur content even further than the
current Tier 2 standard, is prompted by the expanded use of renewable
fuels under the RFS and the likely expansion of ethanol consumption
resulting from the approval of E15. There are several elements of note
to this Tier 3 rulemaking:

Section 211(v) of the CAA requires EPA to first conduct
and complete an ``anti-backsliding'' study to determine if the RFS will
``adversely impact air quality.'' The study was required to be
completed 18 months after enactment of the 2007 EISA legislation, but
it remains unfinished.

An analysis conducted earlier this year suggests that
Tier 3 standards would result in negative economic outcomes, including
the closure of up to seven refineries and gasoline price increases of
up to 25 cents per gallon, as well as increased energy use and
greenhouse gas emissions in order to comply. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  Baker & O'Brien, Inc., ``Potential Supply and Cost Impacts of
Lower Sulfur, Lower RVP Gasoline,'' July 2011, http://www.api.org/
Newsroom/upload/
110715
-
LowerSulfer
-
LowerRVP
-
Final.pdf.

As a result of the predicted shift by automakers toward
direct fuel-injection systems in order to comply with EPA greenhouse
gas emissions standards, EPA's Tier 3 rulemaking appears poised to
tighten vehicle emissions standards as well, including a first-ever
particulate matter emission standard for all light-duty vehicles. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\  Curt Barry, ``Vehicle GHG Controls Drive EPA Plan for Strict
PM Limit, Worrying Industry,'' Inside EPA, July 22, 2011.

EPA is considering, as part of the Tier 3 proposal,
changing the Agency's certification fuel from E0 (pure gasoline without
biofuel additives) to E15 (15 percent ethanol blend). A change in this
certification fuel, which is the test gasoline that EPA and automakers
use to certify that engines meet emissions standards, could generate
significant problems for automobile and engine manufacturers, refiners,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
and advanced biofuels.

Low-Carbon Fuel Standard

Furthermore, proposed and enacted low-carbon fuel standards at the
federal, State, and regional levels create additional regulatory
tension and uncertainty in the marketplace. \8\ As the Congressional
Research Service suggested in a 2008 report on the subject, ``The
establishment of a Low Carbon Fuel Standard--at either the State or
federal level--would add another major regulatory requirement.'' \9\
Studies have indicated that these new standards could significantly
raise prices, reduce energy security, and, in some cases, increase
greenhouse gas emissions. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\  These efforts include California's Low Carbon Fuel Standard
Program (http://www.arb.ca.gov/fuels/lcfs/lcfs.htm), the Northeast
States for Coordinated Air Use Management's (NESCAUM) proposed Clean
Fuel Standard (http://www.nescaum.org/topics/clean-fuels-standard), and
President Obama's proposed National Low Carbon Fuel Standard (http://
my.barackobama.com/page/content/newenergy
-
more).
\9\  Brent Yacobucci, ``A Low Carbon Fuel Standard: State and
Federal Legislation and Regulations,'' CRS Report 7-9662, December 23,
2008.
\10\  See: IHS, ``Assessment of the NESCAUM Economic Analysis of a
Clean Transportation Fuels Program for the Northeast/Mid-Atlantic
Region,'' October 22, 2011; Barr Engineering Company, ``Low Carbon Fuel
Standard `Crude Shuffle' Greenhouse Gas Impacts Analysis,'' June 2010,
http://www.npra.org/files/
Crude
-
Shuffle
-
Report
-
0616101.pdf;
Michael Canes and edward Murphy, ``Economics of a Low Carbon Fuel
Standard,'' 2009, http://www.marshall.org/pdf/materials/643.pdf;
Charles River Associates, ``Economic and Energy Impacts Resulting from
a National Low Carbon Fuel Standard,'' June 2010, http://
consumerenergyalliance.org/wp/wp-content/uploads/2010/06/CRA-LCFS-
Final-Report-June-14-2010.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Harris. The Subcommittee on Energy and Environment
will come to order. Good afternoon. Again, my apologies for the
panel for the delay. We just got back from a series of votes,
but the good news is we shouldn't have any more during the
hearing.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled, ``Conflicts and
Unintended Consequences of Motor Fuel Standards.'' In front of
you are packets containing the written testimony, biography,
and truth in testimony disclosure of today's witness panel.
I now recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement.
Again, I want to welcome everyone to this afternoon's
hearing on, ``Conflicts and Unintended Consequences of Motor
Fuel Standards.''
I would like to note a couple of things at the outset.
First, this hearing is not an attack on biofuels. It is about
understanding the interrelation of the complex web of
government fuel mandates and the economic and environmental
consequences that result from those mandates. Second, many of
the conflicts highlighted today emanate from a single policy
passed by Congress back in 2007, a law expanding the Renewable
Fuel Standard to mandate consumption of 36 billion gallons of
biofuels by the year 2022. Collectively, these issues make one
essential principle abundantly clear: whether through
government handouts, as in the case of Solyndra, or through
heavy-handed fuel mandates, as in the case of the RFS, the
picking of energy winners and losers by government fiat is an
exercise in futility destined to fail miserably.
In the last eight months, this Committee has held numerous
hearings illustrating EPA's penchant for pursuing outcome-based
science. In all the program areas we have examined, the Agency
continuously fails to do its homework before rushing into a
regulatory judgment. Furthermore, much of the science supported
and used as the basis for new regulations is done behind a veil
of secrecy, contravening this Administration's promise of
transparency.
Consider just a few examples. EPA is undertaking a Tier 3
rulemaking later this year despite not having completed the
statutorily required, anti-backsliding analysis due in mid-
2009. EPA granted a waiver to allow 15 percent ethanol in our
fuel based on a single set of test results that are still not
complete and only made public the night before the waiver was
granted, ignoring several other relevant test programs. And the
Inspector General of EPA recently found that the
Administrator's endangerment finding on greenhouse gas
emissions failed basic peer review requirements.
EPA's upcoming Tier 3 rulemaking is a perfect case study in
regulatory folly. The three major elements of EPA's approach
are all being driven by the excesses of past regulatory
decisions including the RFS, not by any organic standard
emanating from the Clean Air Act.
First, there have been reports that the rule will include
the first-ever particulate matter standards for vehicle
tailpipes as the result of automakers increasingly shifting to
direct fuel-injection systems, itself a trend that is growing
in order to comply with EPA's greenhouse gas emission
standards. Second, EPA will also seek to tighten sulfur and
volatility limits for fuels to offset increases in air
pollutants resulting from EPA's Renewable Fuels Standard.
Finally, EPA is also proposing to change its gasoline test fuel
from E0 to E15 in order to accommodate increasing amounts of
ethanol in our fuel system.
The volumes of biofuels mandated by the RFS were the
driving force behind EPA's decision to permit mid-level ethanol
blends, and we are seeing similar engine compatibility,
liability, and infrastructure issues with higher blends of
biodiesel. A study sponsored by the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory and released two weeks ago raises even more red
flags about the deployment of E15. It showed significant damage
to marine engines, a problem unlikely to be mitigated by EPA's
watered-down misfueling label.
Similarly, we will also be discussing a recently-released
report from the National Research Council on the economic and
environmental impacts from U.S. biofuel policy. In addition to
finding that RFS-mandated levels of cellulosic ethanol are
unlikely to be met, the report also predicted a variety of air,
water, and soil quality impacts from increased biofuel
production. The study also concluded that the RFS is an
ineffective policy for greenhouse gas emission reductions, one
of the key motives behind the expanded mandate.
Regulations and standards that create environmental
problems that engender these secondary do-over regulations need
to be rethought. We need to start thinking about the real
objectives these standards are attempting to achieve. Is the
goal reduced fossil fuels, low carbon fuels, low sulfur fuels,
or reduced imported fuels? What are the real benefits realized
with these standards and at what cost? Are we creating an
environment that encourages job growth, or are we adding
regulatory burdens that will continue to cost more jobs?
As we have seen with regulatory approaches in the past,
government intervention more often than not results in
significant unintended consequences for the economy and the
environment. Some, not all, of those consequences can be
avoided with a little forethought and good scientific
investigation. I hope the discussion today will help illuminate
those areas where additional consideration or scientific
investigation is warranted and what objectives we are truly
trying to accomplish with current U.S. fuels policy.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harris follows:]

Prepared Statement of Representative Andy Harris, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment

I want to welcome everyone to this afternoon's hearing on Conflicts
and Unintended Consequences of Motor Fuel Standards.
I'd like to note a couple of things at the outset. First, this
hearing is not an attack on biofuels. It is about understanding the
interrelation of the complex web of government fuel mandates and the
economic and environmental consequences that result from them. Second,
many of the conflicts highlighted today emanate from a single policy
passed by Congress in 2007--a law expanding the Renewable Fuel Standard
to mandate consumption of 36 billion gallons of biofuels by 2022.
Collectively, these issues make one essential principle abundantly
clear: whether through government handouts, as in the case of Solyndra,
or through heavy-handed fuel mandates, as in the case of the RFS, the
picking of energy winners and losers by government fiat is an exercise
in futility destined to fail miserably.
In the last eight months, this Committee has held numerous hearings
illustrating EPA's penchant for pursuing outcome-based science. In all
the program areas we have examined, the Agency continuously fails to do
its homework before rushing into a regulatory judgment. Furthermore,
much of the science supported and used as the basis for new regulations
is done behind a veil of secrecy, contravening this Administration's
promises of transparency.
Consider just a few examples. EPA is undertaking a Tier 3
rulemaking later this year despite not having completed the statutorily
required anti-backsliding analysis due in mid-2009. EPA granted a
waiver to allow 15 percent ethanol in our fuel based on a single set of
test results that are still not complete--and only made public the
night before the waiver was granted--ignoring several other relevant
test programs. And the Inspector General of EPA recently found that the
Administrator's endangerment finding on greenhouse gas emissions failed
basic peer review requirements.
EPA's upcoming ``Tier 3'' rulemaking is a perfect case study in
regulatory folly. The three major elements of EPA's approach are all
being driven by the excesses of past regulatory decisions including the
RFS, not by any organic standard emanating from the Clean Air Act.
First, there have been reports that the rule will include the
first-ever particulate matter standards for vehicle tailpipes as the
result of automakers increasingly shifting to direct fuel-injection
systems--itself a trend that is growing in order to comply with EPA's
greenhouse gas emission standards. Second, EPA will also seek to
tighten sulfur and volatility limits for fuels to offset increases in
air pollutants resulting from EPA's Renewable Fuels Standard. Finally,
EPA is also proposing to change its gasoline test fuel from E0 to E15
in order to accommodate increasing amounts of ethanol in our fuel
system.
The volumes of biofuels mandated by the RFS were the driving force
behind EPA's decision to permit mid-level ethanol blends, and we are
seeing similar engine compatibility, liability, and infrastructure
issues with higher blends of biodiesel. A study sponsored by the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory and released two weeks ago raises
even more red flags about the deployment of E15. It showed significant
damage to marine engines, a problem unlikely to be mitigated by EPA's
watered-down misfueling label.
Similarly, we will also be discussing a recently released report
from the National Research Council on the economic and environmental
impacts from U.S. biofuel policy. In addition to finding that RFS-
mandated levels of cellulosic ethanol are unlikely to be met, the
report also predicted a variety of air, water, and soil quality impacts
from increased biofuel production. The study also concluded that the
RFS is an ineffective policy for greenhouse gas emission reductions,
one of the key motives behind the expanded mandate.
Regulations and standards that create environmental problems that
engender these secondary, ``do-over'' regulations need to be rethought.
We need to start thinking about the real objectives these standards are
attempting to achieve. Is the goal reduced fossil fuels, low carbon
fuels, low sulfur fuels, or reduced imported fuels? What are the real
benefits realized with these standards, and at what cost? Are we
creating an environment that encourages job growth or are we adding
regulatory burdens that will cost more jobs?
As we have seen with regulatory approaches in the past, government
intervention more often than not results in significant unintended
consequences for the economy and the environment. Some, not all, of
these consequences can be avoided with a little forethought and good
scientific investigation. I hope the discussion today will help
illuminate those areas where additional consideration is warranted and
what objectives we are truly trying to accomplish with current U.S.
fuels policy.

Chairman Harris. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Miller for
five minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One of the origins of
this hearing, it appears, is that the majority needed to cover
a variety of topics to placate various industries critical of
EPA and State environmental measures, including the Federal
Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS2) the California Low-Carbon Fuel
Standard, Tailpipe Emission Standards, Tier 3 Motor and Fuel
Standards, Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards for Oil
Refineries,and also the EPA's decision to allow the voluntary
sale of E15. What am I leaving out? There is a little bit of
this, there is a little bit of that.
So we have a seven-witness hearing on motor fuel standards.
I am pleased that the EPA is here at this time to testify, and
Ms. Oge, at least we will not be talking about you behind your
back at this hearing. Most of the issues raised today are
actually outside of our Committee's jurisdiction, so the
hearing is on the science behind the standards. Many of the
standards are the result of complicated statutory procedures
imposed by Congress, but procedures designed to ensure that
everyone affected by a regulation will have a chance to be
heard, and actually industry has insisted on those standards so
they would have an opportunity to be heard in all of those
procedures.
And all the standards we discuss today are intended to
protect the air we breathe, the water we drink, and to curb our
dependence on foreign oil. Our economy is largely built on
access to cheap motor fuels, but there are obvious consequences
to our dependence on those fuels. Our transportation sector
consumes 27 percent of the energy used in our country and makes
us very vulnerable to economic disruption from the interruption
of our oil supply from some of the most unstable nations in the
world.
And the use of motor fuel produces 1.8 million metric tons
of greenhouse gases annually, polluting the environment with
hazardous contaminants that can cause severe and chronic
respiratory illnesses.
The minority's one witness today, not counting Ms. Oge,
will point out that regulations spur innovation. For example,
the U.S. economy has grown by 64 percent since the enactment of
the Clean Air Act, and the benefits of the Act are 40 times the
cost of the regulation. Now, the innovation that has resulted
from the Act's requirements has generated 65,000 American jobs.
And other industries not invited to testify today support
various regulations and have already invested greatly in the
research and development to meet the standards of regulations.
We will submit written statements for the record from some
of those uninvited industries. Unfortunately, we will not hear
today from a parent who has made a panic trip to an emergency
room with a child suffering from an asthma attack. That should
also be part of this hearing.
I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]

Prepared Statement of Representative Brad Miller,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Energy and Environment

Thank you, Chairman Harris.
What are the origins of this hearing? It appears that the majority
needed to cover a variety of topics to placate various industries
critical of EPA and State environmental measures, including the Federal
Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS2), the California Low Carbon Fuel
Standard, tail pipe emission standards, the Tier 3 Motor and Fuel
Standards, and greenhouse gas emission standards for oil refiners. Oh,
also the EPS's decision to allow the vountary sale of E15.
What am I leaving out?
So we have a seven-witness hearing on ``motor fuel standards.''
Most of the issues raised today are actually outside of our
Committtee's jurisdiction, so the hearing supposedly is on the science
behind the stadards.
Many of the standards are the result of complicated statutory
procedures imposed by Congress, but procedures designed to assure that
everyone affected by a regulation will have a chance to be heard. And
all of the standards are intended to protect the air we breathe and the
water we drink, and to curb our dependence on foreign oil.
Our economy is largely built on access to cheap motor fuels, but
there are obviously consequences of our dependence on those fuels. Our
transportation sector consumes 27 percent of the energy used in our
country, and makes us very vulnerable to economic disruption from the
interruption of our oil supply from some of the most unstable nations
in the world. And the use of motor fuels produces 1.8 million metric
tons of greenhouse gases annually, polluting the environment wiht
hazardous contaminants that can cause severe and chronic respiratory
illnesses.
The minority's one witness today will point out that regulations
spur innovation. For example, the U.S. economy has grown by 64 percent
since the enactment of the Clean Air Act, and the benefits of the Act
are 40 times the cost of the regulation. The innovation that has
resulted from the Act's requirements has generated 65,000 American
jobs.
And other industries not invited to testify today support various
regulations and have already invested greatly in the research and
development to meet the standards. We will submit written statements
for the record from those uninvited industries.
Unfortunately, we won't hear today from a parent who has made a
panicked trip to the emergency room with a child suffering from an
asthma attack. That should be part of this hearing, too.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Miller. If there
are Members who wish to submit additional opening statements,
your statements will be added to the record at this point.
At this time, I would like to introduce our witness panel.
Our first witness is Mr. Brendan Williams, Senior Director of
Advocacy for the National Petrochemical and Refiners'
Association. Before joining NPRA, Mr. Williams spent over seven
and one-half years on Capitol Hill specializing in energy and
environment policy.
The next witness is Dr. Ingrid Burke, Director of the Haub
School and Ruckelshaus Institute of Environment and Natural
Resources at the University of Wyoming and Co-Chair of the
National Research Council Committee on Economic and
Environmental Impacts of Increasing Biofuels Production. Dr.
Burke has served as a member of several national research
council committees to review national environmental research
programs and policies.
Next we have Ms. Margo Oge, the Director of the Office of
Transportation and Air Quality at the EPA, where she has worked
since 1980.
Our fourth witness is Dr. Jay Kesan, Professor and H. Ross
and Helen Workman Research Scholar and Program Leader of the
Biofuel Law and Regulation Program at the Energy Biosciences
Institute at the University of Illinois College of Law. His
work focuses on patent law, intellectual property,
entrepreneurship, Internet law and regulation, digital
government, agricultural biotechnology law, and biofuels
regulation.
Next witness is Mr. Bob Greco, the Group Director for
Downstream and Industry Operations at the American Petroleum
Institute. Prior to his 21-year career at API, Mr. Greco was an
Environmental Engineer with EPA with expertise in automotive
emission control technologies.
Next we have Mr. David Hilbert, a Thermodynamic Development
Engineer for Mercury Marine. His main responsibilities include
engine performance and emissions hardware development and base
engine calibration mapping. He conducted the recently-released
National Renewable Energy Lab report on high ethanol fuel
endurance.
Our final witness is Mr. Jack Huttner, the Executive Vice
President for Commercial and Public Affairs at Gevo,
Incorporated. Is that the way it is pronounced?
Mr. Huttner. Gevo.
Chairman Harris. Gevo. Gevo, Incorporated. Prior to joining
Gevo, he was Vice President of Commercial and Public Affairs at
Dupont Dansico Cellulosic Ethanol, and he was Vice President of
Business Development at Genencor, the industrial biotechnology
division of Dansico A/S.
Thank you all for appearing before the Subcommittee today,
and, again, thank you for your patience while we were voting.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited to
five minutes each, after which the Members of the Committee
will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Mr. Brendan Williams of
the National Petrochemical and Refiners' Association. Mr.
Williams.

STATEMENT OF MR. BRENDAN WILLIAMS,

SENIOR DIRECTOR OF ADVOCACY,

NATIONAL PETROCHEMICAL AND REFINERS' ASSOCIATION

Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon,
Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, and Members of the
Subcommittee. I am Brendan Williams, Senior Director of
Advocacy for NPRA, the National Petrochemical and Refiners'
Association. I thank you for giving me the opportunity to
testify today.
NPRA is a trade association representing high-tech American
manufacturers of virtually the entire supply of gasoline,
diesel fuel, jet fuel, other fuels, and home heating oil, along
with petrochemicals used as building blocks for thousands of
products. We favor sound and sensible environmental
regulations. We are strongly committed to clean air and water.
We have an outstanding record of compliance with regulations
issued by the Environmental Protection Agency and other
agencies, and we have invested hundreds of billions of dollars
to dramatically reduce emissions.
We have helped make America's air cleaner today than it has
been in generations. Refiners have cut sulfur levels in
gasoline and diesel fuel by about 90 percent, and we have
reduced benzene in conventional gasoline by 45 percent in
recent years.
EPA data shows that total emissions of the six principle
pollutants in the United States have dropped by 57 percent
since 1980. Ozone levels have decreased by 30 percent. EPA data
indicates there will be continued reductions in the years ahead
under existing regulations.
Despite this great progress, we are concerned that EPA and
other agencies have moved away from sensible regulation towards
an environment characterized by overregulation. This makes
unreasonable and often conflicting demands on our members to
make changes in manufacturing processes that carry an extremely
high cost and bring little or no environmental benefit.
Overregulation raises energy costs for every consumer. It
strengthens foreign competitors eager to replace American
manufacturers and American workers. It weakens U.S. economy,
and it makes America more reliant on unstable parts of the
world for vital fuels and petrochemicals.
A Department of Energy report concluded that the burden of
federal regulations was a significant factor in the closure of
66 refineries in the past 20 years. Just since 2008, the
recession, our refinery closures have led to 3,000 lost jobs in
American refineries, a handful of refineries are also
threatened with closure over the next year if they can't be
sold.
We have seen too many American manufacturing industries go
overseas in recent decades, which led to millions of lost jobs,
and we don't want the same thing to happen if overregulation
forces the U.S. refining industry to move overseas.
American manufacturers of transportation fuel are being hit
with a blizzard of regulations. Some of these involve what are
called Tier 3 regulations to reduce sulfur in gasoline. Others
deal with mandate under the Renewable Fuel Standard involving
ethanol and other biofuels, and others involve greenhouse gas
regulations. These measures pose challenges individually;
however, their impact is exacerbated because many individual
regulatory demands are simply impossible to meet without coming
into conflict with other regulations.
One example deals with potential Tier 3 requirements and
EPA's greenhouse gas standards. Additional sulfur controls for
the fuel supply called for in Tier 3 will require more energy-
intensive processes which will actually increase greenhouse gas
emissions at refineries.
A similar example of conflicting regulations can be found
in relation to the Renewable Fuel Standard. The National
Research Council said increased ethanol required under the
standard could increase ozone and particulate matter and other
emissions, but the Renewable Fuel Standard also requires an
amount of ethanol that cannot be realistically introduced into
the fuel supply given current infrastructure and consumer
demand. Such conflicts are costly and difficult to address.
Unfortunately, the size, scope, and cumulative burden of
current and impending regulatory activity is hurting the
ability of refiners to preserve existing jobs and create new
ones. Overregulation is also adversely impacting our ability to
serve the American people with domestically produced, reliable
transportation fuels.
We believe America's national interest would best be served
by a comprehensive and objective cost-benefit analysis of new
and existing federal regulations. It is time for higher
consumer costs, lost jobs, and damage to America's economic and
national security to be considered as relevant factors in
determining whether even more stringent regulations will do
more harm than good.
Thank you again for the opportunity to be here, and I will
be happy to take any questions at the appropriate time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Williams follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. Brendan Williams,
Senior Director of Advocacy,
National Petrochemical and Refiners' Association

Introduction

Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for giving me the opportunity to testify at
today's hearing dealing with conflicts and unintended consequences of
motor fuel standards. I'm Brendan Williams, and I serve as the Senior
Director of Advocacy of NPRA, the National Petrochemical & Refiners
Association. Since virtually every American drives or travels in
vehicles powered by motor fuels manufactured by NPRA members, the topic
of this hearing directly affects just about everyone in our Nation.
NPRA is a trade association representing high-tech American
manufacturers of virtually the entire U.S. supply of gasoline, diesel,
jet fuel, other fuels and home heating oil, as well as the
petrochemicals used as building blocks for thousands of vital products
in daily life. NPRA members make modern life possible and keep America
moving and growing as they meet the needs of our Nation and local
communities, strengthen economic and national security, and provide
jobs directly and indirectly for more than two million Americans.
For well over 100 years, our refining members have been serving the
American people by manufacturing the most efficient form of safe,
proven, and reliable motor fuels. NPRA members have done this while
making tremendous strides to improve the environment, strengthen
America's economy, and provide good-paying jobs for American workers--
many of them union members.
There is a very close connection between federal energy and
environmental policies. Unfortunately, these policies are often debated
and decided separately and without coordination. As a result, positive
impacts for one policy area sometimes conflict with or even undermine
goals and objectives in the other. Congress and the Administration can
advance both the cause of cleaner fuels and preserve the domestic
refining industry and the jobs it supports by adopting this principle
of balance as part of our Nation's energy and environmental policies.
A healthy and diverse U.S. refining industry serves the Nation's
interest by maintaining a secure supply of energy products.
Rationalizing and balancing our Nation's energy and environmental
policies will protect this key American resource. Given the challenges
of the current and future refining environment, America is fortunate to
retain a refining industry with many diverse and specialized
participants. Refining is a tough business, but the continuing
diversity and commitment to performance within the industry demonstrate
that it has the vitality needed to continue its important work,
especially with the help of a supply-oriented national energy policy.
We support sound and sensible environmental and other regulations.
Our members are strongly committed to clean air and water, have an
outstanding record of compliance with Environmental Protection Agency
and other regulations, and have invested hundreds of billions of
dollars to dramatically reduce emissions as measured by EPA.
As a result of these emissions reductions by our members and by
other industries, America's air today is cleaner than it has been in
generations. Refiners have cut sulfur levels in gasoline by 90 percent
just since 2004. We have also reduced sulfur in diesel fuel by more
than 90 percent since 2005 and reduced benzene in conventional gasoline
by 45 percent since 2010. EPA data shows that total emissions of the
six principal air pollutants in the United States have dropped by 57
percent since 1980, and ozone levels have decreased by 30 percent.
These reductions occurred even as industrial output and the number of
vehicles on the road have increased. EPA data indicates there will be
continued reductions in the years ahead under regulations already in
place.
Refiners have spent nearly $50 billion just to remove sulfur from
gasoline and diesel fuel and to manufacture reformulated gasoline. NPRA
members have additionally addressed requirements for low Reid Vapor
Pressure gasoline, including specially blended fuels required by State
Implementation Plans under the Clean Air Act (CAA), which have reduced
hydrocarbon emissions, an ozone precursor.
Despite the great progress we have made in environmental
stewardship under the CAA and other laws, we are concerned that EPA and
other agencies have at times moved from regulation to overregulation,
making unreasonable and often conflicting demands on our members to
spend enormous sums to make changes in their manufacturing processes
that bring little or no significant environmental benefit.

Unintended Consequences

The demands of environmental overregulation--some of which are
impossible to achieve without coming in conflict with other
regulations--would raise energy costs for every American consumer. They
would also strengthen foreign competitors eager to replace American
manufacturers and American workers, weaken the U.S. economy, make
America more reliant on nations in unstable parts of the world for
vital fuels and petrochemicals, and endanger our national security.
These are not alarmist statements--they are simple facts about the
consequences of overregulation. The refining industry has historically
been very cyclical and volatile financially. A Department of Energy
report issued in March found that refining margins have been
continuously decreasing over the past four years (Exhibit A). The
report also concluded that the compounded burden of federal regulations
was a significant factor in the closure of 66 petroleum refineries in
the United States in the past 20 years (Exhibit B). Just since 2008,
the recession and refinery closures have led to 3,000 lost jobs at
American refineries. A handful of refineries are threatened with
closure in the next few months if they cannot be sold. Some of the lost
supply from shuttered refineries has been made up through capacity
expansions at other facilities, and overall capacity has still been
increasing. However, the rate of new capacity coming online is
decreasing due to financial pressures and the threat of overseas
competition--factors that are exacerbated by a domestic environment of
overregulation.

(Source: U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Policy and
International Affairs, Small Refinery Exemption Study--An Investigation
Into Disproportionate Economic Hardship, P. 28-30, found at: http://
www.epa.gov/otaq/fuels/renewablefuels/compliancehelp/small-refinery-
exempt-study.pdf.)
We've seen how much of the American textile, steel, auto,
appliance, and other manufacturing industries have moved to foreign
nations in recent decades, with the tragic loss of millions of American
jobs. We don't want the same thing to happen to our members and their
workers if overregulation forces much of the refining industry to move
from the United States to other nations as well. At a time of high
unemployment and a poorly performing national economy, the last thing
America needs to do is worsen conditions for another important U.S.
manufacturing sector.
The manufacturers of motor fuels are being hit with a regulatory
blizzard that poses a significant threat to both refinery operations
and our Nation. Some of these regulations involve what are called Tier
3 regulations to reduce sulfur in gasoline, requirements under the
Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) involving ethanol and other biofuels, and
greenhouse gas (GHG) regulations, to name a few.
We believe America's national interest would best be served by
comprehensive and objective cost-benefit analyses of these and other
federal regulations. Existing regulations also need to be examined so
those that do more harm than good can be eliminated. It is not
realistic to demand that every last molecule of emissions be
eliminated--no matter how insignificant, and regardless of the cost in
lost jobs, harm to consumers, and harm to our Nation. Yet all too
often, overregulation of motor fuels and environmental overregulation
takes this approach.

Conflicting Regulations

We understand that different federal and state regulatory agencies
have a hard time balancing the need for effective regulation with the
demands of meeting sometimes conflicting decisions from the courts,
positions of public interest groups, and even newly enacted laws.
However, the size, scope, and cumulative burden of current and
impending regulatory activity is creating both significant regulatory
uncertainty and a slew of conflicting regulations that will impose
significant burdens on domestic fuel manufacturers.
Looking in more detail at the various regulations facing our
industry helps illustrate the problem of conflicting regulations.

A. Tier 3 Gasoline Sulfur Regulations Conflict with GHG Requirements

Under the CAA, EPA has adopted a series of increasingly stringent
rules to reduce the amount of sulfur allowed in gasoline. Since 2004,
EPA's Tier 2 rules have reduced sulfur levels in gasoline by 90
percent, from an average of 300 parts per million in 2004 to an average
of 30 parts per million today. We have seen no evidence that further
sulfur reductions to enable future vehicle technologies are needed.
Nevertheless, EPA is proceeding with what is known as a Tier 3
rulemaking as part of its general authority to regulate fuels under the
CAA. The rule would impose a high-cost, minimal-benefit regulatory
requirement on America's already heavily regulated fuel supply. The
rule could lead to significant domestic fuel supply reductions, higher
petroleum product imports, potentially increased consumer costs,
increased refinery emissions, closed U.S. refineries, and reduced
energy security.
A process called hydrotreating is the principal technology used to
reduce sulfur in petroleum products, including motor fuels such as
gasoline and diesel. This and other such technologies require energy
consumption that results in increased GHG emissions and will also
increase emission of other criteria pollutants. As a result, a
regulation requiring a reduction of sulfur in petroleum fuel increases
emissions that refiners are being told they must reduce under other CAA
regulations.
Although refiners have already slashed sulfur levels in gasoline by
90 percent in the past seven years, EPA's Tier 3 rulemaking could
require further reductions in sulfur levels in gasoline to an average
of 10 parts per million--a 70 percent change from today's already low
levels, while also reducing the gasoline volatility. EPA expects to
issue a proposed rule by the end of 2011 and a final rule in 2012.
There is no reason to regulate sulfur levels further. Sulfur emissions
from cars are minimal.
In addition, the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007
(Section 209) requires EPA to conduct an anti-backsliding study to
determine whether mandated renewable fuel volumes will adversely impact
air quality. The results of this study are critical to assessing
whether or not the current RFS will hamper air quality, as well as how
to mitigate such impacts and whether changes to the petroleum portion
of the fuel supply are the most cost-effective way to address the
issue.
The anti-backsliding study was due in the summer of 2009. It was to
be followed up with promulgated regulations to mitigate any potential
impacts identified in the study by December 2010. Congress clearly
required the study as a precursor to potential regulations, which the
statute states should occur 18 months later. However, EPA has not
completed this study, but intends to move forward with the Tier 3
proposal anyway. The agency said it will release the study at the same
time it releases its proposed Tier 3 regulations. This is contrary to
Congressional intent, which clearly indicated the anti-backsliding
study was to be completed prior to any new regulations being
promulgated. This was to be a sequential schedule, not a concurrent
one. EPA should release the study to assess the feasibility of and
proper approach to any additional fuels regulations.

E15 and the Renewable Fuel Standard

Another set of EPA regulations of motor fuels that is causing
regulatory conflicts and problems for refiners and consumers involves
the size and scope of the ethanol mandate created in the 2007 expansion
of the RFS.
EPA published a decision last November for approval of a partial
waiver with conditions that would allow gasoline containing 15 percent
ethanol--known as E15--to be sold into the marketplace for use in cars
and light trucks produced in model year 2007 and later. EPA later ruled
that E15 could be sold for use in vehicles produced in model year 2001
and later. In addition to being illegal, these decisions hold the
potential to create significant problems in the marketplace.
As NPRA and many other groups argue in a lawsuit, EPA does not have
the legal authority to grant a partial waiver. Section 211(f)(4) of the
CAA is clear on this point, stating that EPA has to determine that any
fuel or fuel additive ``will not cause or contribute to a failure of
any emission control device or system (emphasis added).'' The CAA does
not give EPA discretion to approve a fuel or fuel additive for sale if
it will cause or contribute to the failure of some emission control
devices and not others.
Because E15 would theoretically be sold under the same canopy as
regular gasoline, there is a high likelihood of consumer misfueling.
This is a concern because several studies show that gasoline blends
containing more than 10 percent ethanol could lead to engine damage in
older vehicles and non-road engines, such as those in chain saws,
lawnmowers, boats and snowmobiles. For example, a recent study by the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory on testing conducted on the
effects of E15 on three outboard boat engines found that E15 caused
problems with engine performance, increased fuel consumption, and
increased nitrogen oxide emissions.
Ironically, an increased ethanol blend could also damage older
cars' catalytic converters, which are installed to reduce emissions. In
addition to engine and catalytic converter damage, studies have shown
that as ethanol content in fuel increases, it burns hotter and is more
corrosive. The combined effect of fuel burning hotter and the corrosive
effects of ethanol create the possibility for serious physical injury
to people who may misfuel and potential physical damage to vehicle fuel
tanks and fuel dispensing equipment. Sufficient testing to assess the
impact of these fuel blends on all automobiles--both old and new--and
non-road engines has not been completed.
Industries ranging from outdoor power equipment manufacturers to
automakers to food producers have all expressed concern over EPA's E15
waiver. However, EPA has ignored ongoing testing related to E15 and
made a premature decision to approve the fuel. The same decision to
approve E15 also contains a proposal for E15 misfueling mitigation.
Therefore, EPA made a decision knowing that it would cause problems and
initiated a rulemaking at the same time to mitigate the problems that
the EPA itself created.
EPA could have decided to deny the request to approve E15 as
gasoline, but chose to approve it partially and conditionally. This
decision has put refiners and consumers at significant risk and the E15
misfueling mitigation rule--a cautionary label posted at service
stations--is a woefully ineffective warning device.
The American people are the losers in this situation because EPA
has violated President Obama's 2009 commitment to them to put science
ahead of politics. Consumers rely upon their government to ensure that
the products offered are safe for the intended use. EPA's partial
waivers for E15 ignore this responsibility. American families, farmers,
truckers, and businesses rely on NPRA members millions of times every
day to provide affordable, reliable, and safe fuels for use in their
gasoline-powered on-road and non-road engines. EPA's partial waiver
decisions undermine this reliance.
EPA is rushing to bring E15 to the marketplace and putting
consumers at risk. Congress should not allow EPA to continue down this
path. Congress should repeal EPA's partial waivers for E15.
This problem with EPA's E15 decisions is just one example of the
numerous problems associated with an ill-crafted federal RFS. The
existing program contains an extremely aggressive schedule for
introducing a large amount of ethanol into the marketplace. Such an
implementation schedule raises questions of feasibility, liability, and
other economic costs for both refiners and consumers. If the existing
RFS program is carried out without changes, it will create great market
and economic uncertainty, which will in turn threaten additional
refining investment and job growth and harm consumers.
The RFS is challenging and faces several hurdles. Given the
aggressive schedule of the mandate and the limits of what fuel and
vehicle infrastructure can handle, our Nation will soon face a
practical limit into the amount of ethanol that can be pushed into the
fuel supply without causing significant consumer disruption. This so-
called ``blendwall'' will be reached when nearly all of the gasoline in
the country contains 10 percent ethanol and there is a portion of E85
(fuel containing 85 percent ethanol, 15 percent gasoline) being sold
for use in Flex Fuel Vehicles (FFVs).
However, consumers have been slow to accept E85, and it does not
shape up to be a viable compliance option for the RFS. For example, E85
has low energy content and could be used in cars not designed for the
fuel or in small engines. No small engines are designed for E85, and
only a small fraction of the fleet of cars is designed for the fuel.
E85 requires an expensive investment at retail stations because of the
corrosive nature of ethanol. This issue is yet another in a panoply of
problems associated with the current structure of the RFS. Congress
should address these issues to protect American drivers and consumers.

Conclusion

NPRA members want a clean environment and have worked hard and
invested heavily to achieve that goal. We have made big reductions in
emissions, and more reductions will continue under existing
regulations. But we want sound science and cost-benefit analyses to be
used to examine which environmental regulations are in the best
interests of the American people, looking at a broad range of criteria.
Even when excessive regulations are imposed with the best of
intentions, they can have harmful unintended consequences. Sometimes
these harmful consequences--like a rise in consumer energy costs--are
welcomed by opponents of fossil fuels, because these higher costs tilt
the playing field to make other energy sources more competitive in the
marketplace.
EPA should not have unchecked power to take any action it wants--
without specific authorization by Congress--in the single-minded
pursuit of unrealistic and harmful overregulation. It's time for higher
consumer costs, lost jobs, and damage to America's economic and
national security to be considered as relevant factors in weighing
whether ever-more-stringent regulations do more harm than good.
NPRA is ready to participate in an intellectually honest dialogue
about how to build a stronger economy, a brighter energy future, and a
more prosperous America.

Chairman Hall [Presiding]. Thank you, and I now recognize
our second witness, Dr. Ingrid Burke, from the University of
Wyoming.

STATEMENT OF DR. INGRID BURKE,

DIRECTOR, HAUB SCHOOL AND RUCKELSHAUS INSTITUTE OF

ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES,

UNIVERSITY OF WYOMING,

AND CO-CHAIR, NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL COMMITTEE

ON ECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF

INCREASING BIOFUELS PRODUCTION

Ms. Burke. Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and
Members of the Committee. I served as the Co-Chair of the
National Research Council Committee that authored the report,
``Renewable Fuel Standard: Potential Economic and Environmental
Effects of U.S. Biofuel Policy.'' This study was mandated by
Congress in the Energy and Independence and Security Act of
2007 and the 2008 Farm Bill.
The study committee was asked to discuss the current and
projected environmental harm and benefits of biofuel production
as it increased in the United States to meet the biofuel
consumption mandate of the Renewable Fuel Standard or RFS2.
Today I will present our key findings in three areas:
greenhouse gas emissions, air quality, and water quality.
First, we found that if the consumption mandate of 36
billion gallons of biofuels is to be met in 2022, the effect on
greenhouse gas emissions compared to using an energy equivalent
of petroleum-based fuels is uncertain. Many factors influence
greenhouse gas emissions from biofuel production. They include
the type of feedstock, management practices, and the features
of the individual site. On the whole, the use of crop and
forest residues for biofuels tends to emit lower amounts of
greenhouse gases than the use of annual crops such as corn-
based ethanol for biofuels.
If dedicated energy crops such as switchgrass are to be
grown to meet the consumption mandate for cellulosic biofuels,
conversion of both cultivated and uncultivated land will most
likely be required, and this could result in market-mediated
land-use changes that could result in additional greenhouse
gases.
Although RFS2 imposes restrictions to discourage some types
of land clearing or land cover change for biofuel production in
the United States, it cannot prevent land use or land cover
changes overseas.
In summary, because net greenhouse gas emissions depend
upon site-specific management decisions made given the market
conditions and available technologies at any given time, the
extent to which increasing biofuel production in the United
States to meet RFS2 consumption mandates will result in
greenhouse gas emissions compared to using petroleum-based
fuels is uncertain.
Second, I will speak to the report summary of the effects
of RFS2 on air quality. In general, gasoline and ethanol emit
similar amounts of major pollutants such as particulate matter,
nitrogen oxides, volatile organic compounds, and ammonia during
vehicle use. That is from vehicle evaporative and tailpipe
emissions.
However, the amounts of these air pollutants emitted during
the fuel production are typically higher for corn grain or
cellulosic ethanol than for petroleum-based fuels. As such,
compared to the full life cycle of gasoline, the production and
use of biofuels tends to result in higher atmospheric
concentrations of volatile organic compounds, nitrous oxides,
particulate organic matter, and ammonia on a national average,
and the effects of this on human health depend greatly on
exposure quantity and duration.
Third and finally, water quality effects of increasing
biofuel production also largely depend upon how it is done on
feedstock type, site-specific factors, management practices
used in feedstock production, and in conversion yield. There is
evidence that RFS2 and the push of biofuels has caused more
land to come into corn production. Increases in corn production
have contributed to increased nutrient loadings to surface
waters and to exacerbating eutrophication and hypoxia.
A recent analysis of data from the National Water Quality
Assessment showed increasing concentration and flux of nitrate
in the Mississippi River. Perennial and short-rotation woody
crops for cellulosic feed stocks and use of residues hold
promise for improving water quality under RFS2 because these
crops require lower agricultural--agrichemical inputs than
corn, and perennial root systems can be used to decrease
nutrient loadings to streams compared to other crop management
regimes. Taking the consumption mandates for different types of
biofuels into account, the effect of producing biofuels in the
United States adequate to meet RFS2 in 2022 on water quality is
uncertain.
In summary, the effects of RFS2 on greenhouse gas
emissions, on air quality, and on water quality, as well as
other environmental responses, are highly dependent upon what
kinds of biomass feed stocks are chosen by our producers, the
management choices that they make, and market-mediated
responses in other land use for agricultural production in the
United States.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I am happy to
answer any questions the Subcommittee may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Burke follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Ingrid Burke,
Director, Haub School and Ruckelshaus Institute of
Environment and Natural Resources, University of Wyoming,
and Co-Chair, National Research Council Committee on Economic
and Environmental Impacts of Increasing Biofuels Production

Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee. My name
is Indy Burke. I am the Director of the Haub School and Ruckelshaus
Institute of Environment and Natural Resources and Wyoming Excellence
Chair and Professor at the University of Wyoming. I served as the Co-
Chair of the Committee on Economic and Environmental Effects of
Increasing Biofuels Production of the National Research Council (NRC).
The Research Council is the operating arm of the National Academy of
Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of
Medicine of the National Academies, chartered by Congress in 1863 to
advise the government on matters of science and technology. The report
Renewable Fuel Standard: Potential Economic and Environmental Effects
of U.S. Biofuel Policy is the product of an NRC study mandated by
Congress in the Energy and Independence and Security Act of 2007 and
the 2008 Farm Bill.
The study committee was asked to discuss the potential
environmental harm and benefits of biofuel production if it is to be
increased in the United States to meet the biofuel consumption mandate
of the Renewable Fuel Standard 2 (RFS2). The study relies on data from
literature published up to the time of its preparation, and it found
that if the consumption mandate of 36 billion gallons of biofuels is to
be met in 2022, the effect on greenhouse gas emissions compared to
using the energy-equivalent of petroleum-based fuel is uncertain.
Greenhouse gases are emitted into the atmosphere or removed from it
during different stages of biofuel production--for example, carbon
dioxide is removed from the air by plants during photosynthesis, but it
is also emitted from fermentation and the use of fossil fuels when
biofuels are produced, as well as from the combustion of biofuels
themselves. Many factors, including the type of biofuel feedstock and
the management practices used in growing it, influence greenhouse gas
emissions of biofuels. For example, biofuel feedstock type and site
location affect carbon storage in soil; farmer choices about nutrient
management practices, also determined by the biofuel feedstock type and
site location, affect fertilizer input and gaseous losses of nitrous
oxide, another greenhouse gas, through denitrification.
Increasing biofuel feedstock production also could cause direct and
indirect land-use changes that might alter the greenhouse gas balance.
If the expanded biofuel feedstock production involves removing
perennial vegetation on a piece of land and replacing it with an annual
commodity crop, then the land-use change would incur a one-time
greenhouse gas emission from biomass and soil that could be large
enough to offset greenhouse gas benefits gained by displacing
petroleum-based fuels with biofuels over subsequent years. Furthermore,
such land conversion may disrupt any future potential for storing
carbon in biomass and soil. In contrast, planting perennial crops in
place of annual crops could potentially enhance carbon storage in that
site.
In addition to land-use conversion that is directly linked to
biofuel feedstock production, indirect land-use change occurs if land
used for production of biofuel feedstocks causes new land-use changes
elsewhere through market-mediated effects. The production of biofuel
feedstocks can constrain the supply of commodity crops and raise
prices. If agricultural growers anywhere in the world respond to the
market signals (higher commodity prices) by expanding production of the
displaced commodity crop, indirect land-use change occurs. This process
might lead to conversion of noncropland (such as forests or grassland)
to cropland. Because agricultural markets are intertwined globally,
production of biofuel feedstock in the United States is likely to
result in land-use and land-cover changes somewhere in the world, which
could, in turn, result in one-time greenhouse gas emissions from
biomass and soil. Because greenhouse gases are well mixed in the
atmosphere, their effects are global, irrespective of where they were
emitted. The extent of those biofuel-induced, market-mediated, land-use
changes and their net effects on greenhouse gas emissions are
uncertain.
Among the different types of biofuel feedstocks, crop and forest
residues will likely not contribute much greenhouse gas emissions from
land-use or land-cover changes because they are products of existing
agricultural and forestry activities. However, adequate residue would
have to be left in the field to maintain soil carbon. If dedicated
energy crops such as switchgrass and Miscanthus are to be grown to meet
the consumption mandate for cellulosic biofuels, conversion of
uncultivated cropland will likely be required, resulting in the
displacement of commodity crops and pastures. Although RFS2 imposes
restrictions to discourage biofuel feedstock producers from land-
clearing or land-cover change in the United States that would result in
net greenhouse gas emissions, the policy cannot prevent market-mediated
effects in the United States or abroad, nor can it control land-use or
land-cover changes in other countries. In summary, because net
greenhouse gas emissions depend on all of these issues described above-
site, biofuel feedstock, fertilization, irrigation, direct and indirect
land-use change, and residue management, the extent to which increasing
biofuel production in the United States to meet the RFS2 consumption
mandate will result in savings in greenhouse gas emissions compared to
using petroleum-based fuels is uncertain.
As in the case of greenhouse gas emissions, comparison of other air
pollutant emissions from biofuels and petroleum-based fuels needs to be
considered over the life cycles of the fuels. Production and use of
ethanol results in higher concentrations of such pollutants affecting
air quality as volatile organic compounds, nitrous oxides, particulate
matter, and ammonia than gasoline on a national average. On the whole,
estimates of emissions of pollutants affecting air quality from using
corn-grain or cellulosic ethanol and gasoline in vehicles (including
tailpipe emissions and evaporative emissions from vehicles and filling
station) are comparable. However, the pollutant amounts emitted during
the fuel-production phase (including feedstock production and
transportation) are typically higher for corn-grain or cellulosic
ethanol than for petroleum-based fuels. Unlike greenhouse gases,
pollutants affecting air quality have local and regional effects on the
environment. The potential extent to which these pollutants harm human
health and well-being depends on whether the pollutants are emitted
close to highly populated areas or to agricultural areas.
Other than greenhouse gas emissions, the water quality effects of
increasing biofuel production also largely depend on feedstock type,
site-specific factors such as soil and climate, management practices
used in feedstock production, land condition prior to feedstock
production, and conversion yield. There is evidence that RFS2 and the
push of biofuels has caused more land to come into corn production.
Increases in corn production have contributed to increasing nutrient
loadings to surface water and to exacerbating eutrophication and
hypoxia. A recent analysis of data from the National Water Quality
Assessment showed increasing concentration and flux of nitrate in the
Mississippi River. Increasing corn production to produce corn-grain
ethanol for meeting RFS2 likely will have additional negative
environmental effects. Perennial and short-rotation woody crops for
cellulosic feedstocks hold promise for improving water quality under
RFS2 because those crops require lower agrichemical inputs than corn,
and their perennial root systems can be used to decrease nutrient
loadings to streams compared to other crop management regimes.
Harvesting crop residues for biofuel would not require much additional
nutrient input, but an adequate amount of residues would have to be
left in the field to prevent soil erosion. Certain sites could
withstand about 40 to 50 percent crop-residue removal. Taking the
consumption mandates for different types of biofuels into account, the
effect of producing biofuels in the United States adequate to meet the
RFS2 in 2022 on water quality is uncertain. The effect on water quality
will depend on site-specific details of the implementation of RFS2, and
particularly the balance of feedstocks and levels of inputs.
Consumptive water use is generally higher for biofuel production
than for petroleum-based fuel production on an energy-equivalent basis.
(The energy content of ethanol is about two-thirds of that of an
equivalent volume of gasoline.) The range of estimates for biofuels
(2.9-1,500 gallons per gallon of gasoline equivalent) is much wider
than that for petroleum-based fuels (1.9-6.6 gallons per gallon of
gasoline equivalent). The large range of estimates for biofuels can be
mostly attributed to absence or presence of irrigation during biomass
production. Estimates for consumptive water use in biorefineries that
convert biomass to fuels are between 2.9 and 20 gallons of water per
gallon of gasoline equivalent (four gallons of water per gallon of
gasoline-equivalent average). Water efficiency at ethanol production
facilities has been improving, but withdrawals from confined aquifers
may still be a problem in certain locations.
The effects of increasing biofuel production on soil and
biodiversity can be positive or negative depending on feedstock type
and management practices used. Thus, the effects of achieving RFS2 on
those two environmental variables cannot be readily quantified or
qualified largely because of the uncertainty in the future.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to
answer any questions the Subcomittee might have.

Chairman Hall. Thank you. She yields back her time.
We now recognize our third witness, Margo Oge, from the
Environmental Protection Agency.

STATEMENT OF MS. MARGO OGE, DIRECTOR,

OFFICE OF TRANSPORTATION AND AIR QUALITY,

U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Ms. Oge. Thank you, Mr. Chairman Hall, Ranking Member
Congressman Miller, and the Members of the Subcommittee. I want
to thank you for giving me the opportunity to appear before you
today to testify and hopefully clear the record on a number of
issues that were raised earlier.
I will begin with a very brief overview of the Renewable
Fuel Standards Program. The Energy Independence and Security
Act established renewable fuel standards for the transportation
fuel of 36 billion gallons by 2022. This includes 16 billion
gallons of advanced biofuels.
Each year the law directs EPA to establish annual volume
standards that refiners must meet the following year. To do
this, we conduct an extensive transparent evaluation of the
state of the renewable fuel industry and at the same time we
also consult with our colleagues at the Department of Energy
and Department of Agriculture.
To give you an example, for 2011, this review resulted in
EPA lowering the volume for cellulosics to six million gallons,
substantially below what the Clean Air Act was requiring, which
was 250 million gallons for 2011. This was due to the limited
production capacity of the industry. For 2012, we propose a
range of 3.5 to 12.9 million gallons, and we will finalize the
final standards by sometime this fall.
Let me say a few words, please, about E15 in gasoline.
Under the Clean Air Act, companies that produce fuels cannot
increase the concentration of ethanol in gasoline unless the
administrator of EPA provides a waiver. The law provides for
waivers when EPA determines that the increased concentration of
ethanol will not cause or contribute to failure of vehicles or
engines to meet emission standards.
In 2010, we received a waivers request from Growth Energy
for E15 gasoline. We sought in review in a very transparent way
all the available evidence, including extensive data developed
by the Department of Energy, by industry, and other
organizations. Based on the available information we granted a
partial waiver, allowing 15 percent of ethanol to be used in
model years 2001 and in newer vehicles but prohibited, and I
want to underline prohibiting the use for older vehicles and
off-road equipment, including marine engines.
We also placed several conditions on the waivers to reduce
the potential for misfueling with E15, including labeling pumps
dispensing E15, tracking E15 distribution, and requiring retail
stations to survey. As a new gasoline, E15 must be registered
under the Clean Air Act before it is marketed. Today E15 is not
registered. Industry has given us a sufficient date for us to
evaluate it, but we still have not registered E15.
The last topic that I would like to cover is the
development of the so-called Tier 3 standards. Let me explain
to you what Tier 3 means. This refers to the potential new
standards for clean vehicles and fuels to address basically the
Nation's clean air goals.
As you know, motor vehicles and their fuels are an
important source of compounds that form air pollution. In 2008,
120 million people still lived in counties that exceeded the
public health-based standards. In many of these areas motor
vehicles contribute anywhere from five percent to 45 percent of
specific pollutants.
When EPA established the Public Health Standard for ozone
in 2008, under the previous Administration, the Regulatory
Impact Analysis for this existing ozone standard included the
so-called Tier 3 standards that we are talking about today,
which is cleaner cars and cleaner fuel. And the reason for that
was to help States and localities to meet the clean air goals
of the existing ozone acts in a cost-effective way.
Now, as we develop this proposal, we are considering
vehicle and fuel as an integrated system. You know, this will
enable us to optimize fuel and vehicle changes, finding the
lowest cost in technical, feasible, and emission reductions. As
lead in gasoline, we know that sulfur in gasoline degrades the
performance of catalysts, and by doing that we are reducing the
ability of catalysts to address emissions.
So lowering the sulfur in gasoline would make emission
control technology more effective, not just for new vehicles
but also for the existing fleet, and the end result would be
cleaner air.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I am looking
forward to answer any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Oge follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ms. Margo Oge, Director,
Office of Transportation and Air Quality,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, and Members of the
Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to
testify on various transportation fuel-related programs under the Clean
Air Act (CAA), as amended by the Energy Independence and Security Act
of 2007 (EISA). As requested, I will discuss three different fuels
issues: the renewable fuel standards; partial waivers allowing the
introduction into commerce of gasoline containing up to 15 percent
ethanol (E15) for use in MY2001 and newer light-duty motor vehicles
(which include passenger cars, light-duty trucks and medium-duty
passenger vehicles), and potential future controls on vehicles and fuel
quality, known as ``Tier 3'' standards.

Renewable Fuel Standards

On March 26, 2010, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
finalized regulations to implement the updated national renewable fuel
standard program (RFS) required by Congress under EISA in 2007. These
provisions established new year-by-year specific volume standards for
the amount of renewable fuel that must be used in transportation fuel,
with the standards requiring a total of 36 billion gallons by 2022.
This total includes 21 billion gallons of advanced biofuels, composed
of 16 billion gallons of cellulosic biofuel, four billion gallons of
``other'' advanced biofuels, and a minimum of one billion gallons of
biomass-based diesel. The new requirements also include new definitions
and criteria for both renewable fuels and the feedstocks used to
produce them, including new greenhouse gas emission (GHG) thresholds.
EPA applied the best available science, and conducted extensive
analyses to implement these complex and challenging statutory
provisions. The regulatory requirements went into effect on July 1,
2010, and apply to domestic and foreign production of renewable fuels
used in the United States.
We estimate the RFS program, when fully implemented, would displace
about 13.6 billion gallons of petroleum-based gasoline and diesel fuel,
which represents about seven percent of expected annual gasoline and
diesel consumption in 2022. We also estimate that the fully implemented
program would decrease oil import expenditures by $41.5 billion
dollars, result in additional energy security benefits of $2.6 billion,
and reduce GHG emissions by an average annualized rate of 138 million
metric tons of CO
2
equivalent per year.
EPA supports expanded use of advanced biofuels, especially
cellulosic biofuels, which must achieve at least a 50% and a 60%
reduction, respectively, in lifecycle greenhouse gases. As directed,
each year EPA publishes the annual volumetric requirements for total,
advanced, biomass-based diesel, and cellulosic renewable fuels that
refiners must meet the following year. As part of this effort, EPA must
determine the projected volume of cellulosic biofuel production for the
following year and, if this is less than the volume specified in the
statute, EPA must lower the standard accordingly. In developing
proposed annual volume standards, we conduct a rigorous investigation
of the cellulosic industry, including one-on-one discussions with each
producer to determine their production potential for the following
year. EPA also consults directly with the Department of Agriculture and
the Department of Energy, including the Energy Information
Administration (EIA) to determine the status of production capacity and
capabilities of the cellulosic sector. These evaluations are based on
evolving information about emerging segments of the biofuels industry
and may result in applicable volumes that are different from those in
the statute. We propose the annual volume standards through a
transparent rulemaking process, allowing for public review and comment,
prior to finalizing the standards. This process ensures the most robust
determination possible at the time the standards are set.
In 2010 and 2011, as a result of limited production capacity, we
found it necessary to reduce the cellulosic standard to about 6.5 and 6
million gallons, respectively, substantially below the CAA targets of
100 and 250 million gallons for those years. For 2012, we proposed a
range of 3.5 to 12.9 million gallons. We will finalize the volume
standards later this fall. Under the statute, if we lower the
cellulosic standard, EPA has discretion to reduce the total advanced
and total renewable fuel standards. Thus far, we have not found cause
to reduce the overall advanced and renewable standards.
EPA also recognizes the importance of evaluating and qualifying new
biofuels for use in the RFS program. We already have a long list of
qualified advanced and cellulosic biofuels approved in the current RFS,
including biodiesel and renewable diesel from certain feedstocks,
ethanol from sugarcane, diesel from algal oil, ethanol and diesel from
approved cellulosic feedstocks, and jet fuel and heating oil from
certain feedstocks. In addition, we have established a process to
evaluate new biofuel pathways for approved use in the RFS program and
are using this process to qualify new fuel pathways that can support
meeting the future standards. Many of the feedstocks or biofuels
undergoing evaluation are under consideration as new advanced biofuels.
These include ethanol, diesel and gasoline produced from renewable
feedstocks like energy cane, camelina, and arundo donax, to name only a
few.

E15 Waiver

Under the Clean Air Act, companies that produce fuels cannot
increase the concentration of ethanol in gasoline for use in gasoline-
fueled vehicles unless the Administrator waives this restriction by
determining that the increased concentration will not cause or
contribute to the failure of vehicles or engines to meet emissions
standards. E10 (gasoline with 10% ethanol by volume) was granted a
waiver by operation of law under a previous version of CAA section
211(f)(4) more than 30 years ago. It is now ubiquitous in the
marketplace, with E10 blends now accounting for over 90 percent of the
total U.S. gasoline market.
In 2010, EPA granted in part and denied in part an application from
Growth Energy and 54 ethanol producers requesting a waiver that would
increase the permissible concentration of ethanol in gasoline to 15
percent. Based on the available evidence, including extensive test data
developed by the Department of Energy (DOE) and other researchers, EPA
determined that the CAA criterion in section 211(f)(4) was met for
allowing E15 to be introduced into commerce for use in model year (MY)
2001 and newer light-duty motor vehicles, which includes passenger
cars, light-duty trucks and medium-duty passenger vehicles. EPA also
found that E15 did not meet the statute's criterion in the case of
motor vehicles older than MY2001 and other types of vehicles and
gasoline-powered equipment. As a result, EPA granted partial waivers
raising the permissible concentration of ethanol in gasoline to 15
percent for use in MY 2001 and newer light-duty motor vehicles, but not
for use in any other gasoline-powered vehicles or engines such as
lawnmowers and boats.
EPA placed several conditions on the waivers to reduce the
potential for misfueling with E15. As a result, fuel producers that
decide to introduce E15 into commerce must take a number of steps
designed to reduce misfueling, including labeling pumps dispensing E15,
tracking E15 distribution on product transfer documents and conducting
retail station surveys. To further mitigate the potential for
misfueling, EPA also issued regulations that apply more broadly, to
fuel marketers as well as fuel producers, and that prohibit anyone,
including consumers, from misfueling with E15.
As a new gasoline, E15 must be registered under the Clean Air Act
before it may be introduced into commerce for use in MY2001 and newer
light-duty motor vehicles. Earlier this year, ethanol industry
representatives submitted emissions and health effects information for
use in completing registration applications for E15. They are now
developing additional information for that purpose. Once complete, the
information will be helpful to fuel producers in submitting
registration applications for E15. Until such time as EPA approves a
complete registration application, E15 may not be lawfully sold for use
in MY2001 and newer light-duty motor vehicles.

Tier 3

The last topic I will cover is development of what is commonly
referred to as the ``Tier 3'' vehicle and fuel standards. Emissions
from motor vehicles and their fuels contribute to ozone, particulate
matter (PM), nitrogen dioxide (NO
2
), and carbon monoxide
(CO), which are all pollutants for which EPA has established health-
based National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS). In 2008, over 120
million people lived in counties that exceeded the health-based
standards then in effect.
Motor vehicles are an important source of the compounds that form
this air pollution. We project that in many nonattainment areas, cars
and light trucks will contribute 15-45% of total nitrogen oxides
emissions; 10-25% of total volatile organic compound emissions, and 5-
10 percent of total emissions of fine particulate matter. When a
revised health-based standard for ozone was set in 2008, the Regulatory
Impact Analysis for the new standard included potential Tier 3
standards as part of an overall assessment of measures that would help
States meet the ozone standard.
The Clean Air Act authorizes EPA to establish emissions standards
for motor vehicles to address air pollution that may reasonably be
anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. EPA also has
authority to establish fuel controls where emissions products of
gasoline may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or
welfare or where they significantly impair motor vehicle emissions
control devices or systems.
In the decade since we set the Tier 2 vehicle and fuel standards,
there have been advancements in vehicle catalyst technology and
computer control technology that should enable significant, cost-
effective reductions in motor vehicle tailpipe emissions. Tier 3
vehicle and fuel standards have the potential to cost-effectively
reduce NO
2
, PM, and VOCs by hundreds of thousands of tons.
As we develop this proposal, we are considering the vehicle and its
fuel as an integrated system, which would enable technologically
feasible and cost-effective emission reductions beyond what would be
possible looking at vehicle and fuel standards in isolation. We first
applied such an approach with our Tier 2 vehicle/gasoline sulfur
standards, finalized in 2000. We believe that a similar approach in the
Tier 3 proposal would be a cost-effective way to achieve substantial
additional emissions reductions.
There are extensive data showing that gasoline sulfur degrades the
performance of catalytic systems that are key to reducing emissions
from gasoline vehicles. Lowering the sulfur content of gasoline would
make emission control technologies more effective for both existing and
new vehicles. Gasoline sulfur reductions would be a key factor in
enabling manufacturers to comply across the vehicle fleet with the new
standards, while also achieving immediate significant benefits by
reducing emissions from the existing vehicles.
The Agency has been talking to diverse stakeholders as we develop a
proposal for Tier 3 vehicle and fuel standards that would reduce
emissions from passenger cars and light-duty trucks. The Alliance of
Automobile Manufacturers has urged the Agency to harmonize vehicle
emissions standards with the State of California's program, thus
allowing manufacturers to design a single vehicle for nationwide sales.
New Tier 3 vehicle and fuel standards would create a comprehensive
program for regulating motor vehicles and fuels that would provide
regulatory certainty and compliance efficiency for auto manufacturers.
The Tier 3 proposal will also address a number of requests from fuel
industry representatives to streamline fuels regulations during the
retrospective regulatory review process conducted in response to the
President's Executive Order on January 18, 2011.

The Clean Air Act

These fuel programs are part of, or would continue, the 40-year
Clean Air Act success story. For 40 years, the Clean Air Act has
allowed steady progress to be made in reducing the threats posed by
pollution and allowing us all to breathe easier. In the last year
alone, programs implemented pursuant to the Clean Air Act Amendments of
1990 are estimated to have reduced premature mortality risks equivalent
to saving over 160,000 lives; spared Americans more than 100,000
hospital visits; and prevented millions of cases of respiratory
problems, including bronchitis and asthma. \1\ They also enhanced
productivity by preventing 13 million lost workdays; and kept kids
healthy and in school, avoiding 3.2 million lost school days due to
respiratory illness and other diseases caused or exacerbated by air
pollution. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  USEPA (2011). The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act from
1990 to 2020. Final Report. Prepared by the USEPA Office of Air and
Radiation. February 2011. Table 5-5. This study is the third in a
series of studies originally mandated by Congress in the Clean Air Act
Amendments of 1990. It received extensive peer review and input from
the Advisory Council on Clean Air Compliance Analysis, an independent
panel of distinguished economists, scientists, and public health
experts.
\2\  Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, few of the emission control standards that gave us these
huge gains in public health were uncontroversial at the time they were
developed and promulgated. Most major rules have been adopted amidst
claims that that they would be bad for the economy and bad for
employment.
Some may find it surprising that the Clean Air Act also has been a
good economic investment for our country. In contrast to doomsday
predictions, history has shown, again and again, that we can clean up
pollution, create jobs, and grow our economy all at the same time. Over
that same 40 years since the Act was passed, the Gross Domestic Product
of the United States grew by more than 200 percent. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Economic Accounts,
``Table 1.1.5. Gross Domestic Product,'' http://bea.gov/national/
index.htm#gdp.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some would have us believe that ``job-killing'' describes EPA's
regulations. It is misleading to say that enforcement of the Clean Air
Act is bad for the economy and employment. It isn't. Families should
never have to choose between a job and healthy air. They are entitled
to both.
The EPA's updated public health safeguards under the Clean Air Act
will encourage investments in labor-intensive upgrades that can put
current unemployed or under-employed Americans back to work.
Environmental spending creates jobs in engineering, manufacturing,
construction, materials, operation, and maintenance. For example, EPA
vehicle emissions standards directly sparked the development and
application of a huge range of automotive technologies that are now
found throughout the global automobile market. The vehicle emissions
control industry employs approximately 65,000 Americans with domestic
annual sales of $26 billion. \4\ Likewise, in 2008, the United States'
environmental technologies and services industry 1.7 million workers
generated approximately $300 billion in revenues and led to exports of
$44 billion of goods and services, \5\ larger than exports of sectors
such as plastics and rubber products. \6\ The size of the world market
for environmental goods and services is comparable to the aerospace and
pharmaceutical industries and presents important opportunities for U.S.
Industry. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\  Manufacturers of Emissions Control Technology (http://
www.meca.org/cs/root/organization
2info/
who
-

we
-
are).
\5\  DOC International Trade Administration. ``Environmental
Technologies Industries: FY2010 Industry Assessment,'' http://
web.ita.doc.gov/ete/eteinfo.nsf/068f3801d047f26e85256883006ffa54/
4878b7e2fc08ac6d85256883006c452c/$FILE/
Full%20Environmental%20Industries%20Assessment%202010.pdf (accessed
February 8, 2011).
\6\  U.S. Census Bureau, Censtats Database, International Trade
Data--NAICS, http://censtats.census.gov/naic3
-
6/
naics3
-
6.shtml (accessed September 6, 2011).
\7\  Network of Heads of the European Environment Protection
Agencies, 2005. ``The Contribution of Good Environmental Regulation to
Competitiveness,'' http://www.eea.europa.eu/about-us/documents/
prague
-
statement/prague
-
statement-en.pdf
(accessed February 8, 2011).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion

Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.

Chairman Hall. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back her
time.
I now recognize our fourth witness, Dr. Jay Kesan, from the
University of Illinois College of Law, for five minutes.
Mr.Miller. You need to turn your microphone on.

STATEMENT OF DR. JAY KESAN, PROFESSOR AND

H. ROSS AND HELEN WORKMAN RESEARCH SCHOLAR

AND PROGRAM LEADER

OF THE BIOFUEL LAW AND REGULATION PROGRAM,

ENERGY BIOSCIENCES INSTITUTE,

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS COLLEGE OF LAW

Mr. Kesan. Okay. Sorry. Good afternoon, Chairman Hall,
Ranking Member Miller, and Members of the Committee. Thank you
for the opportunity to appear before you.
My name is Jay Kesan. I am a Professor at the University of
Illinois and Program Leader of the Biofuel Law and Regulation
Program at the Energy Biosciences Institute, which is a joint
effort between the University of Illinois, the University of
California, Berkeley, and the Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory and which has been funded by BP as a multi-year
research commitment.
In 2005, the U.S. Congress passed the Energy Policy Act,
which charged the EPA with developing and implementing the
Renewable Fuel Standard Program. This program was significantly
altered in 2007, with the passage of the Energy Independence
and Security Act, and this expanded program is commonly
referred to as RFS2.
There were three main policy goals that drove the RFS
legislation; national energy security, reduction in GHG
emissions, and economic development, particularly in the rural
sector. All three of these drivers are definitely still with us
today and will continue to remain important in the foreseeable
future.
Under the RFS Program gasoline producers and importers, not
the government and consumers, are responsible for introducing
renewable biofuel into the U.S. market. In essence, the policy
instrument of the RFS is a mandatory demand regime that
requires the regulated parties to commercialize more renewable
fuel than the amount the market would achieve in the absence of
the RFS.
So how does such a large-scale mandatory demand regime like
the RFS help reduce production costs of renewable biofuel over
time? This is well understood by conventional economic theory.
The possibility of large-scale mandatory consumption allows
renewable biofuel producers and their feedstock suppliers to
operate at a large scale through economies of scale and/or
Marshallian externalities.
Second, the RFS2 Program induces biofuel producers and
their feedstock suppliers to invest in R&D activities creating
cost-saving innovation.
Our empirical work has shown that ethanol plants in the
past decade have actually contributed through the RFS to
increasing economies of scales and to improving the level of
competition among firms through existing plant expansion as
well as expansion through new plant construction.
Finally, uncertainty influences investment decisions
regarding R&D activity. Hence, removing some degree of the
uncertainty by creating several years of a mandatory demand
regime makes it easier for biofuel producers to finance their
R&D projects. The uncertainty and risk of an unstable policy
have an even bigger impact on commercial investments because
the costs are so much higher compared to R&D. On the other
hand, a stable commitment to an RFS2 regime reduces that
uncertainty and risk associated with commercial investments.
Other regulatory initiatives such as E15 and E85 work in
tandem with RFS2 to facilitate innovation and development of
the biofuel industry. In addition, efforts to clarify
regulations by removing some of the uncertainty about the
approved level of blending for biobutanol is another initiative
that works with the RFS2 Program to further expand the
development of advanced biofuels such as biobutanol.
We are in an era of heavily constrained government
spending. Policy initiatives like the RFS do not require
government money. Rather, RFS facilitates innovation and
commercialization of new technologies by reducing some
uncertainties by providing a guarantee of market demand.
We are starting to see the RFS program begin to yield
tangible results on the ground in terms of producing advanced
biofuels and cellulosic biofuels. For instance, the commercial
investments in biofuels derived from lignocellulosic biomass
are real. There are credible players in the industry such as
INEOS, Abengoa, POET and BP breaking ground on new plants and
projects.
I am an engineer and a lawyer, but my esteemed colleagues
at the Energy Biosciences Institute, who are world-class
experts in the plant sciences, tell me that scientific
advancements have already solved the problem of obtaining sugar
from lignocellulosic biomass many times. Therefore, it is only
a matter of technological effort and time, together with the
support of a foundational policy like the RFS, before we see
large-scale production of advanced biofuels.
There is extensive research showing that learning by doing
lowers the production cost of biofuels. This has been shown to
be true for corn ethanol and sugarcane ethanol. The RFS is a
cornerstone piece of legislation for the biofuel industry. The
RFS mandates will accelerate the production of advanced
biofuels and lead to more cumulative experience and promote the
innovation needed to lower production costs in the future.
We need a broad-based approach to energy policy in the
U.S., and biofuels will play a significant role in our national
energy portfolio. We need important policy mechanisms like the
RFS to ensure that we have new energy options. A healthy market
is one that has a broad set of biofuel producers and, more
importantly, a diverse portfolio of renewable energy options.
Thank you very much for your attention. I am happy to
answer any questions that the Members of the Committee may
have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Kesan follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Jay Kesan, Professor and
H. Ross and Helen Workman Research Scholar and Program Leader
of the Biofuel Law and Regulation Program, Energy Biosciences
Institute,
University of Illinois College of Law
Good afternoon, Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, and Members
of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you.

Introduction

My name is Jay Kesan. I am a Professor at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and the Program Leader of the Biofuel Law
and Regulation Program at the Energy Biosciences Institute, a joint
research effort between the University of Illinois, the University of
California, Berkeley, and the Department of Energy's Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, and funded by BP as a multi-year research
commitment.

The Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) Program

In 2005, the U.S. Congress passed the Energy Policy Act, which
charged the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) with developing and
implementing the Renewable Fuel Standard Program (RFS). The RFS was
designed to ensure the introduction and consumption of a certain volume
of renewable fuel in the Unites States. More specifically, under the
RFS Program, obligated parties such as gasoline producers and importers
were required to produce or purchase a specific amount of renewable
biofuel every year between 2006 and 2012.
The RFS was significantly altered in December 2007 with the passage
of the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007, and the expanded
Program is now commonly known as RFS2. Under the RFS2, the period of
volumetric requirements is extended through 2022, and renewable fuel is
sub-categorized into traditional renewable fuel, advanced biofuel,
cellulosic biofuel, and biomass-based diesel based on fuels' feedstocks
and the green house gas (GHG) emission reduction thresholds that they
satisfied.
There were three main policy goals that drove the RFS legislation--
national energy security, reduction in GHG emissions, and economic
development, particularly in the rural sector. All three of these
drivers are definitely still with us today and will continue to remain
important in the foreseeable future.

The Economic Rationales for the RFS2 Program

The RFS program is designed to facilitate the substitution process
of domestically produced, renewable biofuels for petroleum, and to make
renewable fuel economically viable in the future. In order to achieve
this main goal, gasoline producers and importers are required to
commercialize their obligated amount of renewable biofuel every year
during the period between 2006 and 2022. These parties--not the
government and consumers--are responsible for introducing renewable
biofuel into the U.S. market. In essence, the policy instrument of the
RFS is a mandatory demand regime that requires gasoline producers and
importers to commercialize more renewable biofuel than the amount the
market would achieve in the absence of the RFS.
How does such a large-scale mandatory demand regime like the RFS
help reduce production costs of renewable biofuel over time? This is
well understood, and several mechanisms can be found in light of well-
established economic theory. First, economies of scale and/or
Marshallian externality contribute to improving production cost
conditions. A possibility of large-scale mandatory consumption allows
renewable biofuel producers and their feedstock suppliers to operate at
a large scale. Then, large-scale operation decreases their average cost
of production. In particular, when the fixed cost of physical capital
is very high, this effect is likely to kick in. High fixed costs are
not limited to physical capital, and they may equally apply to R&D
expenditures. Thus, large-scale demand raises the profitability from
R&D activity, and, as a result, promotes technological advancement.
Similarly, large-scale mandatory demand improves the infrastructure of
the renewable biofuel industry. This externality positively affects the
cost conditions of each producer involved in the biofuel industry.
Second, the RFS2 program induces biofuel producers and their
feedstock suppliers to invest in R&D activities creating cost-saving
innovation. The basic logic of this relies on the well-established idea
of ``market pull'' or ``cost spreading.'' In the context of the RFS
program, a renewable biofuel producer reaps the benefits of cost-saving
innovation by embedding them in biofuel technology and then selling
biofuel as a final product. While his R&D expenditures are a fixed
cost, the marginal benefit from such R&D is proportional to biofuel
sales. That is, the producer benefits more from cost-saving innovation
as its sales increase. Thus, the possibility of large-scale biofuel
sales, brought about by the RFS, gives biofuel producers an extra
incentive to invest in the R&D that creates cost-saving innovation. In
addition, large-scale mandatory consumption provides incentives to new
market entrants. Therefore, higher levels of market competition require
more cost-saving innovation in order to survive. In such cases,
technological advancement might not necessarily come with a larger
scale of production. However, it is surely the case that costs are
lower with improved production technology.
Our empirical work analyzing ethanol plants in the past decade
indicates that the RFS has contributed to increasing economies of scale
and to improving the level of competition among firms through existing
plant expansion as well as expansion through new plant construction.
\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  J.P. Kesan, A. Ohyama, and H.-S. Yang, ``An Economic
Evaluation of the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) Standard Program: An
Industrial Policy Approach,'' Working Paper, available on SSRN, http://
www.ssrn.com (2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, uncertainty influences investment decisions regarding R&D
activity. In general, returns to R&D investments are quite skewed, and
firms may find it difficult to finance R&D expenditures through the
capital market. Thus, removing some degree of uncertainty by creating
several years of a mandatory demand regime makes it easier for biofuel
producers to finance their R&D projects. Furthermore, according to
option value theory, firms may postpone R&D projects because of great
uncertainty even if the net present value of the project is not
negative. As mentioned previously, the returns to R&D investments
partly depend on demand conditions. Since the mandatory demand of the
RFS guarantees a market to biofuel producers, it reduces the degree of
uncertainty. This in turn leads to lowering discount factors associated
with uncertainty of benefits derived from R&D projects. In sum, the RFS
encourages R&D activity in the industry by easing credit constraints or
lowering the value of postponing R&D projects.
The amount of money spent on R&D is lower than the amount of money
that biofuel producers need to spend to build commercial production
facilities, and thus the uncertainty and risk of an unstable policy has
an even bigger impact on commercial investments because the costs are
so much higher. On the other hand, a stable commitment to the RFS2
regime reduces that uncertainty and risk associated with commercial
investments.
Other regulatory initiatives such as the E15 and E85 programs work
in tandem with the RFS2 to facilitate innovation and further
development of the biofuel industry. In addition, efforts to clarify
regulations by removing some of the uncertainty about the approved
level of blending for biobutanol is another positive initiative that
can work with the RFS2 Program and further expand the development of
advanced biofuels such as biobutanol.
Consider another example from another renewable energy sector--the
case of wind energy. I have attached a graph to my written statement
that shows that investment in wind energy has been stable and growing
rapidly in the past decade whenever there has been a stable tax policy
in place. This once again illustrates the importance of a firm and
stable policy commitment instead of intermittent policy initiatives.
We are in an era of heavily constrained government funding. Policy
initiatives like the RFS mandates do not require government money.
Rather, we are simply facilitating innovation and commercialization of
new technologies by reducing some uncertainties by providing a
guarantee of market demand.
It is worth noting that similar regulatory regimes in other arenas
designed to advance and facilitate the development and deployment of
new technologies have a long and successful history. Such examples
include automobile airbag technology, digital broadcasting, enhanced
911 calling and the like.

Taking Stock of Where We Are Today and Looking Ahead

We are starting to see the RFS program begin to yield tangible
results on the ground in terms of producing advanced biofuels and
cellulosic biofuels. For instance, the commercial investments in
biofuels derived from lignocellulosic biomass are real. There are
credible players in the industry such as INEOS, Abengoa, POET and BP
breaking ground on new plants and projects this year and in 2010.
I am an engineer and a lawyer. But my esteemed colleagues at the
Energy Biosciences Institute (EBI), who are world-class experts in the
plant sciences, tell me that scientific advancements have already
solved the problem of obtaining sugars from lignocellulosic biomass
many, many times. Therefore, it is now only a matter of technological
effort and time, together with the encouragement and support of a
foundational policy such as the RFS, before we achieve large-scale
production of advanced biofuels.
Relatedly, the U.S. has a substantial land base beyond that used
for row-crop agriculture that can be mobilized to achieve substantial
domestic biofuel production and meet all the biofuel mandates of EISA/
RFS2. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  C. Somerville, H. Youngs, C. Taylor, S.C. Davis, and S.P.
Long, ``Feedstocks for Lignocellulosic Biofuels,'' Science, vol. 329,
pp. 790-792 (13 Aug. 2010); Huang, H., M. Khanna, and X. Yang,
``Economic Implications of Energy Crop Production on Conservation
Reserve Program (CRP) Land'' presentation at AFRI Meeting on Prosperity
for Small- and Medium-Sized Farms and Rural Communities Programs,
Miami, Florida, November 7-9, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is extensive research showing that ``learning by doing''
lowers the production cost of biofuels. This has been shown to be true
for corn ethanol and sugarcane ethanol. The RFS is a cornerstone piece
of legislation for the biofuel industry. The RFS mandates will
accelerate the production of advanced biofuels and lead to more
cumulative experience and promote the innovation needed to lower
production costs in the future.
The National Research Council report on the RFS is not a conclusion
on the biofuel industry and is, more accurately, a report on a work
that is still in progress. In fact, the NRC report is based on rather
outdated information. For instance, it is not based on current biomass
production estimates or on current technological information. That
said, the NRC report does correctly acknowledge that commercializing
advanced and cellulosic biofuel technologies will require policy
certainty.
We need a broad-based approach to energy policy in the U.S. and
biofuels will play a significant role in our national energy portfolio.
We need important policy mechanisms such as the RFS to ensure that we
have new energy options. A healthy market is one that has a broad set
of biofuel producers and, more broadly, a diverse portfolio of
renewable energy options, including solar, wind, natural gas,
hydroelectricity, and biofuels.
Thank you very much for your attention. I am happy to answer any
questions that Members of the Committee may have.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very, very much.
I now recognize our fifth witness, Mr. Bob Greco of the
American Petroleum Institute.

STATEMENT OF MR. BOB GRECO, GROUP DIRECTOR,

DOWNSTREAM AND INDUSTRY OPERATIONS,

AMERICAN PETROLEUM INSTITUTE

Mr. Greco. Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Miller, and other Committee Members. My name is Bob
Greco, and I am the Downstream Group Director for the American
Petroleum Institute, API. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify on the conflicts and unintended consequences of motor
fuels, particularly the Tier 3 requirements now being developed
by EPA.
API represents over 480 member companies involved in all
aspects of the oil and natural gas industry, an industry that
supplies most of America's energy, supports 9.2 million U.S.
jobs and 7.5 percent of the U.S. economy, and has invested
nearly $2 trillion dollars in U.S. capital projects since 2000,
including those spurring advances in nearly every formable form
of energy.
The U.S. refining industry already operates in an extremely
complex regulatory environment. U.S. refiners have invested
$112 billion in environmental improvements between 1990 and
2008, significantly reducing emissions while producing cleaner
fuels and improving energy efficiency.
On top of these existing regulations, U.S. refiners are now
facing a blizzard of significant and potentially very costly
regulations that may take effect over the next few years. These
regulations include more stringent Tier 3 standards; refinery
controls including greenhouse gas limitations through the new
NESHAP and NSPS requirements; the RFS implementation and the
impending blend wall; refinery emissions controls to achieve
more stringent air quality standards for ozone, particulate
matter, and other pollutants; and new EPA requirements for
boilers and incinerators.
Today I will focus on the proposed Tier 3 gasoline
standards being drafted by EPA.
Under the Clean Air Act, EPA has already implemented
stringent rules reducing the amount of sulfur allowed in
gasoline and reducing vapor pressure. For example, the Tier 2
rules have reduced sulfur levels in gasoline by 90 percent,
from an average of 300 parts per million before 2004 to an
average of 30 parts per million today. EPA is now developing a
Tier 3 rulemaking that would reduce sulfur levels to an average
of 10 parts per million, nearly a 70 percent change from
today's already low levels, while also reducing gasoline
volatility and perhaps other properties.
EPA expects to issue a proposed rule by the end of this
year and a final rule in 2012. EPA should not issue a Tier 3
proposal without first justifying the impacts, costs, and
benefits of further reducing sulfur and vapor pressure. EPA has
not produced a scientific basis to justify these new
regulations, and at this point EPA has not released the date of
the agency claims to have already in hand.
We have studied and believe that further sulfur and vapor
pressure reductions would not produce benefits enough to
justify the potentially onerous costs. These could include
higher fuel manufacturing costs, refinery closures, lost jobs,
increased emissions, and increased product imports.
Researchers at Baker and O'Brien have studied the costs and
impacts of several Tier 3 scenarios which could require a
substantial reconfiguration of U.S. refineries. Their research
shows that the refining industry could face up-front capital
costs ranging from between $10 to $17 billion, with recurring
annual costs in the range of $5 to $13 billion.
As a result, they contend, gasoline manufacturing costs
could rise by up to 25 cents a gallon.
In addition, up to 14 percent of total gasoline production
volume could be lost. This volume would suffer when sulfur is
reduced and light-end components are removed from gasoline.
Finally, because the processes used to reduce sulfur
content and vapor pressure are also energy intensive, they
could increase refinery carbon dioxide emissions by up to 2.3
percent. EPA would thus needlessly put upward pressure on
refineries to increase their CO
2
emissions while
separately proposing requirements to reduce their CO
2

emissions.
Overall, this research estimate said up to seven U.S.
refineries could close, as they would be unable to make or
recover the required investments to comply with the new
requirements. This would be in addition to the 66 U.S.
refineries that have already closed in the last 20 years. The
U.S. Department of Energy has identified the cost of regulatory
compliance as a part of the economic stress that caused the
shutdowns. The regulatory burden of Tier 3 requirements could
add to that stress.
In conclusion, America's refining industry is a strategic
and valuable asset that provides U.S. with secure supplies of
fuel products and directly and indirectly employs nearly
500,000 Americans. It is already heavily regulated. Layering on
new regulations is hard to understand when our economy is
already not generating jobs, and then the Administration says
it looks for ways to limit unnecessary or inefficient
regulations.
In the interest of more transparency in government and
sounder regulations, we urge the agency to perform the needed
studies and analysis and release all other pertinent
information to stakeholders before going forward with the Tier
3 requirements.
Thank you for your time today, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Greco follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. Bob Greco, Group Director,
Downstream and Industry Operations, American Petroleum Institute

Good afternoon. My name is Bob Greco, and I am Group Director of
Downstream and Industry Operations for the American Petroleum Institute
(API). Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on overlapping
and sometimes contradictory fuel requirements facing the refining
industry. API is a national trade association representing over 480
member companies involved in all aspects of the oil and natural gas
industry.

U.S. Refining Is a Strategic Asset

America's refiners are a strategic asset for the United States, and
maintaining a viable domestic refining industry is critical to the
Nation's economic security. The refining industry provides the fuels
that keep America moving. The industry provides the Nation's military
with secure, available fuels wherever and whenever they are required.
In addition, it provides affordable and clean fuels products to
industries that rely on those fuels to manufacture hundreds of
thousands of other consumer products that Americans depend on every
single day.
Equally as important, U.S. refineries sustain hundreds of thousands
of good-paying, highly skilled American jobs across the country, in
addition to the raw material building blocks which support a vast
number of other American production industries. According to a study by
Wood MacKenzie, the U.S. refining industry employs or supports the
employment of over 460,000 jobs in the U.S.
According to the EIA and all credible studies, the United States
(and the world) will continue to depend on refining petroleum-based
products for decades to come in order to meet the increasing energy
demand. Domestic refineries are competing directly with petroleum
product imports. Because the refining industry operates on a global
basis, the U.S. faces the choice of either manufacturing these products
at home or importing them from other countries. The U.S. refining
industry already operates in an extremely complex regulatory
environment. U.S. refiners have invested $112 billion in environmental
improvements from 1990 to 2008, significantly reducing emissions while
producing cleaner fuels and improving energy efficiency. Since 2000
alone, U.S. refiners have spent nearly twice as much on environmental
improvements as the government and private sector \1\ spent on non-
hydrocarbon technologies. Regulations governing fuel composition,
greenhouse gases, and environmental standards have an enormous
financial impact on the refining industry, as do financial controls and
taxation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Excluding expenditures by the oil and natural gas industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There are significant and potentially very costly additional
regulations under development that may take effect over the next five
years. These regulations include:

More stringent ``Tier 3'' gasoline standards;

Refinery controls, including GHG limitations, through new
NESHAP and NSPS requirements;

RFS implementation and the impending ``blend wall'';

Refinery emissions controls to achieve more stringent air
quality standards for ozone, PM, etc.;

New EPA requirements for boilers and incinerators (Boiler
MACT).

Today I will focus specifically on the proposed Tier 3 gasoline
standards being drafted by EPA.

Tier 3 Gasoline Proposal

EPA is developing a ``Tier 3'' rulemaking that would likely reduce
sulfur levels in gasoline to an average of 10 ppm--a nearly 70 percent
change from today's already low levels-- while also reducing gasoline
volatility and, perhaps, other properties. EPA expects to issue a
proposed rule by the end of 2011 and a final rule in 2012.
EPA should not issue a Tier 3 proposal without first justifying the
impacts, costs, and benefits of reducing sulfur and vapor pressure in
gasoline. Although EPA maintains these changes to gasoline are needed
to improve air quality and fuel economy, the Agency has not produced
the justification to back up its claims. At this point, EPA has not
released the data the agency claims to have already in hand.
We have studied and believe that further sulfur and vapor pressure
reductions would not produce benefits enough to justify the potentially
onerous costs. These could include higher fuel manufacturing costs,
refinery closures, lost jobs, increased emissions, and increased
product imports.
Under the Clean Air Act, EPA has already implemented increasingly
stringent rules reducing the amount of sulfur allowed in gasoline and
reducing vapor pressure. For example, the Tier 2 rules have reduced
sulfur levels in gasoline by 90 percent, from an average of 300 parts
per million before 2004 to an average of 30 parts per million today.
EPA has told us that Tier 3 rules would likely require a further
reduction to 10 parts per million. The Tier 3 changes EPA envisions
could require refiners to install additional hydrotreating and
fractionation units, significantly altering their refinery
configurations and operations.
Researchers at Baker and O'Brien, Inc., have studied the costs and
impacts of several Tier 3 scenarios. The study was shared with EPA,
DOE, and EIA a couple months ago. The Baker and O'Brien work shows that
the refining industry could face up-front capital costs ranging from
between $10 billion to $17 billion, with recurring annual operating
costs in the range of $5 billion to $13 billion.
As a result, they contend, gasoline manufacturing costs could rise
between 12 cents per gallon and 25 cents per gallon.
In addition, between seven percent and 14 percent of total gasoline
production could be lost. Volume would suffer when sulfur is reduced
and light end components are removed from gasoline.
Finally, because the refinery processes needed to reduce sulfur
content and vapor pressure are also energy intensive, the Tier 3 rule
could increase refinery carbon dioxide emissions by up to 2.3 percent.
EPA would thus needlessly put upward pressure on refineries to increase
their CO
2
emissions while separately proposing requirements
to reduce refinery CO
2
emissions. Refineries would also have
to ensure that increased emission of other pollutants resulting from
reconfiguring their refineries are properly controlled and permit
limits maintained.
Overall, Baker and O'Brien estimate that between four and seven
U.S. refineries could close, as they would be unable to make or recover
the required investments in plant equipment and operations necessary to
comply with the new requirements. This would be in addition to the 66
U.S. refineries that have closed in the last 20 years. The U.S.
Department of Energy has identified the cost of compliance with various
regulations as a part of the economic stress that caused the shutdowns.
\2\ The regulatory burden of Tier 3 requirements would add to this
stress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  U.S. Department of Energy; Office of Policy and International
Affairs. Small Refinery Exemption Study: An Investigation into
Disproportionate Economic Hardship March 2011 http://www.epa.gov/otaq/
fuels/renewablefuels/compliancehelp/small-refinery-exempt-study.pdf.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Summary

If America's refining industry is to remain viable, we need a
regulatory structure that improves our environment while allowing the
industry to remain competitive in the worldwide market. The domestic
refining industry's outstanding history of regulatory compliance has
made U.S. refineries among the cleanest and most efficient in the
world. The industry remains committed to meeting regulatory
requirements.
However, government must adopt a more reasonable approach to
regulations. For example, it should allow time for existing regulations
to reach their full effectiveness before adding new layers of
regulation. The high and very real costs of complying with overreaching
regulations that have uncertain benefits may weaken the ability of our
domestic refining industry to compete with foreign refiners.
EPA's combination of suggested CAFE standards and Tier 3 fuel
changes, coupled with potential refinery GHG controls, threatens the
existence of U.S. refinery jobs and products. Domestic refining
capacity could be reduced, thereby increasing imports and costs.
Specifically regarding the proposed Tier 3 fuel requirements, EPA
should complete the long overdue Anti-Backsliding study mandated by
EISA (and now two years late), finalize and publish its scientific
justification as soon as possible, and allow stakeholders adequate
opportunity to review the data and provide input long before the Agency
proceeds with a proposed Tier 3 fuel rulemaking. EPA should provide a
credible analysis showing that lowering the vapor pressure or sulfur
content of gasoline will achieve cost-effective, real emissions
reductions, and air quality, health and welfare benefits.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize our next witness, Mr. David Hilbert of
Mercury Marine.

STATEMENT OF MR. DAVID HILBERT,

THERMODYNAMIC DEVELOPMENT ENGINEER,

MERCURY MARINE

Mr. Hilbert. Good afternoon, Chairman Harris, Ranking
Member Miller, other Members of the Subcommittee. It is a
pleasure to be here this afternoon. My name is David Hilbert,
and I am a Thermodynamic Development Engineer from Mercury
Marine, which is a division of the Brunswick Corporation. I am
here today to testify on behalf of the NMMA.
I was the technical leader of a test of E15 blend fuel in
three different Mercury outboard engines. This was done under
contract to the U.S. Department of Energy and coordinated by
NREL.
The test objective was to understand the effects of running
a 15 percent ethanol blend on outboard marine engines during
300 hours of wide-open throttle endurance. Three separate
engine families were evaluated listed here. Two of each engine
were evaluated, one being run on E15, the other being run on E0
or ethanol-free gasoline.
It is important to note two main effects seen in this test
of the ethanol-blend fuel. One is that the use of ethanol fuel
on these engines increases the operating temperature, which can
reduce the strength of the metallic components. The other is
that ethanol can cause material compatibility issues with the
fuel system components due to the chemical interactions.
So this first slide shows photos of the components from our
9.9 horsepower test engine with E0 components being on the
left, E15 on the right. The top photos are the undersides of
the pistons, and the lower photo is of the connecting rods
which connect with the pistons. You can see the evidence of the
heavier carbon deposits which indicates the higher metal
temperatures on the E15 engine.
The next slide shows photos of the fuel pump gasket and
then the mating check valve that it seals against, again, from
the 9.9 horsepower engines, and in general the E15 gasket shows
more deterioration, and this occurred to the point where there
is actually material that transferred from the gasket to the
check valve that it seals against, indicating that the gasket
was breaking down as evidenced by the photo in the lower right-
hand corner.
The next set of images is from the E15-fueled 300
horsepower supercharged engine, which did not complete the
entire endurance test on the E15 fuel. The exhaust valve failed
as shown in the photo at the left, which ended the test. Upon
disassembly, we found two other valves that were cracked.
Metallurgical analysis of these valves show that the failure
was due to the elevated metal temperatures.
These photos show a comparison of the pistons and
connecting rods from the 300 horsepower supercharged engines,
and much like the 9.9 horsepower pistons and connecting rods,
these components, again, show evidence of higher operating
temperatures as evidenced by the difference in the carbon
deposits.
This last set of images I would like to show you are from
the 200 horsepower, two-stroke engine that was operated on E15.
This engine on E15 fuel did not complete the entire endurance
test. It failed the rod bearing, which destroyed the engine,
the remnants of which are shown in the upper right-hand corner
of the screen. The damage was so severe to this engine that the
root cause of the failure could not be fully identified, but it
should be noted that two-stroke engines of this architecture
mix the fuel and the oil and use that mixture to distribute the
oil throughout the rest of the engine. More testing is needed
to understand how the ethanol affects this type of lubrication
system, as it is not well understood at this time.
So despite the limited nature of this testing, several
significant issues were identified. This testing was done on a
small sample of engines running only one operating point. In
addition to the need for more two-stroke lubrication system
testing, as I just mentioned, more testing is really needed to
understand how E15 fuel affects marine engines during other
operating conditions. Examples of this would include cold
start, hot restart, acceleration, part throttle, et cetera.
And another main effect that needs more investigation is to
understand the effect of the fuel on the engines that are
stored with fuel in the fuel system over long periods of time,
which occurs frequently with our engines.
So what I have presented to you in brief today and what is
available in the full report are the results of the limited
testing conducted on three of Mercury's outboard engine
families. Changes in the fuel formulations and the resulting
effects on marine engine operability are of high importance to
assure a safe and reliable fleet of marine engines. This study
showed how misfueling marine engines currently in use with E15
may cause a variety of issues for owners and can lead to
premature engine failure.
Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hilbert follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. David Hilbert,
Thermodynamic Development Engineer, Mercury Marine

Good afternoon, Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, other
Members of the Subcommittee.
It is a pleasure to be here this afternoon. My name is David
Hilbert, and I am a thermodynamic development engineer for Mercury
Marine, a division of the Brunswick Corporation, located in Fond du
Lac, Wisconsin. Mercury Marine has been a manufacturer of recreational
marine engines continuously since 1939, and currently makes and sells
more marine engines than any other manufacturer in the world. I am here
today to testify on behalf of the National Marine Manufacturers
Association, which represents over 1,500 boat builders, marine engine,
and marine accessory manufacturers.
I was the technical leader of a test of E15 blend fuel in three
different Mercury outboard engines. These tests were conducted at the
Mercury Marine test facility in Fond du Lac in 2010-2011 by Mercury
personnel under contract to the U.S. Department of Energy and
coordinated by the National Renewable Energy Lab (NREL). The final
report was released by the Department of Energy in October 2011.
The objective of these tests was to understand the effects of
running a 15% ethanol blend on outboard marine engines during 300 hours
of wide-open throttle (WOT) endurance testing--a typical marine engine
durability test. Three separate engine families were evaluated. A 9.9
HP carburated four-stroke engine and a 300 HP supercharged electronic
fuel-injected (EFI) four-stroke engine represented current products. A
200 HP electronic fuel-injected (EFI) two-stroke engine was chosen to
represent the legacy products still in widespread use today. Two
engines of each family were evaluated. One test engine was endurance
tested on E15 fuel, while a second control engine was endurance tested
on ethanol-free gasoline.
The primary point to remember when considering this test is that
ethanol, in any blend, is an oxygenator. E10 fuel has 3% oxygen, while
E15 fuel has 5%-6% oxygen. On a typical marine engine, this additional
oxygen makes the fuel burn hotter, and the higher temperatures can
reduce the strength of the metallic components. In addition, ethanol
can cause compatibility issues with the other materials in the fuel
systems because of the chemical interaction. I would like to show you
some photos of the engine components after the endurance testing to
illustrate the results of the testing.
We were able to complete the entire 300-hour test running E15 in
the 9.9 HP engine. Test results indicated poor running quality,
including misfires at the end of the test. The poor run quality caused
an increase in exhaust emissions. In addition, there were increased
carbon deposits in the engine on the underside of the pistons and on
the ends of the rods indicating higher engine temperatures. You can see
the difference in the carbon deposits in this photo. Additionally,
deterioration of the fuel pump gasket was evident, likely due to
material compatibility issues with the fuel blend. This deterioration
of the gasket could lead to fuel pump failure, disabling the engine.
The effect on the gasket is shown here.
The 300 HP four-stroke supercharged engine did not complete the
endurance test on E15 fuel. The engine encountered a valve failure
after 285 hours of endurance testing. As you can see from the photos,
one valve broke apart, which ended the test, and two others developed
cracks. I should mention that these are high-quality valves constructed
of inconel, a high-temperature resistant alloy. Even so, when we did
metallurgical analysis on this engine, we found that the cause of these
fractures was deteriorated mechanical strength due to high metal
temperature. The next photos show a comparison of the pistons and
connecting rods from the Verado engine, also indicating that the E15
test engine operated at elevated temperatures.
The 200 HP two-stroke engine using E15 fuel also failed to complete
the endurance test. It failed a rod bearing at 256 hours of testing,
resulting in catastrophic destruction of the engine. You can see the
remains of the bearings in the photos. There was so much damage to the
engine that we could not determine the exact cause of failure. It is
important to note that two-stroke engines of this architecture mix the
fuel and the oil and use that mixture to distribute the oil to the
critical interfaces such as the bearings and cylinder walls. Ethanol
may have an effect on the dispersion or lubricity of the oil as it is
mixed with the fuel. More testing of such engines is necessary to
understand the ramifications of an E15 blend fuel on this type of
lubrication system, as it is not well understood at this time.
Despite the limited nature of this testing, several significant
issues were identified. The testing was done on a small sample of
engines running one operating point, wide-open throttle. In addition to
the need for more two-stroke lubrication system testing, more testing
is needed to understand how E15 fuel affects marine engines during
other operating conditions. Examples would include starting,
acceleration/deceleration, part-throttle operation, and the effect of
E15 fuel on marine engines that are stored with fuel in the system over
long periods of time, which occurs regularly with our engines.
What I have presented to you in brief today--and what is available
at the NREL Web site in full--are the results of the limited testing
conducted on three of Mercury's outboard engine families. Changes in
fuel formulations and the resulting effects on marine engine
operability are of high importance. This study showed how misfueling
marine engines currently in use with E15 may cause a variety of issues
for owners and can lead to premature engine failure. Thank you for
allowing me the opportunity to testify today.
To see the full report from the testing performed by Mercury Marine
on outboard marine engines, please visit the following Web site: http:/
/www.nrel.gov/docs/fy12osti/52909.pdf.
To view the companion report from the testing performed by Volvo
Penta on sterndrive/inboard marine engines, please visit the following
Web site: http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy12osti/52577.pdf.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, and finally I
recognize our final witness, Mr. Jack Huttner, from Gevo.

STATEMENT OF MR. JACK HUTTNER,

EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT,

COMMERCIAL AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS, GEVO, INC.

Mr. Huttner. Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member Miller and Members of the Subcommittee. My name
is Jack Huttner, Executive Vice President for Commercial and
Public Affairs of Gevo, and I appreciate the opportunity to be
here today.
Gevo is a Colorado-based renewable chemicals and advanced
biofuels company. We are developing cost-competitive biobased
alternatives to petroleum and have 56 million gallons of
production under development for 2012. We are a unique player
in a number of ways that might add interesting insights for
today's discussion. We do not fit neatly in either the biofuels
or the refinery camps.
We make isobutanol, which is a four-carbon alcohol. We make
it in ethanol plants that we retrofit with our technology.
Isobutanol can be easily converted using existing refining and
petrochemical processes into gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, and
chemicals like synthetic rubber. In short, Gevo combines
advanced biotechnology and traditional chemistry to make a
platform hydrocarbon molecule.
So what kind of company are we after all? Well, we think we
are something new, a harbinger of an energy future where
barriers and boundaries between the agricultural and petroleum
supply chains disappear. Welcome to the world of drop-in
biofuels. Made from biomass but formed into end products using
chemistry, drop-in biofuels require no flex fuel vehicles,
special-blended pumps, or new pipelines.
Gevo has been able to work across the industry frontiers
here in Washington. For example, I am Vice Chairman of the
Advanced Biofuel Association and sit on the Boards of Bio and
Renewable Fuel Association. We are also associate members of
NPRA and SIGMA, and since we use starch from corn as one of our
carbon sources, we are also actively involved with the Corn
Growers Association. We get to see all sides of the energy
debate.
I want to state up front that Gevo supports the RFS2 and
stands ready to partner with Congress, the EPA, and our other
stakeholders to assure its success. RFS2 is the most
significant federal policy to spur the advanced biofuel
industry. The program has helped create many opportunities for
our company and our peer group companies, including the five
that have recently become publicly traded.
We are all growing, adding jobs, and contributing to
reduced fossil fuel use and petroleum imports. We salute the
EPA for their efforts to implement the important program.
There are some aspects of policy and regulation that do
present challenges to the adoption of advanced biofuels. This
is understandable because these policies were established when
ethanol was the only available biofuel, a time before the era
of cost-competitive drop-in biofuels became possible.
Technology has evolved over these last 10 years, and a new
advanced biorefinery industry has developed. We need to look at
our policy and regulatory framework with fresh eyes in order to
realize its promise.
I would like to just highlight one issue today to
illustrate a challenge directly related to these conflicts and
unintended consequences, subject of today's hearing. That is
the issue of co-mingling, blending E10 gasoline with biobutanol
or other advanced biofuels at retail gasoline stations. When
the Clean Air Act was written, ethanol was the only available
biofuel. So the act granted gasoline containing between nine
and 10 percent a waiver to exceed evaporative emission
guidelines by one pound of pressure, known as Reid Vapor
Pressure or RVP.
This is a problem actually for Gevo and other biofuel
producers. If you blend E10 gasoline with butanol, which has a
very low RVP by the way the ethanol content is diluted below 10
percent, and thus, the fuel blended with biobutanol would,
therefore, lose that one pound waiver, even though the fuel
dispense would actually and could probably have a lower RVP
than E10.
Per the Clean Air compliance point of view, this doesn't
make much sense. We should be able to find a way to allow the
commingling of E10 and biobutanol so that the new biofuel could
enter the market to lower evaporative emissions and contribute
to cleaner air. We believe the EPA has the flexibility to
address this issue, and we are currently in a very positive
dialogue with them to resolve it.
Writing federal statutes and regulations with only ethanol
in mind made sense in the past because there were no other
available biofuel additives for gasoline, but that will be less
and less true as time goes on. Many advanced biofuel
manufacturers, including Gevo, are seeking to enter the
Nation's gasoline supply, and we all need a policy and a
regulatory environment that is open to innovation and new
technology and lets the market reward those advanced biofuels
based on their energy content, their emissions profile, and
their compatibility with all engines and existing
infrastructure.
So, in summary, we believe biofuels policy and regulation
should create a level playing field for all biofuels and that
the market should be empowered to choose those that have the
best performance and price characteristics.
Thanks again for inviting me, and I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Huttner follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. Jack Huttner, Executive Vice President,
Commercial and Public Affairs, Gevo, Inc.

Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Minority Member Miller, and
Members of the Subcommittee. I am Jack Huttner, the Executive Vice
President for Commercial and Public Affairs for Gevo, Inc. Gevo
appreciates the invitation to testify at this hearing today on the
``Conflicts and Unintended Consequences of Motor Fuel Standards.''
Gevo is a Colorado-based renewable chemicals and advanced biofuels
company. We are developing biobased alternatives to petroleum-based
products. We are a unique biofuels player in a number of ways--ways
that might add some interesting insights into this discussion. First of
all, we make isobutanol, a four-carbon alcohol, via fermentation, but
it can be also be made from petroleum. Does that make us a biofuel
company? Biobutanol can be easily converted using known refining and
petrochemical process into gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, and chemicals
like synthetic rubber. We are also building a processing unit in Texas
to make hydrocarbons. Does that make us a refinery company? Besides
combining advanced biotechnology and traditional chemistry, to confound
matters further, we also retrofit current ethanol plants to make
isobutanol.
So, what are we in the end? Are we a biofuel company, a chemical
company, a jet fuel producer, or what? Actually, we think we are
something new, a harbinger of a new energy future where barriers and
boundaries between the agriculture and petroleum supply chains
disappear. Welcome to the world of drop-in biofuels, made from biomass
but formed into end products using chemistry. Drop-in biofuels like
biobutanol work well in small engines, marine engines, and automobile
engines. It requires no flex fuel vehicles or special blender pumps. It
can be transported through existing petroleum pipelines so no new
transportation or fueling infrastructure is needed.
There are advantages to early innovators like Gevo and some
disadvantages. Let's start with the advantages. First of all, we get to
work across the frontiers with all sectors and this is particularly
true here in Washington. For example, I am vice chairman of the
Advanced Biofuels Association and sit on the boards of the
Biotechnology Industry Organization and the Renewable Fuels
Association. But, we are also active associate members of the National
Petrochemical and Refiners Association and the Society of Independent
Gasoline Marketers of America. And, since we use the starch from corn
as one of our carbon sources, we also are actively engaged with the
National Corn Growers Association. We get to see all sides of energy
policy. It is an exciting and challenging place to be.
But, there are some disadvantages to go along with this ``neither
fish nor fowl'' position. Chief among them is developing our various
business segments in a policy and regulatory environment that was
crafted before the era of cost-competitive drop-in biofuels became
possible as they are becoming today. When ethanol was the only
commercially viable biofuel, it was only natural that biofuel policy
assumed that would always be the case. But technology has evolved over
the last decade and a new industry has developed--advanced
biorefineries.
Gevo is retrofitting its first ethanol plant to make biobutanol in
Luverne, Minnesota. It is scheduled to come online in the first half of
2012 and is expected to have the capacity to produce 18 million gallons
per year of biobutanol. About six months later, our second ethanol
plant conversion, in Redfield, South Dakota, is scheduled to be
completed, adding an expected additional 38 million gallons per year of
biobutanol production capacity. By 2015, we plan to have approximately
350 million gallons of biobutanol production capacity from about nine
plants across the nation.
We also recently announced a contract to supply the U.S. Air Force
with blends of kerosene made from isobutanol and participation in a new
project to develop cellulosic biojet technology.
Gevo is exactly the type of company, and biobutanol is exactly the
type of advanced renewable fuel, that Congress was trying to encourage
when it enacted the revised Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) as part of
the 2007 energy bill. In 2006, Gevo did not exist as a company. This
year, we have over 110 employees in three states. We are hiring now and
expect to continue expanding by 25% or more for the next several years.
Gevo supports the 2007 revisions to the RFS and stands ready to
partner with Congress and interested stakeholders in assuring its
successful implementation. The RFS2 program represents the most
significant federal level policy to encourage the development of an
advanced biofuels industry in the United States. We salute the EPA for
their efforts in support of this program. The 2007 RFS2 program helped
to create many opportunities for our company and we will continue to
work hard to take advantage of those opportunities.
Gevo continues to face challenges as well, including some that
relate directly to the ``conflicts'' and ``unintended consequences''
that are the subject of today's hearing. Each of these challenges can
be resolved in a positive manner without direct congressional action,
as long as we can all work collaboratively on the congressional goals
for the RFS2 program. To that end, we are currently working in a
constructive and positive manner with EPA to create a smooth regulatory
framework for the deployment of drop-in biofuels.
One such challenge is the issue of commingling--blending E10 with
biobutanol or other second-generation biofuels at retail gasoline
stations. This challenge relates to the issue I mentioned earlier,
namely, when the Clean Air Act was written, ethanol was the only
biofuel available. So, the Clean Air Act granted gasoline containing
between nine and 10 percent ethanol a waiver to exceed the evaporative
emission guideline by one pound of pressure, known as Reid Vapor
Pressure or RVP. This is a problem for Gevo and producers of some other
biofuel components. If you blend a gasoline containing butanol with
E10, the ethanol content is diluted below 10% in the underground
storage tank and therefore loses the one-pound waiver, even though the
fuel dispensed would likely have a lower RVP than E10. From a clean air
compliance point of view, we should be able to find a way to allow the
commingling of E10 and butanol so that a new, lower RVP biofuel can
enter the market, lower evaporative emissions and contribute to cleaner
air. We are currently in the early stages of discussion with the EPA
and hope to resolve this issue.
A second challenge faced by Gevo and other advanced biofuel
manufacturers is connected with EPA's proposal for new motor vehicle
tailpipe emissions standards, expected early next year. These so-called
``Tier 3'' standards may include, among many other provisions, a change
in the test gasoline used by EPA and motor vehicle manufacturers to
certify that engines meet emissions standards. Since the 1960s, EPA has
mandated that this ``certification fuel'' be pure gasoline without
biofuel additives--in other words, E0. There is the possibility that
the new Tier 3 rules will stipulate E15 as the new certification fuel.
In a vacuum, this change from E0 to E15 may seem innocuous. After
all, E10 currently is prevalent across the Nation, and EPA recently
approved the use of E15 in certain motor vehicles. However, this
proposal raises significant concerns to Gevo and other biofuels
manufacturers. If adopted, all engine manufacturers will ``tune'' their
engines to that fuel so they can meet emission standards. This will
likely further establish ethanol as the presumptive biofuel additive.
Writing federal statutes and regulations with only ethanol in mind
made sense in the past, because there were no other viable biofuel
additives for gasoline. But that will be less and less true as time
goes on. Many advanced biofuel manufacturers, including Gevo, are
seeking to enter into the Nation's gasoline supply in the coming months
and years, and we need a policy and regulatory environment that is open
to new technologies and lets the market reward advanced biofuels based
on their inherent energy content, emissions, and engine compatibility
characteristics.
Congress did an admirable job in 2007 of drafting a revised RFS
program that is technology neutral. A central focus of the RFS2 program
was technology neutrality--allowing competing biofuel pathways to
compete for market entry in a manner that is not biased by federal
regulations. Congress drafted the RFS2 program in 2007 to avoid picking
``winners and losers'' among different biofuels technologies. EPA
should do the same and fashion rules that embody the same intent and
outcome to the greatest extent possible. We look forward to working
with the EPA and Congress to assure that the implementation of
regulations creates a level playing field for all advanced biofuels.
Thank you again for inviting me to appear at this hearing today. I
would be pleased to answer any questions you may have.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. I thank the panel for
their testimony. Reminding Members the Committee rules limit
questioning to five minutes.
The Chair at this point will open the round of questions,
and I recognize myself for the first five minutes.
Ms. Oge, looking through your testimony, you claim a pretty
amazing amount of hospital visits prevented and millions of
cases of respiratory problems including bronchitis and asthma.
I have asked a previous witness from EPA to actually show me
some of that data, and they were not forthcoming. So I am going
to just tell you right upfront I am going to request that
information from you as well, and I hope you are more
forthcoming than others from the EPA.
Now, Ms. Oge, if the RFS did not exist, would, in fact, EPA
be pursuing stricter limits on sulfur contents and fuel
volatility as part of its Tier 3 rulemaking?
Ms. Oge. Absolutely. Let me go back and remind us what--
when did we start thinking about Tier 3 until the previous
Administration in 2008, a new standard was set to .075 parts
per million. As part of the Regulatory Impact Analysis that the
agency did at that time in 2008, we consider what we are
calling today the Tier 3 Program. It is very typical for EPA
when we establish public health standards to evaluate cost-
effective ways that we can enter at the national level. So we
get in a way that will reduce costs for localities and States
so we don't have to force controls at the local and State level
that can be very expensive.
So what we are calling Tier 3 today, which is a systems
approach of reducing sulfur from gasoline because sulfur
poisons catalysts and prevents catalysts from doing their job,
and at the same time reduce emissions from cars. So the Tier 3
effort started the thinking back in 2008.
Now, in the meantime, we have been working with the State
of California as they are moving forward to address car
standards and, as you probably know, California has a low
sulfur fuel, so they do have a 10-parts-per-million cap of
sulfur so they are able to move forward with the standards. In
order to have a 50-state program across the country and help
areas that cannot meet today's existing ozone standard, which
is about 55 areas across the country, we need to have clean
sulfur to enable both the new technologies, but at the same
time by lowering the sulfur level from 30 parts per million to
lower, you can get significant reductions of nitrogen oxides
and improve air quality across the board from the existing
fleet.
Chairman Harris. Okay. Can the EPA demonstrate that the
ozone National Ambient Air Quality Standards can't be met
without the fuel property reductions required by Tier 3?
Ms. Oge. In 2008, the Agency looked at a number of
strategies including Tier 3. We believe Tier 3 will be one of
the most cost-effective ways that the Agency can undertake in
order to reduce potential access at the State and local level,
going to small facilities where the costs on reducing nitrogen
oxide could be significantly higher.
As part of our proposal we are going to lay out the cost
effectiveness of the actions that we are going to take, both
for cost and reducing sulfur in gasoline.
Chairman Harris. Okay. Mr. Greco, Mr. Hilbert showed some
pretty interesting pictures of the marine engines from the use
of E15, pretty worrisome, actually. In your view does the final
misfueling label for E15--is that going to solve the problem in
not getting that fuel into those engines?
Mr. Greco. We would say it is insufficient to do that. We
submitted comments to EPA during the development of that label
and feel that they were not accepted, and EPA, in fact, went
with a label that we feel is less sufficient for that. So we
have our concerns with the current label as finalized.
Chairman Harris. Well, let me follow up a little bit on a
similar topic. In October, Ms. Oge is quoted as saying the EPA
has, ``held very productive discussions with both car companies
and fuel providers,'' about the upcoming Tier 3 standards.
Now, do you agree with her characterizations of EPA's
outreach to your----
Mr. Greco. I am hearing a different story from my members
who have met with Ms. Oge. We feel that--in our discussions
there has been unanimity about the concerns that we have raised
today in our testimony about the costs, the impacts on jobs,
and energy security from this. And there is a united view of
that amongst the refining industry.
Chairman Harris. Ms. Oge, that doesn't leave much doubt
about where the industry stands, and they are the fuel
providers. What do you define as a very productive discussion?
I am not sure.
Ms. Oge. That is a good question.
Chairman Harris. If the fuel providers come in and say
unanimously, look, this isn't practical, this won't work, what
was the product of that? Because you used a very specific word,
very productive discussion.
Ms. Oge. Well, first of all, I believe that the discussions
were very productive and----
Chairman Harris. And that is my question: define
productive.
Ms. Oge [continuing]. Let me define productive. Starting
last February, I took my team, and I went to all the
refineries, most of the refineries. We went to Texas, to
Kansas, California. So to me the fact that EPA spends hours
listening to the regular community, you know, we didn't invite
them to come to us. We went and visited with them.
So I feel that what we heard from the industry was very
productive, because that is how we are going to design the
program. I think the program that we are designing and we
haven't proposed anything. The Administrator has not proposed
any standards, we haven't sent the proposal to OMB, so I think
for the industry to say that our discussions were not
productive, it is unfortunate, because they don't know how
those discussions are forming the policy that the agency is
going to recommend.
So I would strongly suggest in my mind productive doesn't
mean we agree on everything. Productive is that the EPA is
listening carefully, and the industry was offering very
important information, and we need it on a one-on-one basis
with each of the refineries rather than meeting with the
association where they could not disclose confidential
information.
So we have confidential information, I think, that
discusses we are very productive, and when the proposal is
going to go out, I think the industry is going to realize that,
indeed, those discussions that we had with individual refiners
have ended in a program that is going to be very flexible and
cost effective.
Chairman Harris. Okay. I guess people can disagree.
Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. Mr. Chairman, before I begin my testimony, I
would like to move into the record. Mr. Costello could not be
here, but he wanted to introduce into the record a letter from
Virginia Dale, Dr. Virginia Dale, the director of the Center
for Bioenergy Sustainability at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
The letter provides some helpful comments on the NRC report.
Chairman Harris. Sure. I would note that the representative
of Oak Ridge National Laboratory has informed us the letter
from Dr. Virginia Dale, despite appearing on Oak Ridge National
Laboratory letterhead, reflects her views as a member of the
National Academy's biofuels panel and does not represent the
views of the lab on the issue. Well, you laugh, but that is an
important point, because you know when you write on
Congressional letterhead, it has to be--you are representing
the U.S. Congress, and you know, we have strict rules. But with
that entered in the record here, I have no objection to the
letter, just with that statement from Oak Ridge.
[The information may be found in Appendix 2.]
Mr. Miller. Thank you. Beginning my five minutes, Mr.
Huttner's testimony was far more conciliatory towards the EPA
than some of the majority witnesses in this Committee. I don't
think he actually used the term very productive, but he seemed
to suggest in his testimony that you were having useful
conversations and that you were willing to talk to them.
And both Mr. Huttner and Dr. Kesan mentioned a specific
regulatory difficulty of blending E10 with biobutanol or other
advanced fuels, and I do understand that there are some
regulatory obstacles to the introduction of biobutanol to the
marketplace.
First, do you agree that biobutanol is a promising drop-in
fuel, and assuming that those new fuels are able to meet all
Clean Air Act standards, could the obstacle that Dr. Kesan and
Mr. Huttner referred to be overcome through your procedures?
Are you aware of the specific blending issue?
Ms. Oge. Thank you, Mr. Miller. First of all, let me say
that isobutanol or biobutanol is probably one of the most
promising fuels because what it is it is a drop-in fuel, so
actually you--it becomes part of the refining product so you
don't have to blend it at the retail stations, so there are a
lot of issues with infrastructure and so forth that isobutanol
doesn't have. So, indeed, it is a very promising fuel.
We are having productive discussions with a company,
another company----
Mr. Miller. Very productive or just productive?
Ms. Oge. Very--I want to underline very productive.
Mr. Miller. All right.
Ms. Oge. And I think this is--you have raised very
important issues because clearly when the Clean Air Act was
drafted, there were different issues that Congress was
intending at the time. So we are working very closely with the
companies so that we are capable of finding pathways to allow
this promising fuel in the marketplace.
Mr. Miller. Okay. Dr. Kesan, I think that Mr. Huttner used
the term flexibility. Since you are on the university faculty,
I think you used the term regulatory innovation, but it seems
to be the same concept, and that had happened in the past to
meet Clean Air requirements to allow new fuels on the
marketplace.
How has that flexibility or regulatory innovation helped
meet renewable fuel standards and other standards required by
the Clean Air Act?
Dr. Kesan. I agree with Ms. Oge and with Mr. Huttner that
this is a really good opportunity, and isobutanol has some
significant potentials. What I suggest in the written article
that you are referring to is that if you are concerned about a
particular oxygenate percentage by weight as being something
that you have approved in the past, if that is the underlying
scientific concern that you have sort of capped it at a
particular percentage, 2.7, 3.7, whatever it is, to the extent
that you can actually blend an equivalent of butanol that
results in the same oxygenate percentage by weight, for
example, then clarifying that and clarifying precisely what
kind of blending percentages you can have would help a lot. It
would help a lot because there is--that is an area of
uncertainty, and there have been, as I outlined in the article
you mentioned, there are sort of ways that you can do this, and
the EPA has done that with various sort of substantially
similar rulemaking in the context of methanol and other places.
And so I do think that there is an opportunity to capture
the benefits offered by a fuel that might satisfy the advanced
biofuel threshold of, you know, 50 percent GHG reductions and
which is an important objective in RFS2, at the same time meet
all the concerns, you know, environmental and otherwise.
Mr. Miller. Mr. Huttner, this was your issue. Do you have
anything to say about the flexibility or the regulatory
innovation of EPA in addressing this regulatory obstacle?
Mr. Huttner. No. Thank you, and I appreciate the remarks of
the other witnesses, and I would say that for a new and
emerging company like Gevo bringing innovation and new jobs to
the economy, representing the advanced biofuel sector, which is
a new sector trying to work its way with the petroleum and the
existing ethanol industry, engaging with the regulatory and
policymakers early on in our activity is an important kind of
value that we have as a company. Only in that way can we really
assure that we can find our way into the market with all the
big guys.
So as a newcomer one of those things that we do is try to
go out early and meet with people.
Mr. Miller. My time has expired.
Chairman Harris. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wasn't sure
whether you were going to call myself or my colleague from
California first.
So, Mr. Williams, in your testimony you provided some
achievements of the members of the NPRA in their commitment to
clean air and clean water. Very commendable. You mentioned all
have been outstanding, have an outstanding record of complying
with the EPA, have provided hundreds of billions of dollars of
investment to dramatically reduce the levels of sulfur in
gasoline to 90 percent and diesel to 90 percent, too.
These are excellent achievements. Let me ask you a simple--
two simple yes, no questions. Would your members have done this
without federal regulation and enforcement?
Mr. Williams. Some of the reductions, yes, I believe--we
are not saying we are opposed to all regulations. The point of
my testimony is that we are getting to a point where, you know,
we would consider it to be almost a tipping point. You have
lots of overlapping and conflicting regulations that are
creating significant challenges for our industry, and that is
one of the things I said in my written testimony and my opening
statement was that, you know, we support sensible regulations.
It is just a matter of measure, and it is a matter of whether
or not these things actually can work together.
Mr. McNerney. How many jobs were lost in that process?
Mr. Williams. Well, they did have some costs. If you look
at the chart in the back of my testimony, it isn't my chart, it
is the Department of Energy. There were 66 refinery closures in
the last 20 years because of some of those regulations, and
those regulations obviously weren't the only factor. There were
a lot of factors, but they were a significant factor according
to DOE. I don't have specific job numbers on that, but again,
the DOE chart----
Mr. McNerney. So those refineries were closed before 2004?
Mr. Williams. Those refineries, some of them closed after
2004, and again, the chart lists just since 2008, there have
been about three refinery closures. There was an announcement
recently that two companies unfortunately feel they are going
to have to close three more refineries if they can't find a
buyer over the next year.
Mr. McNerney. Well, at that point in your testimony, you
changed and stated that you see no evidence that further
reductions would improve future vehicle technology, but I would
like to submit for the record, Mr. Chairman, two records, one
from the Association of Global Auto Manufacturers and the other
from the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers who disagree with
that in that the amount of sulfur still is damaging to their
catalytic converters.
Chairman Harris. Without objection.
[The information may be found in Appendix 2.]
Mr. Williams. Would you like me to comment on the----
Mr. McNerney. Sure.
Mr. Williams [continuing]. Auto Alliance letter? We have
obviously seen that letter, too, and we haven't seen any
evidence that current sulfur levels are actually deteriorating
catalysts. There are obviously a lot of cars out on the road
right now running on existing levels of sulfur in gasoline.
Not only that but there are at least 19 vehicle models that
can meet Tier 3 vehicle standards and run off Tier 2 sulfur
gasoline, and they are not expensive models. They are things
like the Chevy Malibu and the Ford Focus. So it----
Mr. McNerney. Well, I am glad it is your opinion, but the
two letters from the Automobile Manufacturers and the testimony
of Ms. Oge contradict that. So I don't think it is a clear case
there is no improvement still, and I think that is an area that
we need to be diligent to move forward in.
Let me ask what is it that is keeping the Association back
from wanting to do additional refining. Is it the cost? Is it
the jobs?
Mr. Williams. Additional refining or additional regulatory
measures?
Mr. McNerney. Well, refining additional sulfur out of
gasoline?
Mr. Williams. Yeah. I mean, I think, you know, my colleague
over at API highlighted some of the costs associated with those
reductions and the Tier 2 reductions started in 2007, but
weren't finalized until--or started in 2000, I am sorry, and
weren't finalized until 2004, and 2007. EPA recognized those
would be onerous, which is why you had the lead time.
Mr. McNerney. Well, Mr. Greco indicated a 12 to 25 cent per
gallon cost, but the National Association of Clean Air agencies
state that the cost would be less than one cent. So, again, I
don't see any verification for these statements that
improvement is not going to hurt the economy and that the cost
is going to be that drastic.
Mr. Greco. We would be happy to go over our study with you
at your convenience. We just got the NACA study like you did,
so we did not have the benefit of looking at it. We did model
112 refineries nationwide. So we stand by our study and feel it
is very robust and credible.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I think the statement of Dr. Kesan that
uncertainty is the problem in terms of cost production. So
putting regulations in place that allow refineries and
producers to plan ahead for 10 years and meet these levels is
going to be much more cost effective than waffling back and
forth on these issues, especially when the health and safety of
our children is involved.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Harris. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlelady from California, Ms. Woolsey.
Ms. Woolsey. Thank you very much.
First of all, Mr. Williams, I am just going to not repeat
what my colleague just asked you. Tell me what did the NPRA sit
here and say when they were deciding on the first tier of
regulations? Were you for it, did you know it was going to be
okay, what did you say?
Mr. Williams. Which--are you talking about Tier 2
specifically?
Ms. Woolsey. Tier 2.
Mr. Williams. Tier 2. Yeah. Our association industry
supported reductions in sulfur in gasoline. We did have some
concerns about the extend of the reductions and some of the
time frames.
Ms. Woolsey. Uh-huh.
Mr. Williams. And I can get you more details on that----
Ms. Woolsey. Okay. Well, I just----
Mr. Williams [continuing]. Prior to my time----
Ms. Woolsey [continuing]. Want to be clear.
Mr. Williams. But we did support some cuts in sulfur.
Ms. Woolsey. Yeah. Right. Experience doesn't always support
being against change because then we learn, oh, my, that was a
success.
Mr. Greco, on the 25 cents a gallon increase, what industry
in this country has higher profits than yours? Why would that
25 cents that it is going to cost to clean our air fall on the
shoulders of the consumer?
Mr. Greco. Well, first that 25 cents is a manufacturing
cost. I cannot say how much of that cost would get passed onto
the consumer.
Regarding your other statement, if you look at the earnings
statements of the various member--various companies, our
profits on a per dollar sales basis are actually in line if not
a little lower than many companies; many high-tech companies
based in California, for example, have significantly higher
profits than oil companies.
That being said, we have invested as my testimony mentions,
over $100 billion in the past 20 years on environmental
improvements on making cleaner fuels, and we have seen the
benefits of that. As Mr. Williams said, our air is
significantly cleaner than it was 20 years ago. Now, that is a
combination of cleaner vehicles enabled by cleaner fuels. We
are just saying that at this point we are seeing diminishing
returns from those changes.
Ms. Woolsey. Okay. Well, thank you very much on that. It is
my understanding that ethanol makes up 10 percent of the U.S.
daily gasoline demand, about 10 percent. If ethanol were not
part of our fuel system, how would that 10 percent of the fuel
supply be filled, and do you think it would cost consumers more
or less if we don't have ethanol?
I will start with you, Mr. Greco, and Mr. Williams, I would
like you to answer that and then I am hoping Ms. Oge will
answer it also.
Mr. Greco. I mean, I can't predict the cost in that case.
We find----
Ms. Woolsey. What would it be if it wasn't ethanol?
Mr. Greco. It would be other components of the hydrocarbon.
It would be lighter-ends gasoline. It depends on each refinery.
Each refinery had to make those investment decisions and
blending decisions based on their unique operation. So there is
not a single answer that I can give you.
Ms. Woolsey. Okay. Mr. Williams, do you have an idea of
what would fill that need?
Mr. Williams. So just for clarity, you are asking what the
cost would be if there was more ethanol in----
Ms. Woolsey. No, if there was less. If we took away the
ethanol.
Mr. Williams. So if you had less ethanol----
Ms. Woolsey. Less ethanol. No ethanol.
Mr. Williams [continuing]. What would the cost be, and you
know, I would echo Mr. Greco's comments that we cannot predict
price; however, we can say that ethanol has lower energy
content than a gallon of gasoline, so there would be an
efficiency boost. EPA has already said in a public letter that
there is a mild, a fuel economy penalty, fuel efficiency
penalty.
Ms. Woolsey. Well, let us have Ms. Oge, if you would like
to respond to that.
Ms. Oge. We would not have 10 percent ethanol. I think you
would have some ethanol because ethanol improves the octane of
gasoline, so it is a very important property in gasoline, so
you would have some ethanol, and then you would have other
aromatics, other compounds that are gasoline-based, compounds
that currently have ethanol. For example, ethanol reduces the
amount of benzene and aromatics.
So, again, that is somewhat less toxic substances in the
gasoline make-up.
May I speak a little bit about the price issue?
Ms. Woolsey. Yes.
Ms. Oge. So, you know, the API study basically makes
certain assumptions of what EPA is going to do. EPA has not
declared what we are going to do as part of Tier 3. Actually,
our Tier 3 efforts are concentrating on reducing sulfur less
than 30 parts per million.
So the NACA report is more close, the stated report of what
EPA is planning to do. API study made a lot of assumptions of
actions that EPA is going to take as part of Tier 3, but that
is not accurate.
Ms. Woolsey. Thank you.
Mr. Greco. Can I respond to that?
Ms. Woolsey. My time is up. I would be glad to have them
respond. Mr. Chairman, it is up to you.
Chairman Harris. Sure, Mr. Greco.
Mr. Greco. Thank you. We made the best assumptions we could
at the time. It has been a shifting field with EPA as to what
this target would be. We expect about a 60-day comment period.
That is probably not sufficient time for us to do a full-blown
study when we get the proposal, which is why we are asking for
the study now to see the data and then go to a rulemaking.
Chairman Harris. Thank you. I now recognize the gentleman
from New York, Mr. Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Williams, in your
written testimony you applaud your industry for its significant
emissions reductions through compliance with Tier 2 standards,
which were responsible for a 90 percent reduction in sulfur
emissions.
You also claimed no further regulation of sulfur content is
necessary. It is widely known that there is a harmful effect
from sulfur emissions that is posed to public health. In fact,
the National Association of Clean Air Agencies, the Northeast
States for Coordinate Air Use Management, and the Ozone
Transport Commission have all come forward in support of Tier
through regulations, noting the significant impact reduced
sulfur emissions have on public health.
So, Mr. Chair, with your permission I would like to ask
unanimous consent to submit for the record statements from
these three organizations that I just mentioned.
Chairman Harris. Could we see them? I don't think they have
been shared with the Majority staff.
Mr. Tonko. Certainly.
Chairman Harris. If you can just keep them----
Mr. Tonko. Okay.
Chairman Harris [continuing]. I will rule on that.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Thank you. The goal of the yet-to-be-
proposed Tier 3 standards is to reduce hazardous pollutants in
order to help States and local air quality agencies reach the
2008 National Ambient Air Quality Standards requirements. It
seems to me that we have the technology to further reduce these
toxic pollutants and achieve our current goals which will help
reduce respiratory infections and other respiratory illnesses.
So, Mr. Williams, in your testimony you state that there is
a minimum benefit to reducing the already minimal amount of
sulfur emissions from cars. Why do you claim there will be
minimal benefit to reducing sulfur?
Mr. Williams. Well, we are already going to continue
getting reductions based on the Tier 2 standards that, again,
were implemented in 2004 and 2007. In fact, you mentioned the
2008 ozone NAAQS. The RIA itself doesn't explicitly say that
Tier 3 for fuels is needed. It does talk about some catalyst
technology improvements that could be a potential; however, I
believe there are about eight new counties that are going to be
out of attainment with the 2008 ozone NAAQS standard, and those
counties are actually going to come into attainment with the
Tier 2 standards before Tier 3 would even be implemented from
what we preliminarily heard from EPA.
And, again, there are--you wanted to discuss the vehicles
earlier. There are Tier 3-capable vehicles that can run on Tier
2.
So you continue to see sulfur reductions. It is just a
matter of we have gone from 300 down to 30 PPM and now we are
looking to go down to 10, and we didn't go to 30 too long ago.
Getting back to one of the other points of my testimony, how do
all these things really interact with, you know, EPA in another
letter mentioned that the Renewable Fuels Standard could
actually see some potential emissions increases, and one of the
reasons for the anti-backsliding study and the Energy
Independence and Security Act was to assess that, and it was
pretty clear that Congress said you do the 2008 anti-
backsliding study and then get an assessment of what is going
to happen to the fuel supply and then what measures might be
necessary to do any additional work.
Now we are being told that the anti-backsliding study is
going to come out at the same time as the Tier 3 regulations.
So the reaction is happening before there is anything to really
react to and we have a full understanding of the consequences.
Mr. Tonko. Ms. Oge, do you have any comments on this
regard?
Ms. Oge. Thank you. We--scientifically it is proven that
sulfur poisons catalysts. It is like back in the '70s when we
had to remove lead to enable the three-way catalyst.
So it is not a secret that the higher the sulfur level, the
more it impacts the effectiveness of a catalyst. California has
10 parts per million sulfur, Europe, Japan, other countries. We
have the most advanced automotive technologies. We need a
better quality for our fuel to enable the catalyst to perform
to the best potential for those precious metals.
On the other hand, there is extensive data to show that
today's cars will benefit by having low sulfur, by reducing
nitrogen oxides. As a result, cleaner air for 130 million
people that breathe in healthy air in this country.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. When it comes to reducing NAAQS, what
source, in your opinion, Ms. Oge, is the most cost effective?
Ms. Oge. We believe that efforts that we are undertaking,
the Tier 3 efforts, which is to reduce NAAQS, emissions, and
hydrocarbons from tailpipe emissions and from cars, combining
it with low sulfur level, would provide some of the cost-
effective strategies for local and State governments to address
ozone air pollution.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. I yield back to Mr. Chair.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. I would also like to
take this opportunity to ask you--and by the way, we will enter
those--there is no objection, so we will enter them.
[The information may be found in Appendix 2.]
Chairman Harris. I would like to take this opportunity to
ask unanimous consent to add a few items into the record as
well. These items are in the public domain and have been shared
with the minority. The executive summary of the National
Research Council's report, Renewable Fuel Standard Potential
Economic and Environmental Affects on U.S. Biofuel policy, the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory and Mercury Marine report,
high ethanol fuel endurance, the study of the effects of
running gasoline with 15 percent ethanol concentration and
current production outboard four-stroke engines and
conventional two-stroke outboard engines, the executive summary
of the Baker and O'Brien study, potential supply and cost
impacts of lower sulfur, lower RVP gasoline, responses
requested by Vice Chairman Sensenbrenner on warranty and
liability concerns about E15 which were sent by BMW Chrysler
Ford GM, Honda, Hyundai, Kia, Mazda, Mercedes, Nissan, Subaru,
Toyota, Volkswagon, Volvo, Briggs and Stratton and Mercury
Marine, statements objecting to EPA's granting of a partial
waiver for E15 from the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers
and the Association of Global Auto makers, and a letter send by
the Chairman of the Full Committee to Administrator Jackson
about Tier 3 and EPA's responses.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information may be found in Appendix 2.]
Chairman Harris. I thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and the Members for their questions. We are going to
get out on time despite a late start.
The Members of the Subcommittee may have additional
questions for the witnesses, and we ask, and we will ask you to
respond to those in writing. Ms. Oge, I am going to have to ask
you specifically; the EPA is particularly unforthcoming with
answers. Other EPA witnesses. So I hope you break the mold on
that. I will ask you to respond to the questions in writing.
The record will remain open for two weeks for additional
comments from Members.
The witnesses are excused, and this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:57 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Mr. Brendan Williams, Senior Director of Advocacy,
National Petrochemical and Refiners' Association

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

Q1.  In your testimony, you state that NPRA believes that a
comprehensive cost-benefit analysis would be in the national interest.
This Congress passed the TRAIN Act to require such an analysis on the
stationary source regulation. Do you envision similar legislation for
mobile source regulation? Or should the cost-benefit of the stationary
regulation include existing and potential regulation on mobile sources
as well?

A1.  Comprehensive cost-benefit analysis on both stationary and mobile
source regulations is in the best interest of the Nation. We understand
that federal and State regulators have a hard time balancing the need
for effective regulation and economic development. However, the size,
scope, and cumulative burden of current and impending regulatory
activity is creating uncertainty and conflicts that burden the domestic
fuel supply. Legislation like the TRAIN Act is a significant step
forward to ensure the regulatory blizzard that fuel producers are
facing does not put them out of business.
Many mobile source regulations facing fuel producers need to be
examined because of their tremendous cost, conflicts with other
regulations, and their potential to negatively impact the economy.
Considering both mobile and stationary sources together in cost benefit
analysis is critical, because mobile source regulations can create
conflicts with stationary source regulations. As discussed in my
testimony, such is the case with EPA's Tier 3 gasoline regulations,
which would require new energy-intensive processes that could lead to
more greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and come in conflict with EPA's GHG
regulations under the Clean Air Act. In addition, EPA is moving forward
with the Tier 3 rulemaking without conducting the anti-backsliding
study required in section 209 of the Energy Independence and Security
Act of 2007 (EISA 2007). Not only does this move contradict
congressional intent, but it could lead to additional regulatory
conflicts if the study indicates the RFS could complicate Tier 3 in
some manner (or vice versa). In September, the House passed the
Kinzinger-Gonzalez Amendment to the TRAIN Act 269-145. The amendment
would ensure the economic and jobs impacts of EPA's Tier 3 regulations
are thoroughly analyzed and reviewed. NPRA supported this important
amendment.

Q2.  How has the inclusion of mandated volumes of com ethanol impacted
our reliance on foreign oil? What effect will cellulosic ethanol
production have on fossil fuel use?

A2.  The inclusion of mandated volumes of corn ethanol has not reduced
U.S. reliance on foreign oil. While such a goal may have been the law's
intent, the result has been negligible. Refineries still need crude oil
to produce petroleum products that are not affected by corn ethanol,
such as home heating oil, diesel, and jet fuel.
Ethanol was used in the fuel supply before the RFS2 mandate because
it is a source of octane. Ethanol currently makes up slightly less than
10 percent of the domestic gasoline supply. It has lower energy content
than gasoline, resulting in slightly lower fuel economy. It will be
extremely difficult to blend more than 10 percent ethanol into the fuel
supply given extensive issues that need to be addressed to overcome the
``blendwall'' (e.g., the fact that vehicles and infrastructure handling
the existing fuel supply are not equipped to run on gasoline containing
more than 10 percent ethanol).
It is premature to speculate on the effect of cellulosic biofuels.
Large volumes of these fuels were mandated in EISA 2007. The law
required the use of 100 million gallons of cellulosic biofuels in 2010
and 250 million gallons in 2011. Yet despite these mandates, no
cellulosic biofuels have been produced to date.

Q3.  In addition to the litany of mobile source regulations facing your
industry, it is my understanding that President Obama has endorsed a
low carbon fuel standard modeled after the one in California. What
would be the impacts of a national low carbon fuel standard?

A3.  A national LCFS would essentially create a cap-and-tradelike
system for the fuel supply, which would likely result in significant
increases in fuel costs and threaten the availability of supply around
the U.S. A recent study by Charles River Associates (CRA) shows that a
national LCFS would raise the cost of transportation fuels by up to 80
percent within five years and up to 170 percent within 10 years. Along
with the significant increase in transportation costs, the study shows
a national LCFS policy could lead to closures of upwards of 50 U.S.
refineries.
Furthermore, a national LCFS not only impacts the fuel supply, but
the economy as a whole, significantly reducing consumer purchasing
power and the fiscal health of the U.S. The CRA study indicates a
national LCFS would result in an estimated 2.3 million to 4.5 million
net American jobs lost by 2025 from baseline levels, with 1.5 million
losses from the manufacturing sector alone. This study also indicates
that the average American household's annual purchasing power would be
reduced between $1,400 and $2,400 by 2025 relative to 2010 levels. In
addition, studies conclude a national LCFS would lead to a decline in
U.S. Gross Domestic Product of two to three percent--or $410 billion to
$750 billion--by 2025.

Q4.  When the U.S. went from leaded to unleaded gasoline, EPA mandated
fuel nozzles for leaded gasoline differ from those for dispensing
unleaded gasoline. Despite this difference, there was a 20 percent
incidence of misfueling. Given this historical figure, what is your
opinion of the chance of misfueling with E15 for on-road legacy
vehicles--pre-2001--and off-road engines if the only safeguard is a
misfueling label?

A4.  NPRA cannot speculate on the likelihood of misfueling with the
only safeguard being the misfueling label. However, NPRA has
significant concerns about E15 being sold under the same canopy as
regular gasoline, as this could result in a greater chance of
misfueling. In June 2011, EPA introduced an orange and black label to
make drivers aware of the change to prevent misfueling. We do not feel
that the label is sufficient to prevent consumers from misfueling.
EPA's decisions in November of 2010 and January 2011 to grant a
partial waiver for gasoline containing 15 percent ethanol, known as
E15, to be sold in the marketplace for cars and light trucks produced
in model year 2001 or newer are illegal. EPA does not have the
authority to grant a partial waiver, and this product will most likely
create significant problems in the marketplace, including enhancing the
probability of misfueling.
Several studies show that misfueling with gasoline blends
containing more than 10 percent ethanol can result in engine damage for
not only cars and light trucks, but also non-road engines, such as
lawnmowers and boats. For example, two recent studies by the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory tested the effects of E15 on marine engines
and found E15 resulted in problems with engine performance and
durability, increased fuel consumption, and increased nitrogen oxide
emissions. Furthermore, increased ethanol blends could damage cars'
catalytic converters, which were installed to reduce emissions, and its
corrosive nature could damages fuel tanks and fuel dispensing
equipment, putting people at greater risk. Even the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) released a report stating that E15 needs
further studies due to the potential negative impacts it would have to
consumers.

Questions Submitted by Ranking Member Brad Miller

Q1.  Please provide your name and employment organization(s).

A1.  Brendan Williams. National Pertochemical & Refiners Association.

Q2.  Are you an officer or employee of, or otherwise compensated by,
any other organizations(s) that may have an interest in the topic of
this hearing?

A2.  Yes.

Q3.  If the answer to question 2 is ``yes,'' please specify the
organization(s) and the nature of your relationship with the
organization(s).

A3.  NPRA represents virtually every refinery and petrochemical
facility in the U.S., as well as many companies who have a relationship
with the refining and petrochemical industries, but do not actually
possess refineries or petrochemical facilities. A full list of NPRA
members can be found on our Web site: www.npra.org.

Q4.  in the last three calendar years, including this one, have you
been a registered lobbyist?

A4.  Yes.

Q5.  If the answer to question 3 is ``yes,'' please list all of your
client(s) that may have an interest in the subject matter of this
hearing, and the dates between which you represented that client or
those clients.

A5.  For a list of all members of NPRA, please visit www.npra.org. I
have been with NPRA since 2007.

Q6.  if you have worked as an attorney, contractor, consultant, paid
analyst, or in any other professional services capacity, please provide
a list of all of your firm's clients who you know to have an interest
in the subject matter of this hearing. These should be clients that you
have personally worked with in the past three calendar years (including
the present year). Provide the name of the client, the matter on which
you worked, and the date range of that work. If there was a
deliverable, please describe the product.

A6.  N/A.

Q7.  Please provide a list of all publications on which you have
received an author or coauthor credit relevant to the subject of this
hearing. If the list is extensive, the 10 most recent publications
would be sufficient.

A7.  N/A.
Responses by Dr. Ingrid Burke, Director of the Haub School and
Ruckelshaus Institute of Environment and National Resources, University
of Wyoming,
Co-Chair, National Research Council Committee on Economic and
Environmental Impacts of Increasing Biofuels Production

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

Q1.  How has increased ethanol production had an effect on the number
of acres dedicated to corn production in the U.S.? How has our soil,
water, and wildlife habitat been affected as a result?

A1.  Responses are based on the content of the report NRC report
Renewable Fuel Standard. Potential Economic and Environmental Effects
of U.S. Biofuel Policy with references to specific pages.
The percent of U.S. corn production used for fuel ethanol has been
increasing since 2001 (Figure 2-3 on p. 37). USDA-ERS data indicate
that planted acreage for corn has increased in this decade compared to
the last one.
As corn acreage increases, greater nitrogen fertilizer is applied
to achieve desired yields. Thus, there is a tendency for greater runoff
and loadings to streams and rivers from increased corn production (p.
234), thereby decreasing water quality. In fact, a recent analysis of
the National Water Quality Assessment programs found that since 1980
most of the drainages associated with the Mississippi River increased
in flow-normalized concentration and flux of nitrate. Many studies
relate the hypoxic area in July to August to the nitrogen loading
emanating from the Mississippi River and Atchafalaya River from May to
June, suggesting that increases in nitrogen runoff serve to increase
gulf hypoxia (p. 232).
The effect of increasing corn production in the United States on
soil and biodiversity is largely site specific and depends on the
condition of the land before it was put into corn production. If the
land was already in annual crop production, then the conversion to corn
production might not have a large additional effect on soil and
biodiversity. In contrast, if the expanded production involves removing
perennial vegetation on a piece of land and replacing it with corn,
then the land conversion results in losses of major stores of soil
carbon and disrupts the future potential for storing carbon in soil (p.
252). The land conversion from perennial vegetation to corn has also
been shown to be correlated with reduced grassland bird diversity and
population. Likewise, taking land from the Conservation Reserve Program
(CRP) out of retirement to grow corn for ethanol raises similar soil
quality and biodiversity concerns (p. 254).

Q2.  Will second generation bioenergy crops like switchgrass and
Miscanthus use more or less water than current crops like corn and
soybeans? Also, will they use more or less fertilizers and pesticides?

A2.  Whether switchgrass and Miscanthus use more water than corn and
soybean largely depends on where the crops are grown and whether they
are irrigated (pp. 244 and 248). Studies have shown that switchgrass
and Miscanthus yield increases with precipitation and irrigation
(Heaton et al., 2004; Robins, 2010). Thus, if the crops are grown in
dry areas and are irrigated to enhance yield, then switchgrass or
Miscanthus would not necessarily use less water than corn.
The average nitrogen fertilization rate for corn is 138 lbs/acre
(p. 207). The reported nitrogen fertilizer use ranges from 50 to 100
lbs/acre for Miscanthus and from 0 to 200 lbs/acre for switchgrass (p.
208). Although Miscanthus and switchgrass have the potential to use
less nitrogen fertilizer than corn, it largely depends on the condition
of the land on which the crops are grown and the management decisions
that individual land operators make.
Severe pest and disease outbreaks have not been reported outside
the tropics for switchgrass and Miscanthus (p. 109). They are likely to
use less pesticides than corn and soybean. However, the pest and
disease dynamics could change if cultivation of switchgrass and
Miscanthus increases and become more intensive to achieve desired
yields.

Q3.  Why did the NRC panel find that the RFS ``may be an ineffective
policy for reducing global greenhousegas emissions''?

A3.  Processes that affect GHG emissions of biofuels include land-use
and land-cover changes, CO
2
storage in biomass during growth
and emissions from fossil fuel combustion in the manufacturing,
transport, and application of agricultural inputs, from fermentation to
ethanol, and from tailpipe emissions (p. 5). Some of those processes
that affect GHG emissions are highly variable, even within one given
type of biofuel. For example, GHG emissions are strongly influenced by
whether a biorefinery uses fossil fuel or bioelectricity, or whether
any direct or indirect land-use changes were incurred for feedstock
production. The published estimates of life-cycle greenhouse gas
emissions of corn-grain ethanol vary from 52-177 g CO
2
eq
per MJ (p. 220). The range of values illustrates how changes or
variations in processes (for example, fossil fuel vs. bioelectricity
use, coproduct production, amount of fertilizer input, or extent of
indirect land-use change) can result in different GHG emissions for the
same fuel type.
If no direct or indirect land-use or land-cover changes are
incurred, biofuels tend to have lower life-cycle GHG emissions than
petroleum-based fuels. Feedstocks such as crop and forest residues and
municipal solid wastes incur little or no direct and indirect land-use
or land-cover changes; therefore, cellulosic biofuels made from those
feedstocks are more likely to reduce GHG emissions when care is taken
to maintain land productivity and soil carbon storage.
Other cellulosic feedstocks such as switchgrass and Miscanthus can
contribute to carbon storage in soil, particularly if they are planted
on land with low carbon content. For example, planting perennial
bioenergy crops in place of annual crops could potentially enhance
carbon storage in that site. However, planting switchgrass and
Miscanthus on existing cropland can trigger indirect land-use changes
elsewhere that can result in large GHG emissions. Although RFS2 can
levy restrictions to discourage bioenergy feedstock producers from
land-clearing or land-cover change in the United States that would
result in net GHG emissions, the policy cannot prevent indirect land-
use changes nor can it control such land-use changes outside the United
States. Therefore, the extent to which RFS2 contributes to lowering
global GHG emissions is uncertain.

Q4.  Can you describe the consensus process used by the NRC panel in
reaching their conclusions? Did any of the individual members disagree
with the findings?

A4.  Each member acts in an individual capacity and brings a unique
expertise to the committee. Committee members are asked to consider
respectfully the viewpoints of other members, to reflect their own
views rather than be a representative of any organization, and to base
their scientific findings and conclusions on the evidence. The
committee deliberates in meetings to develop draft findings and
conclusions.
Once the study committee has a consensus draft of its report, it is
subject to an independent peer review overseen by Academy members on
the Report Review Committee. The peer review process typically
strengthens the reports significantly, as the Academy will not issue a
report until it is satisfied that the questions given to the study
committee have been adequately addressed (and that the study committee
did not go beyond its task to address other questions), that the
conclusions made in the report are well supported, and that all
important issues raised in the review have been addressed.
Study committee members are asked to sign off on the final draft of
the report. Each committee member has the right to issue a dissenting
opinion to the report if he or she disagrees with the consensus of the
other members.
Thus, NRC reports not only represent the consensus views of the
authoring study committee, but also have the institutional endorsement
of the National Academies (http://www.nationalacademies.org/
studyprocess/index.html).
All committee members agreed to the content and signed off on the
report Renewable Fuel Standard: Potential Economic and Environmental
Effects of U.S. Biofuel Policy. No dissenting opinions to the report
were registered

REFERENCES

Heaton, E., T. Voigt, and S.P. Long. 2004. A quantitative review
comparing the yields of two candidate C4 perennial biomass crops in
relation to nitrogen, temperature and water. Biomass and Bioenergy
27(1):21-30.

Robins, J.G. 2010. Cool-season grasses produce more total biomass
across the growing season than do warm-season grasses when managed with
an applied irrigation gradient. Biomass and Bioenergy 34(4):500-505.

Questions Submitted by Ranking Member Brad Miller

Q1.  As I understand it, your study assumes no further technology
advances for biofuels. Would you characterize this as a reasonable
assumption given the current state of the biofuels industry? Why did
the NRC choose to make this assumption?

A1.  Response is based on the content of the NRC report Renewable Fuel
Standard. Potential Economic and Environmental Effects of U.S. Biofuel
Policy with reference to a specific page and appendix.
The NRC study does not assume ``no further advances for biofuels.''
The committee performed a ``sensitivity analysis'' to account for
technology advances for conversion of biomass to fuels (p. 109). Based
on an exhaustive review of the literature (Appendix M), the committee
concluded that the current and near future technologies for cellulosic
biofuels could likely achieve a conversion yield of 70 gallons of
ethanol equivalent for each dry ton of biomass. The committee ran the
BioBreakeven model with that conversion yield and then performed the
same analysis with a conversion yield of 80 gallons of ethanol
equivalent per dry ton of biomass to account for any technology
advancements between now and 2022.

Q2.  Please provide your name and employing organization(s).

A2.  Ingrid Burke; University of Wyoming.

Q3.  Are you an officer or employee of, or otherwise compensated by,
any other organization(s) that many have an interest in the topic of
this hearing?

A3.  No.

Q4.  In the last three calendar years, including this one, have you
been a registered lobbyist?

A4.  No.

Q5.  If you have worked as an attorney, contractor, consultant, paid
analyst, or in any other professional services capacity, please provide
a list of all of your firm's clients who you know to have an interest
in the subject matter of this hearing. These should be clients that you
have personally worked with in the last three calendar years (including
the present year). Provide the name of the client, the matter on which
you worked and the date range of that work. If there was a deliverable,
please describe that product.

A5.  None.

Q6.  Please provide a list of all publications on which you have
received an author or coauthor credit relevant to the subject of this
hearing. If the list is extensive, the 10 most recent publications will
be sufficient.

A6.  List as follows:
Evans, S.E., Byrne, K.M., W.K. Lauenroth, and I.C. Burke. Long-term
drought reduces the dominant species and increases ruderals in a
semiarid steppe. In press, Journal of Ecology.

Evans, S.E., I.C. Burke, and W.K. Lauenroth (2011), Controls on
soil organic carbon and nitrogen in Inner Mongolia, China: A cross-
continental comparison of temperate grasslands, Global Biogeochem.
Cycles, 25, GB3006, doi:10.1029/2010GB003945.

Gathany, M. and I.C. Burke. 2011. Post-fire soil fluxes of
CO
2
, CH
2
, and N
2
O along the Colorado
Front Range. International Journal of Wildland Fire, in press.

Bontti, E.E., I.C. Burke, and W.K. Lauenroth. 2011. Nitrogen
partitioning between microbes and plants in the shortgrass steppe.
Plant and Soil, in press.

McHale, M.R., E.G. McPherson, I.C. Burke. 2007. The potential of
urban tree plantings to be cost effective in carbon credit markets.
Urban Forestry and Urban Greening 6:49-60.

Currie, W.S., M.E. Harmon, I.C. Burke, S.C. Hart, W.J. Parton, and
W. Silver. 2010. Cross-biome transplants of plant litter show
decomposition models extend to a broader climatic range but low
predictability at the decadal time scale. Global Change Biology 16:
1744-1761.

Munson, S.M., T.J. Benton, W.K. Lauenroth, and I.C. Burke. 2010.
Soil carbon flux following pulse precipitation events in the shortgrass
steppe. Ecological Research, 25: 205-211.

McCulley, R.L., I.C. Burke, and W.K. Lauenroth. 2009. Conservation
of nitrogen increases with precipitation across a major grassland
gradient in the central Great Plains of North America. Oecologia
159(3):571-581.

Burke, I.C., W.K. Lauenroth, G. Cunfer, J.E. Barrett, A.R. Mosier,
and P. Lowe. 2002. Nitrogen in the central grasslands region of the
United States. BioScience 52(9):813-823.

Burke, I.C., W.K. Lauenroth, and D.G. Milchunas. 1997.
Biogeochemistry of managed grasslands in the Central Grasslands of the
U.S. Pages 85-102. In Paul, E. and K. Paustian, eds. Organic matter in
U.S. agroecosystems. Lewis Publishers.
Responses by Ms. Margo T. Oge,
Director of the Office of Transportation and Air Quality, EPA

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

Q1.  Why did EPA only choose to require service stations to label E15
but not other gasoline ethanol blends like E10, E85, or other mid-level
ethanol blends?

A1.  As part of the E15 Misfueling Mitigation Rule, EPA proposed to
label E15 and sought comment about whether to also label E10. Most
commenters stated that there is no need to label E10 fuel dispensers.
Since E10 is currently prevalent in the marketplace (over 90 percent of
the market) and already familiar to consumers, EPA concluded that E10
labels are not needed to minimize misfueling with E15 and that the E15
label contains the information needed to steer consumers to the fuel
appropriate for their vehicles. EPA also noted that adding an EPA label
to E10 fuel dispensers may confuse consumers since most States already
require labels for E10 fuel dispensers.
EPA also sought comment about whether to require labels for E85 and
other mid-level ethanol blends. Public comments were split on that
issue. The Agency decided not to require labels for those fuel
dispensers because the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) already requires
labels for pumps dispensing E85 and other alternative fuels, and the
FTC is considering further labeling requirements for E85 and mid-level
ethanol blends. EPA also observed that most E85 and mid-level ethanol
blend dispensers already have signage that makes clear that they are
appropriate only for flexible-fueled vehicles. In sum, EPA concluded
that it was not appropriate to adopt labeling requirements for blends
other than E15 at this time.

Q2.  Why did EPA backpedal on the content and language on the warning
label from the initial proposal to the final label that was announced
in June?

A2.  EPA adopted a final E15 pump label that reflects many commenters'
suggestions and the Agency's consultation with consumer labeling
experts at the FTC. The Agency determined that the final label
effectively provides consumers with the key information they need to
avoid using E15 in vehicles not covered by the partial waiver decisions
without unduly alarming them. FTC experts advised that stronger warning
language might result in consumers avoiding use of E15 in vehicles for
which the fuel is appropriate under the waivers (i.e., MY2001) and
newer light-duty vehicles).

Q3.  Since 14 automakers wrote to Representative Sensenbrenner saying
that their warranties will not cover E15, who will be at fault when a
motorist misfuels?

A3.  EPA cannot speak for auto manufacturers as to whether
manufacturers' product warranties will cover the costs of any problems
that result if a motorist misfuels. EPA's waiver decisions and labeling
rule do not change the terms of manufacturers' warranty provisions.
Under EPA's regulations governing emissions warranties, manufacturers
may condition their emissions warranties on use of a particular fuel so
long as the fuel is broadly available, and may deny an emissions
warranty claim if use of a different fuel causes the problem. EPA does
not have jurisdiction over other warranties that manufacturers may
provide. However, manufacturers have a strong incentive to work with
their customers to solve problems.
EPA believes that the misfueling mitigation measures the Agency has
established will minimize the potential for misfueling. EPA also plans
to work with stakeholders to monitor the entry of E15 into the
marketplace and the effectiveness of the required misfueling mitigation
measures so that any issues that develop may be addressed on a timely
basis. In addition, representatives of ethanol producers are currently
working with automakers, boat manufacturers, EPA, and others to develop
public education materials that will provide consumers with additional
information to help them make appropriate fuel choices for their
vehicles and gasoline-fueled equipment.

Q4.  When does EPA plan to register E15? What differences did EPA find
between E10 and E15?

A4.  The timing of registration depends on the actions of E15
manufacturers. Under the Clean Air Act, every fuel manufacturer that
intends to introduce E15 must first register the fuel with EPA just as
they need to register E10 fuels. To meet registration requirements,
fuel manufacturers must submit an application that includes emission
and health effects information as well as company-specific information.
Last year, the Renewable Fuels Association and Growth Energy
submitted information and analysis for meeting the emissions and health
information requirements for registering E15. The Agency reviewed the
information and identified a few gaps that the two associations then
worked to fill. They made their final submission last month, and the
Agency subsequently issued an evaluation document that finds that the
submission would satisfy the emissions and health effects information
requirements for a registration application for E15. The final
submission and evaluation document considers the differences between
E10 and E15.
As noted above, each E15 fuel manufacturer must register the fuel,
and a complete registration application includes more than emissions
and health effects information. Since EPA has evaluated the final RFA
and Growth Energy submission, fuel manufacturers may choose to rely on
that information to complete their applications, but they must also
provide company-specific information. We review and, as appropriate,
approve complete applications as they are received. As of April 2, we
have approved 24 applications for ethanol for use in E15.
It is also important to note that, prior to marketing E15, there
are other requirements under the E15 partial waivers that must be
satisfied. These include submission, EPA approval, and implementation
of a misfueling mitigation plan and a survey plan for reviewing
implementation of labeling and other E15-related requirements. State
and local fuel quality, safety, and other regulations may also apply.

Q5.  E15 is not a legal fuel until it is registered with EPA. EPA
indicates they have received an application for registration. Can you
identify a timeline for making a decision to approve or not approve the
fuel?

A5.  As of March 16, 2012, EPA has received 18 applications to register
ethanol for use in making E15. EPA's practice for all fuel registration
applications is to review and act on them in the order they are
received.

Q6.  As part of the Tier 3 rulemaking later this year, will EPA propose
to change the current certification fuel from E0 (e-zero) to E15? If
this has not been determined yet, what factors will EPA consider in
making this decision?

A6.  As we look to set new vehicle emission standards, we are also
considering changes to the test fuel used to certify them. The current
test fuel is E0 and is no longer representative of in-use gasoline. We
will be considering all the properties of gasoline, including the
ethanol content that is expected to reflect in-use gasoline during and
after the implementation time frame of the Tier 3 emission standards.

Q7.  EPA completed consultations with a Small Business Advocacy Review
Panel about the upcoming Tier 3 regulations on October 14. Why was this
review panel necessary, what concerns were raised by the small
businesses, and what changes has the Agency made to the proposal in
light of those concerns?

A7.  The Regulatory Flexibility Act, as amended by the Small Business
Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act, requires that the Agency convene a
review panel for any rule subject to notice-and-comment rulemaking
requirements that may have a significant impact on a substantial number
of small entities. As we began the rulemaking process, we could not be
certain whether the rulemaking would have a significant impact on a
substantial number of small entities, so we decided to convene a SBAR
Panel for the Tier 3 rulemaking. As we continued to develop the
proposal, the Panel process enabled us to receive the views and
recommendations of the Panel and small entity representatives. We are
using this input and insights gained through the Panel process as well
as prior Panels that we have convened to design the proposal from the
outset in a way that is responsive to the concerns of small businesses.
We have convened such a Panel in many of our major rules, and this has
typically led to our providing flexibility for small entities, such as
providing additional time to comply with the standards.

Q8a-b.  EPA stated that it intends to publish the Tier 3 Proposed Rule
in December 2011. EPA has also stated this rule will include regulatory
streamlining provisions to satisfy the President's July 11th Executive
Order. (a) If the Proposed Rule is delayed beyond the end of the year
for reasons unrelated to the streamlining provision, would EPA still
include these streamlining provisions in the proposal? (b) Would EPA
drop these important streamlining changes in order to meet the self-
imposed December deadline?

A8a-b.  The streamlining provision will be included in the Tier 3
proposal, which clearly has been delayed beyond December of 2011. We
are continually involved in a process of reviewing and updating our
existing regulations to consider new information and to respond to
changing circumstances. Sometimes these regulatory updates occur
through stand-alone rulemakings, and sometimes for efficiency we
include them with other major rulemakings, such as the Tier 3 rule. As
we began the Tier 3 rulemaking process, we sought input from industry
not only on potential Tier 3 vehicle emission and fuel standards, but
also on aspects of our current regulations that could benefit from
technical corrections, clarifications, and streamlining. The oil and
auto industries both responded with a number of items that were
candidates for updating. We ourselves identified a number of other
areas. We are committed to following through with streamlining
provisions as part of the Tier 3 proposal.

Q9.  EPA has stated it has data that demonstrates a reduction in sulfur
in gasoline from 30 ppm to 10 ppm will result in substantive reductions
in nitrogen oxide emissions and decreased ozone formation. Yet, EPA has
not provided data to support this position. Please produce the evidence
to show that reductions in sulfur from 30 ppm to 10 ppm will result in
substantive reductions in nitrogen oxides and atmospheric ozone
formation.

A9.  There is a large body of public literature on research which has
shown significant impacts of gasoline sulfur on vehicle emissions. This
will be included in the docket at the time of the Tier 3 proposal,
along with our own emission testing and inventory and air quality
modeling to support the potential Tier 3 sulfur standards.

Q10.  Mr. Hilbert's testimony detailed the results of the DOE-funded
study on the impacts of E15 on marine engines, essentially finding that
E15 will severely damage if not destroy these engines. What is your
message to the millions of boat owners that now risk severe engine
damamge (and potentially safety issues) as a result of running on E15?
And is EPA doing anything beyond the labeling mandate to assist boat
owners and others at risk from misfueling?

A10.  Based on our engineering assessment that marine and other nonroad
engines, vehicles, and equipment (nonroad products) are generally
equipped with less sophisticated emission controls that may not
accommodate E15, EPA denied the waiver for all of those nonroad
products, as well as for all motorcycles and heavy-duty gasoline-fueled
engines and vehicles. Thus, E15 is not approved for use in these
engines and vehicles. EPA's assessment was confirmed for marine engines
by the recent report you cite from the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory. The NREL study was conducted on an engine durability cycle
designed to stress engines, and the engines used elevated ethanol
levels throughout testing. We have no evidence that occasional
misfueling would destroy engines. The main concern is habitual
misfueling, most likely happening accidentally if there were no
labeling requirement.
The partial waivers EPA granted to E15 include conditions that
require E15 producers to implement misfueling mitigation measures, and
a final rule EPA issued in June requires that E15 producers and
marketers take several specific steps, including fuel pump labeling, to
help minimize the potential for misfueling. We based the misfueling
mitigation requirements on similar requirements that proved successful
in transitioning the marketplace to ultra-low sulfur diesel (ULSD)
fuel. In the E15 misfueling mitigation rulemaking, we also noted that
E15 marketers may supplement the required labels with signs or other
means of communication that provide additional information appropriate
for their customers. In addition, EPA described the importance of an
industry-led public outreach and education campaign like that
undertaken for ULSD. Development of an E15 outreach and education
campaign is now underway, and representatives of many stakeholders,
including marine engine manufacturers, are participating, as is EPA.
The Agency is committed to working with stakeholders to monitor the
entry of E15 into the marketplace and the effectiveness of misfueling
mitigation efforts so that we many address any issues that arise on a
timely basis.

Q11.  I understand that EPA will soon publish an annual rulemaking
which will include an assessment of the cellulosic industry prospects
for 2012. Will EPA's methodology in assessing the cellulosic standard
prospects for 2012 incorporate lessons learned from the previous year's
assessment in order to weed out the factors that caused EPA's
projections to significantly overestimate the amount actually produced?

A11.  The statute specifies that EPA is to project the volume of
cellulosic biofuel production, in consideration of the projections from
the Energy Information Administration, for the upcoming year and must
base the cellulosic biofuel standard on that projected volume if it is
less than the applicable volume set forth in the Act. Since these
evaluations are based on evolving information about emerging segments
of the biofuels industry, and may result in the applicable volumes
differing from those in the statute, we believe that it is appropriate
to establish the applicable volumes through a notice-and-comment
rulemaking process. In making this determination, EPA did consider all
relevant factors, including historical production trends.

Q12.  The National Academy of Sciences report entitled ``Renewable Fuel
Standard: Potential Economic and Environmental Effects of U.S. Biofuels
Policy'' found that the RFS standards are unlikely to be met absent a
surprise technological breakthrough or policy change. We are about to
enter a dramatic ramp-up in required biofuel production due to the
RFS--billions of additional gallons of biofuels that the National
Academy says we we won't be able to produce. Does EPA have the
authority to downwardly revise the overall RFS and will EPA exercise
that authority?

A12.  Under RFS2, if the projected volume of cellulosic biofuel
production is less than the applicable volume specified in the Act, EPA
must lower the applicable volume used to set the annual cellulosic
biofuel percentage standard to the projected volume of production. When
we lower the applicable volume of cellulosic biofuel in this manner, we
are also authorized to lower the applicable volumes of advanced biofuel
and/or total renewable fuel by the same or a lesser amount. EPA has
lowered the volumes of cellulosic the past two years, but has not
lowered the total advanced or total renewable fuel volume standards
because we anticipate that non-cellulosic advanced biofuels will be
available in adequate supply to meet these standards. If, however, in
the future, as the advanced volume mandate increases, our analysis
indicates insufficient volumes of non-cellulosic advanced biofuels will
be available, the Agency could exercise its authority to lower by the
same or a lesser amount the total advanced and total renewable fuel
volumes.
Further, section 211(o)(7) of the Clean Air Act allows the
Administrator of EPA, in consultation with the Secretaries of
Agriculture and Energy, to waive the requirements of the national
renewable fuel standard, in whole or in part, if the Administrator
determines, after pulic notice and opportunity for public comment, that
implementation of the RFS requirements would severely harm the economy
or environment of a State, a region, or the United States.

Questions Submitted by the Chairman of the House Committee

on Science, Space, and Technology, Representative Ralph M. Hall

Q1.  In response to my letter dated July 25, 2011, Assistant
Administrator Gina McCarthy stated that the Regulatory Impact Analysis
(RIA) to the 2008 Ozone NAAQS standard indicated that Tier 3 tailpipe
standards for new light-duty vehicles were needed to attain the
standard. However, the RIA only mentions improved catalyst designs to
achieve Tier 3 tailpipe standards for NO2 of 0.02 grams/mile, and it is
silent on the need for additional controls on fuel properties. Can EPA
cite where it states in the RIA that additional controls on fuel
properties are needed? Can EPA demonstrate that this standard cannot be
met with gasoline with an average sulfur content of 30 ppm, the current
standard?

A1.  The Ozone NAAQS RIA did not specifically mention sulfur control.
However, EPA has determined that in order for vehicle manufacturers to
achieve more stringent NO
2
tailpipe standards, they will
need to employ advanced catalyst designs. These advanced catalyst
designs are only effective when coupled with lower sulfur
concentrations in fuel. In developing the Tier 3 vehicle standards,
which will be based on improved catalyst designs, we have consistently
looked at the vehicle and its fuel from a systems approach, such that
the improved catalyst design and gasoline sulfur control are looked at
together. Any proposal to reduce sulfur levels will include a
demonstration of the need for lower-sulfur gasoline to enable the
vehicle tailpipe standards contemplated in the NAAQS RIA.

Q2.  In September, EPA published a preliminary review of recent ozone
data and identified eight new areas that would be in non-attainment
with the 2008 NAAQS standard. For the five areas outside California
that would presumably benefit from a lower sulfur standard, what
percent would reach attainment (due to the continued penetration of
vehicles certified to Tier 2, which is still being implemented) before
2017, when the Tier 3 standards would presumably begin to take effect?

A2.  EPA's preliminary review of recent ozone data, included in a
September 22, 2011, memo from Gina McCarthy to the EPA Regional Air
Division Directors, found that 52 areas monitor air quality that
exceeds the 2008 ozone NAAQS. According to the memo, EPA's modeling
indicates that approximately half of the 52 hypothetical nonattainment
areas would attain the NAAQS by 2015 as a result of rules already in
place. The memo goes on to say that Tier 3 vehicle and fuel standards,
as well as other stationary source rules under development, ``will
ensure steady forward progress to clean up the Nation's air and protect
the health of American families, while minimizing and in many cases
eliminating the need for States to use their scarce resources on local
actions.''

Q3a-c.  It has come to the Committee's attention that there is a
concern regarding certain blends of biodiesel, specifically, above five
percent or B5. There have been reports in some States of diesel
vehicles breaking down to blends of 11 percent or more. On the gasoline
side of the fuels equation, EPA establishes a certification fuel and
requires quality control standards. (a) Is there a similar
certification fuel for diesel? (b) What quality controls does EPA have
to ensure biodiesel meets appropriate specifications? (c) Since the use
of biodiesel is a federal mandate, why are the States the only ones
involved in ensuring the quality of biodiesel fuel?

A3a-c.  (a) Biodiesel (B100) for use in motor vehicles is required to
be registered under 40 CFR 79 as a diesel fuel. As part of
registration, in accordance with the Clean Air Act, diesel fuel is also
required to be ``substantially similar'' to the diesel fuel used to
certify vehicles to emissions standards, or the fuel must have received
a waiver approved under 211(f) of the Clean Air Act. However, we have
not defined ``substantially similar'' for diesel, so we rely on the
fuel meeting the ASTM D6751 standard for biodiesel or to be waived
under the authority in 211(f) before it can be registered. We believe
that biodiesel meeting ASTM D6751 is ``substantially similar'' to
diesel certification fuel.
(b) EPA requires the biodiesel manufacturer to present a
certificate of analysis showing that the biodiesel meets the industry
quality standard as noted above.
(c) EPA's Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance conducts
random and directed inspections of fuel production and dispensing
facilities TKTKTK for compliance with our requirements for renewable
fuels and gasoline and diesel fuel.

Questions Submitted by Representative Randy Neugebauer

Q1.  The refining industry is already heavily regulated. Additional
regulations, such as Tier 3, may cause some U.S. refineries to close.
Has EPA addressed this issue? What does EPA believe will happen to
gasoline supply in the case of U.S. refinery closures? How would higher
gasoline imports be helpful to achieve energy security?

A1.  There are many factors that contribute to the closure of
refineries over time. The Energy Information Administration (EIA) data
show that since 1982 there have been 154 net refinery closures as the
refining industry, like any other industry, has continued to undergo
the natural process of rationalization as it matures. Smaller, less
efficient facilities have been replaced by larger facilities. During
the period from 2003 to 2011, when the highway and Nonroad Ultra-Low
Sulfur Diesel programs, Tier 2 gasoline sulfur control, gasoline
benzene control, were all phasing in, EIA data posted on its Web site
show a net of just two closures of refineries that were producing
transportation fuels, far fewer than during any previous period. During
this same time, the average size of U.S. refineries increased from
113,000 barrels per day to 123,000 barrels per day, and total U.S.
refining capacity increased by six percent. In each and every
rulemaking, we have provided considerable lead time, phase-in
flexibility, and, as necessaary, case-by-case refinery economic
hardship relief to ensure our regulations were not causing refinery
closures. We have processed at least a dozen individual hardship
applications to date. During these hardship discussions, not one
company has ever said that they were closing because of our standards.
For these reasons, we are also confident that the Tier 3
regulations would not cause refinery closures. We are once again
developing the program with considerable lead time, phase-in
flexibility, and case-by-case hardship relief to minimize the impacts.
We are aware of the results of a study by Baker & O'Brien for API
suggesting the potential for four to seven refinery closures. However,
this study did not model the Tier 3 program, but rather fuel scenarios
from a previous Automobile Alliance study. Furthermore, a prior Baker &
O'Brien study for API for the ultra-low sulfur nonroad diesel proposal
back in 2003 contained similar dire projections of as many as 12
refinery closures and dramatic reductions in diesel fuel production,
which would result in a need to import 640,000 barrels per day of
diesel fuel. However, when we analyzed what actually transpired between
2005 and 2010 when the highway and nonroad diesel fuel programs phased
in, refineries did not close; diesel fuel and distillate production did
not decline. Some U.S refineries are competing favorably with the rest
of the world, although some refiners on the East Coast exposed to heavy
competition from product imports and from the Gulf Coast refiners have
recently closed.

Q2.  The EPA was required to conduct an anti-backsliding study by the
summer of 2009 to examine the potential adverse air quality impacts of
renewable fuel mandates. It is fairly clear that this report was
intended to precede additional regulations, as its findings will be
crucial to informing new regulatory decisions. However, the EPA has
said it will announce the details of the study along with your Tier 3
regulations. Why has the EPA ignored the Congressional intent for the
purpose and schedule of this study and subsequent regulations? How can
the Agency justify promulgating Tier 3 rules without first publishing
the anti-backsliding study?

A2.  The primary driver for the development of the Tier 3 vehicle and
fuel standards is the need for further control measures to help areas
that aren't meeting air quality standards to achieve and maintain them
and therefore protect public health. There are over 144 million people
living in areas that are exceeding these standards. The EPA is
developing Tier 3 standards for light-duty vehicles and their fuels
using its general authority under Clean Air Act sections 202(a) and
211(c). The Tier 3 standards under development are not intended to be
an anti-backsliding control strategy but instead are justified on their
own as an important strategy to address ozone and other air quality
problems.
We are also in the process of carrying out the anti-backsliding
study as required under Clean Air Act sections 211(q) and 211(v) to
assess the emission and air quality impacts resulting from the
increased renewable fuel volumes required by Congress. The anti-
backsliding study and Tier 3 overlap in some technical areas, as they
both consider the impacts of fuels and vehicles on emissions, and both
actions will utilize an assessment of how renewable fuels affect
vehicle emission. While they are designed for different purposes, this
technical overlap is why we are conducting the anti-backsliding study
in the same time frame as our Tier 3 proposal. However, the Agency
would need to move forward with Tier 3 standards with or without the
anti-backsliding study.

Q3.  Could you please detail options other than Tier 3 EPA assessed, if
any, that could result in meeting the 2009 Ozone National Ambient Air
Quality Standards (NAAQS)? Did EPA exhaust all other possiblities that
could help us meet those standards, such as vehicle catalyst
modifications?

A3.  The Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA) for the 2008 ozone NAAQS
modeled a variety of potential control measures that would help areas
attain the NAAQS, including controls on stationary, area, onroad mobile
and nonroad mobile sources. The Tier 3 vehicle standards represent the
``improved catalyst design'' that is discussed in that RIA. In the
analysis done for the RIA, all of these measures combined were
necessary to bring areas into attainment with the 2008 NAAQS.

Q4.  What is EPA's end goal with emissions? Do you believe that
emissions should ultimately be entirely eliminated? For example, should
sulfur levels reach zero parts per million? At what point are we at
final and acceptable levels of emissions?

A4.  EPA's goal, as established by the Clean Air Act, is for all
Americans to have air quality that meets health-based standards. The
Clean Air Act requires that EPA review the health-based air quality
standards (such as the ozone NAAQS) every five years to ensure that the
standards are requisite to protect the public health. Meeting the
health-based air quality standards requires a joint effort by the
States and EPA, through a combination of nationwide rules passed by EPA
and local rules passed by State and local air quality management
agencies.

Questions Submitted by Ranking Member Brad Miller

Q1.  Ms. Oge, my colleagues and I are very worried aobut the economic
crisis in the country. Mr. Greco and Mr. Williams both claim in their
testimony that oil refineries will have to close because of the not-
yet-proposed Tier 3 standard. The DOE study that Mr. Williams mentioned
in his testimony did note that the ``cost of compliance contributed to
economic stresses that resulted in the shutdown of 66 refineries from
1990 through 2010,'' but the report did not state that compliance costs
were the ``significant'' factor as Mr. Williams has stated. It seems to
me there are a number of factors that could have contributed to the
closure of refineries. What is your response to the statement by NPRA
that EPA's rules have been a significant factor in the closure of 66
refineries since 1990?

A1.  There are many factors that contribute to the closure of
refineries over time. The Energy Information Administration (EIA) data
show that since 1982 there have been 154 net refinery closures as the
refining industry, like any other industry, has continued to undergo
the natural process of rationalization as it matures. Smaller, less
efficient facilities have been replaced by larger facilities. During
the period of 2003 to 2011 when the Highway and Nonroad Ultra-Low
Sulfur Diesel programs, Tier 2 gasoline sulfur control, gasoline
benzene control, and the renewable fuel standards were all phasing in,
EIA data posted on its Web site shows a net of just two closures of
refineries that were producing transportation fuels, far fewer than
during any previous period. During this same time, the average size of
U.S. refineries increased from 113,000 barrels per day to 123,000
barrels per day, and total U.S. refining capacity increased by six
percent. In each and every rulemaking, EPA has provided considerable
lead time, phase-in flexibility, and (as necessary) case-by-case
refinery economic hardship relief to ensure our regulations were not
causing refinery closures. We have processed at least a dozen
individual hardship applications to date. During these hardship
discussions, not one company has ever said that they were closing
because of EPA standards.
For these reasons, we are also confident that the Tier 3
regulations, as well as the refinery sector rulemaking, will not cause
refinery closures. For the Tier 3 rule, we are once again developing
the program with considerable lead time, phase-in flexibility, and
case-by-case hardship relief to minimize the impacts. We are aware of
the results of a study by Baker & O'Brien for API suggesting the
potential for four to seven refinery closures. However, this study did
not model the Tier 3 program but rather fuel scenarios from a previous
Alliance study. Furthermore, a prior Baker & O'Brien study for API for
the ultra-low sulfur nonroad diesel proposal back in 2003 contained
similar dire projections of as many as 12 refinery closures and
dramatic reductions in diesel fuel production, which would result in a
need to import 640,000 barrels per day of diesel fuel. However, when we
analyzed what actually transpired between 2005 and 2010 when the
highway and nonroad diesel fuel programs phased in, refineries did not
close; diesel fuel and distillate production did not decline. Some U.S.
refineries are competing favorably with the rest of the world, although
some refiners on the East Coast exposed to heavy competition from
product imports and from Gulf Coast refiners have recently closed. For
the refinery sector rulemaking, we do not anticipate any refinery
closures as a result of stationary source regulations. In line with the
above discussion, refinery closures have resulted from such significant
drivers as changes in demand for refined petroleum products, the
addition of capacity in emerging markets, and the decrease in the price
of other fuels (i.e., natural gas), not from regulating fuel quality.

Q2.  When did EPA start considering Tier 3 standards, and why?

A2.  EPA is continuously assessing motor vehicle emissions and how they
affect air quality and public health, and also the development and
application of vehicle and emission control technologies. As part of
the regulatory impact analysis for the 2008 ozone NAAQS, we identified
tighter vehicle standards as a control measure that would help areas
attain the standard. We have been planning for such standards since
that time.
Emissions from motor vehicles and their fuels contribute to public
health issues that exist currently and are projected to continue in the
future. Motor vehicles are an important source of the compounds that
form ozone, particulate matter (PM), and nitrogen dioxide
(NO
2
). State and local areas need federal measures to reduce
these motor vehicle emissions in areas where these emissions are a
significant factor contributing to nonattainment of the health-based
air quality standards. As EPA is moving forward to implement the 2008
ozone standard, we project that about half of the expected 52
nonattainment areas will need additional emission reduction--either
from specific stationary sources of pollution or from motor vehicles--
in order to attain and maintain the public health standard.
Federal measures to reduce motor vehicle emissions are a cost-
effective strategy for attaining public health standards. As the States
have been telling us (e.g., the National Association of Clean Air
Agencies [NACAA] and the Northeast States for Coordinated Air Use
Managment [NESCAUM]), without new federal vehicle standards, areas may
need to adopt other controls on industrial sources or small businesses
that are more costly.

Q3.  Why was the National Association of Clean Air Agencies' (NACAA)
cost estimate for a potential Tier 3 fuels program so much lower than
API's estimate of costs of potential fuel controls? How do these
compare to what EPA is considering?

A3.  One of the primary reasons is that the NACAA cost estimate was
based on an analysis of the potential Tier 3 standards, whereas the API
cost estimate was of fuel scenarios from a previous Automobile Alliance
study, the least stringent of which is still more stringent than what
EPA is considering for Tier 3. Beyond this, the API study made several
conservative assumptions which tended to inflate the costs and impacts.
As discussed in the response to question 1, this is consistent with
prior studies' performance for API by the same contractor.

Q4.  What technology advancements in alternative transportation fuels
are currently being reviewed at EPA? Could these fuels impact the
ability of the country to meet the RFS?

A4.  EPA continues to evaluate new fuels and new technologies as part
of its responsibilities to qualify new renewable fuel pathways under
the RFS program. There are many fuels that offer the potential for use
in meeting the RFS volume standards. Many fuels have already been
approved and new ones are being approved on an ongoing basis. Just
recently, EPA issued a direct final action to identify additional fuel
pathways that the Agency determined meet the biomass-based diesel,
advance biofuel, or cellulosic biofuel life cycle greenhouse gas (GHG)
reduction requirement under RFS2. This rule, when finalized, will
approve biofuels produced from camelina oil, energy cane, giant reed,
and napier grass. It also includes an evaluation of renewable gasoline,
biodiesel produced through alternative processing, and clarifies our
definition of renewable diesel to explicitly include jet fuel.
Responses by Dr. Jay Kesan, Professor and H. Ross and
Helen Workman Research Scholar and Program Leader,
Biofuel Law and Regulation Program, Energy Biosciences Institute,
University of Illinois College of Law

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

Q1.  In your view, did EPA adequately follow the Clean Air Act in
granting partial waivers for E15?

A1.  Sec.  211 of the Clean Air Act states:

``Effective upon November 15, 1990, it shall be unlawful
for any manufacturer of any fuel or fuel additive to first introduce
into commerce, or to increase the concentration in use of, any fuel or
fuel additive for use by any person in motor vehicles manufactured
after model year 1974 which is not substantially similar to any fuel or
fuel additive utilized in the certification of any model year 1975, or
subsequent model year, vehicle or engine under section 7525 of this
title.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. Sec.  7545(f)(1)(B) (2010) (emphasis
added).

``The Administrator, upon application of any manufacturer
of any fuel or fuel additive, may waive the prohibitions established
under paragraph (1) or (3) of this subsection or the limitation
specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection, if he determines that
the applicant has established that such fuel or fuel additive or a
specified concentration thereof, and the emission products of such fuel
or fuel additive or specified concentration thereof, will not cause or
contribute to a failure of any emission control device or system (over
the useful life of the motor vehicle, motor vehicle engine, nonroad
engine or nonroad vehicle in which such device or system is used) to
achieve compliance by the vehicle or engine with the emission standards
with respect to which it has been certified pursuant to sections 7525
and 7547(a) of this title. The Administrator shall take final action to
grant or deny an application submitted under this paragraph, after
public notice and comment, within 270 days of the receipt of such an
application.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. Sec.  7545(f)(4) (2010) (emphasis
added).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sub-Issues Raised by Rep. Andy Harris

Reliance on U.S. DOE Testing and Data by EPA

In your question, you state the following:

In discussing EPA's decision to grant a waiver for mid-
level ethanol blends in a recent article, you stated that the Clean Air
Act ``language makes it perfectly clear that the fuel waiver applicant
bears the burden of establishing that the waiver fuel will not
negatively affect vehicle and engine emissions control systems.
Nonetheless, when the EPA conditionally granted'' the E15 waiver, ``it
relied almost exclusively on data supplied by the U.S. Department of
Energy as opposed to data and analysis submitted by the waiver
applicants.''
These excerpts are from an article of mine published in Global
Change Biology Bioenergy.

A. Arguments Against EPA's Action

The language of the CAA explicitly states that the EPA should not
grant a fuel waiver unless ``the applicant has established'' that the
waiver fuel will not adversely affect the ability of emission control
systems to achieve compliance with EPA's emissions standards. \3\ Yet
when EPA conditionally granted the E15 Waivers, it relied primarily on
testing conducted by the U.S. DOE. Specifically, when the EPA published
its first decision regarding E15, it stated:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  Id.

Growth Energy did not provide the necessary information
to support a full waiver in several key areas, especially long-term
durability emissions data necessary to ensure that all motor vehicles,
heavy-duty gasoline highway engines and vehicles, highway and off-
highway motorcycles, and nonroad products would continue to comply with
their emission standards over their full useful life. In 2008, DOE
began emissions durability testing on 19 Tier 2 motor vehicle models
that would provide this data for MY2007 and newer light-duty motor
vehicles (``DOE Catalyst Study''). Consequently, the Agency delayed a
decision until the DOE test program was completed for these motor
vehicles in September 2010. EPA reached its decision on the waiver
request based on the results of the DOE Catalyst Study and other
information and test data submitted by Growth Energy and in public
comments. EPA also applied engineering judgment, based on the data in
reaching its decision. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Partial Grant and
Partial Denial of Clean Air Act Waiver Application Submitted by Growth
Energy To Increase the Allowable Ethanol Content of Gasoline to 15
Percent; Decision of the Administrator, 75 Fed. Reg. 68094, 68095 (Nov.
4, 2010) (emphasis added) [hereinafter E15 Waiver I].

Additionally, when EPA summarized its findings with respect to the
fuel effects it traditionally analyzes in considering fuel waivers
(i.e., durability/long-term exhaust emissions, immediate exhaust
emissions, evaporative emissions, materials compatibility, and
driveability and operability), it repeatedly relied on the ``DOE
Catalyst Study'' and pointed out the shortcomings of the data submitted
by the applicant. \5\ Moreover, when EPA deferred its decision on model
years 2001-2006 light-duty vehicles, it again referred to ongoing DOE
testing and stated that ``EPA expects to make a determination for these
motor vehicles shortly after the results of DOE testing is available.''
\6\ While the EPA's decision pays some attention to the notion of
relying on ``test data submitted by Growth Energy'' (amongst other
sources), \7\ it remains abundantly clear that the data submitted by
the applicant, when standing alone, was insufficient to justify
granting the E15 Waivers. As such, the applicant did not establish that
E15 would not adversely affect emissions control systems. Since the CAA
only authorizes the EPA to grant a fuel waiver after the Administrator
``determines that the applicant has established'' that the waiver fuel
will not adversely affect emissions control systems, \8\ the
Administrator may have abused her discretion and acted in an arbitrary
and capricious manner in conditionally granting the E15 Waivers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  Id. at 68096-97.
\6\  Id. at 68097.
\7\  Id. at 68095.
\8\  Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. Sec.  7545(f)(4) (2010) (emphasis
added).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. Arguments in Support of EPA's Action

As an initial matter, since the CAA requires the Administrator of
EPA to ``determine[]'' whether the requisite burden has been
established before granting a fuel waiver, the statute clearly
envisions the exercise of agency discretion. \9\ Although the CAA makes
it clear that the applicant ultimately bears the burden of proof in
seeking a fuel waiver, it says nothing about what types of information
EPA is permitted to rely on in reaching its decision. \10\
Additionally, the CAA explicitly provides that EPA must engage in
``public notice and comment'' prior to issuing a fuel waiver decision.
\11\ If EPA is not permitted to rely on information gathered through
public notice and comment (i.e., information not supplied by the
applicant), then the process is pointless. Moreover, the E15 Waivers
provide a prime example of why EPA should be permitted to rely on
information other than that submitted by the applicant. If, for
example, the CAA were interpreted as requiring EPA to deny the E15
Waivers because the applicant itself had failed to submit enough data
to establish that the waivers should be granted, this would not have
altered the results of the DOE testing, and the applicant would likely
resubmit its application based on the DOE results, and EPA would be
forced to begin the public notice and comment process all over again.
It is clearly a more efficient use of resources for the EPA to base its
fuel waiver decisions on all relevant information that is brought to
light via the public notice and comment period. Finally, the CAA's
reference to the fact that the applicant must establish that the waiver
fuel will not adversely affect emissions control systems, could be
explained as a hold-over from the waiver provision's previous version
that did not require public notice and comment. \12\ Since the previous
wording of the waiver provision did not require notice and comment,
this language was likely originally included as a means to specify that
EPA was not required to establish the merits of a fuel waiver (i.e.,
the EPA's role is to merely make a decision based on information
submitted by the applicant). As the CAA now explicitly requires public
notice and comment, it would be an absurd result to interpret the
waiver provision as precluding the granting of a waiver when the
applicant fails to establish the requisite burden on its own but
sufficient information is gathered from other public sources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\  See id.
\10\  See id.
\11\  Id.
\12\  Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. Sec.  7545(f)(4) (2006).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
C. Explanation of the Quoted Excerpts From Our Article

The quoted statement from our article is presented out of context
in Representative Harris' question. In our article, the statement is
preceded by noting that ``[i]f we unpack the CAA's fuel waiver
language, some important and possibly misleading ideas emerge.'' As
this article was intended for a non-legally trained audience, this
portion of the paper was intended to compare and contrast the way a
non-lawyer would read the plain language of the CAA with the way in
which EPA administers the fuel waiver process. In doing so, we remain
completely agnostic as to whether or not the EPA's approach is proper.
In another article of mine, Making Regulatory Innovation Keep Pace
with Technological Innovation, we again mention this issue in an
agnostic manner, but go on to opine that if the EPA continues to view
DOE testing as the gateway to fuel waiver approval, then it would be
beneficial for the DOE to begin conducting tests on emerging types of
biofuels (e.g., biobutanol).

Conditionally Granting the E15 Waiver for Some Vehicles

and Denying It for Other Vehicle/Engine Types

(i.e., conditionally granting a ``Partial Waiver'')

In your question, you state the following:

You also noted that EPA's decision to partially approve
the waiver contradicted the Clean Air Act language that the ``fuel has
no adverse effects on the emissions control system in a variety of
vehicle and engine types.''

These excerpts are from an article of mine published in Global
Change Biology Bioenergy.

A. Arguments Against the EPA's Authority to Conditionally
Grant a "Partial Waiver" (Quoted directly from U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Partial Grant and Partial Denial of Clean Air Act
Waiver Application Submitted by Growth Energy To Increase the Allowable
Ethanol Content of Gasoline to 15 Percent; Decision of the
Administrator, 75 Fed. Reg. 68094, 68143-44 (Nov. 4, 2010) (internal
citations omitted)).

``As stated in EPA's notice for comment on the E15 waiver request,
a possible outcome after the Agency reviewed the record of scientific
and technical information may be an indication that a fuel up to E15
could meet the criteria for a waiver for some vehicles and engines but
not for others. In this context, the Agency noted that one
interpretation of section 211(f)(4) is that the waiver request could
only be approved for that subset of vehicles or engines for which
testing supports its use. We also stated that such a partial waiver for
use of E15 may be appropriate if adequate measures or conditions could
be implemented to ensure its proper use. EPA invited comment on the
legal aspects regarding a waiver that restricted the use of E15 to a
subset of vehicles or engines, and the potential ability to impose
conditions on such a waiver.
We received a number of comments expressing opposition to a partial
waiver based on a lack of legal authority under section 211(f)(4). Some
of those same commenters, as well as others, also stated that EPA
should first conduct and finalize a rulemaking under section 211(c) to
mitigate the potential for misfueling and limit the types of mobile
sources for which E15 may be used.
Many commenters pointed to the language in section 211(f)(4) and
argued that the use of the word `any' in the phrase `will not cause or
contribute to a failure of any emission control device or system (over
the useful life of the motor vehicle, motor vehicle engine, nonroad
engine or nonroad vehicle in which such device or system is used) to
achieve compliance by the vehicle or engine,' means that if the waiver
applicant has not established that the use of E15 meets the waiver
criteria for any type of motor vehicle or nonroad product, then the
waiver must be denied. Noting the statutory provision's use of the word
`any,' commenters asserted that should E15 cause or contribute to a
failure of any emission control device to achieve compliance under any
single circumstance, then the waiver applicant has not met the waiver
criteria and the waiver must be denied in its entirety. Another
commenter suggested that the word `any' modifies `emission control
device' and that if an emission control device for any of the types of
vehicles in the parenthetical language in section 211(f)(4) is
implicated, then the waiver must be denied. Still another commenter
suggested that `In amending section 211(f)(4) in 2007 with enactment of
the Energy Independence and Security Act, Congress expanded the types
of devices for which an applicant must establish that a fuel or fuel
additive will not cause or contribute to a failure while retaining the
prohibition of causing or contributing to the failure of `any' device.
With the expansion of section 211(f)(4), EPA is directed to only
approve a waiver if all nonroad and on- road vehicles and engines would
not be adversely affected.' Commenters asserted that the provision
effectively required that there should be a `general purpose' fuel. The
commenters noted that EPA would contradict this direction if it failed
to address impacts on any portion of the vehicles or engines.
Essentially, the implication of all of these assertions is that EPA can
only grant a waiver if all emission control devices in all types of
mobile sources listed in the statute will not be adversely impacted by
E15.
We also received several comments suggesting that if EPA desires to
grant a partial waiver, it must first proceed under section 211(c) with
a separate and full rulemaking to analyze the costs, benefits,
necessary lead time, and the technological feasibility of a partial
waiver. The commenters stated that this rulemaking should also include
an analysis of the partial prohibition and controls on the use of E15
and include detailed regulatory requirements to ensure adequate control
measures and to mitigate misfueling with E15. Commenters stated that
the inclusion in section 211(f)(4) of 270 days by which EPA must act
does not allow enough time to address all the necessary marketing and
other issues and thus Congress could not have envisioned a partial
waiver.''
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Partial Grant and Partial
Denial of Clean Air Act Waiver Application Submitted by Growth Energy
To Increase the Allowable Ethanol Content of Gasoline to 15 Percent;
Decision of the Administrator, 75 Fed. Reg. 68094, 68143-44 (Nov. 4,
2010) (internal citations omitted).

B. Argument in Support of the EPA's Authority to
Conditionally Grant a ``Partial Waiver`` (Quoted directly from U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Partial Grant and Partial Denial of
Clean Air Act Waiver Application Submitted by Growth Energy To Increase
the Allowable Ethanol Content of Gasoline to 15 Percent; Decision of
the Administrator, 75 Fed. Reg. 68094, 68144 (Nov. 4, 2010) (internal
citations omitted)).

``Growth Energy and ACE stated that the Agency has the authority to
grant a partial waiver or that EPA's authority for a partial waiver is
a permissible interpretation of CAA authority, but that the evidence
suggests a waiver for all vehicles and engines on the road today is
appropriate.
We also received comment noting that the prohibition in section
211(f)(1) only applies to the use of any fuel or fuel additive in
light-duty motor vehicles, indicating that the grant of the waiver of
this prohibition under section 211(f)(4) is not dependent on findings
with respect to nonroad products. The commenter further noted that
although EPA has the authority and discretion to look at the effect of
a fuel or fuel additive on nonroad products (in the context of
examining impacts on motor vehicles), nothing in the statute or
legislative history indicates that the amendment to section 211(f)(4)
sought to limit EPA's discretion for issuing a waiver for motor
vehicles. In light of Congress' decision in the Energy Independence and
Security Act of 2007 to substantially increase the Renewable Fuel
Standard Program's volume mandates, this commenter suggests that
reading the word `any' in section 211(f)(4) as amended by the 2007
Energy Act to apply to anything more than any emission control systems
on the subset of motor vehicles would be at odds with Congressional
intent.
Regarding EPA's authority to impose conditions on a waiver, we
received comment stating that EPA has the authority to grant waivers
subject to a broad range of conditions that ensure that the fuel or
fuel additive will not cause or contribute to the failure of any
emission control device or system. One commenter pointed to four of the
eleven waivers EPA has issued since 1977 that have placed conditions on
a waiver. In EPA's first waiver decision in 1978, the Agency discussed
its authority to grant conditional waivers, noting that it may grant a
waiver `conditioned on time or other limitations,' so long as `the
requirements of section 211(f)(4) are met.' This commenter also points
to the legislative history of section 211(f)(4) which makes clear that
EPA has authority to grant conditional waivers. The 1977 Senate Report
regarding section 211(f)(4) states: `The Administrator's waiver may be
under such conditions, or in regard to such concentrations, as he deems
appropriate consistent with the intent of this section.' Senate Report
No. 95-125, 95th Congress, 1st Session 91 (1977), pg 91.''
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Partial Grant and Partial
Denial of Clean Air Act Waiver Application Submitted by Growth Energy
To Increase the Allowable Ethanol Content of Gasoline to 15 Percent;
Decision of the Administrator, 75 Fed. Reg. 68094, 68144 (Nov. 4, 2010)
(internal citations omitted).

C. The EPA's Decision Regarding Its Authority to
Conditionally Grant a ``Partial Waiver'' (Quoted directly from U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Partial Grant and Partial Denial of
Clean Air Act Waiver Application Submitted by Growth Energy To Increase
the Allowable Ethanol Content of Gasoline to 15 Percent; Decision of
the Administrator, 75 Fed. Reg. 68094, 68144-46 (Nov. 4, 2010)
(internal citations omitted)).
``The issue before EPA is whether it is reasonable to interpret
section 211(f)(4) as authorizing EPA to grant a partial waiver under
appropriate conditions, as in today's decision. If Congress spoke
directly to the issue and clearly intended to not allow such a partial
waiver, then EPA could not do so. However, if Congress did not indicate
a precise intention on this issue, and we believe that section
211(f)(4) is ambiguous in this regard, then a partial waiver with
appropriate conditions would be authorized if it is a reasonable
interpretation. EPA has considered the text and structure of this
provision, as well as the companion prohibition in section 211(f)(1),
and believes it is a reasonable to interpret section 211(f)(4) as
providing EPA with discretion to issue this partial waiver with
appropriate conditions.
It is important to put section 211(f)(4) in its statutory context.
The prohibition in section 211(f)(1) and the waiver provision in
section 211(f)(4) should be seen as parallel and complementary
provisions. Together they provide two alternative paths for entry into
commerce of fuels and fuels additives. The section 211(f)(1)
prohibition allows fuels or fuel additives to be introduced into
commerce as long as they are substantially similar to fuel used to
certify compliance with emissions standards, and the section 211(f)(4)
waiver provision allows fuels or additives to be introduced into
commerce if they will not cause or contribute to motor vehicles and
nonroad products to fail to meet their applicable emissions standards.
EPA's authority to issue a waiver is coextensive with the scope of the
prohibition--whatever is prohibited can also be the subject of a waiver
if the criteria for granting a waiver are met. In addition, the
criteria for each provision have similar goals. They are aimed at
providing flexibility to the fuel and fuel additive industry by
allowing a variety of fuels and fuel additives into commerce, without
limiting fuels and additives to those products that are identical to
those used in the emissions certification process. This flexibility is
balanced by the goal of limiting the potential reduction in emissions
benefits from the emissions standards, even if some may occur because a
fuel or fuel additive is not identical to certification fuel or it
leads to some emissions increase but not a violation of the standards.
Together, these are indications that these provisions are intended to
be parallel and complementary provisions.
The section 211(f)(1) prohibition has evolved over time. Initially
it was adopted in the 1977 amendments of the Act, and was much more
limited in nature. It applied only to fuels or fuel additives for
general use, and was also limited to fuels or fuel additives for use in
light-duty motor vehicles. EPA interpreted this as applying to bulk
fuels or fuel additives for use in unleaded gasoline. The prohibition
did not apply to other gasoline, or to diesel fuels or alternative
fuels, or to fuel additives that were not for bulk use. It was thus
relevant only to the subset of motor vehicles designed to be operated
on unleaded gasoline.
In 1990 Congress amended the prohibition and broadened it. It now
applies to `any fuel or fuel additive for use by any person in motor
vehicles manufactured after model year 1974 which is not substantially
similar to any fuel or fuel additive utilized in the certification of
any model year 1975, or subsequent model year, vehicle or engine.' This
extended the scope of the prohibition to apply to all gasoline, to
diesel fuel, and to other fuels such as E85. However, the concept of
applying this prohibition based on the relevant subset of vehicles
continues. For example, a diesel fuel that is introduced into commerce
for diesel vehicles does not need to be substantially similar to
gasoline fuel or other fuels intended for non-diesel vehicles. This is
so even though Congress used the phrase `substantially similar to any
fuel or fuel additive utilized in the certification of any* * *vehicles
or engine' (emphasis supplied). Clearly Congress did not intend the use
of the term `any' in the prohibition to always mean all motor vehicles
or 100% of the motor vehicle fleet. Diesel fuel does not need to be
substantially similar to the fuel used in the certification of gasoline
vehicles, and E85 does not need to be substantially similar to fuel
used in the certification of diesel vehicles. For example,
manufacturers who want to introduce E85 fuel or fuel additives for E85
look to the certification fuel that was used for the subset of vehicles
that were certified for use on E85.
In some limited cases, EPA has approved a fuel additive as
substantially similar even when it is introduced into commerce for use
in just one part of a single vehicle manufacturer's product line. For
example, where a fuel additive is considered part of the emissions
control system for a vehicle model and is certified that way by the
vehicle manufacturer, then it is not a violation of the substantially
similar prohibition for manufacturers of the fuel additive to introduce
it into commerce for use in just that very small subset of vehicles, as
long as it is substantially similar to the fuel additive used in the
certification of that vehicle model. In all of these cases, broad to
narrow subsets of motor vehicles can be considered when deciding
whether the introduction of a fuel or fuel additive for use by that
subset of motor vehicles is in compliance with the prohibition.
EPA has in fact applied this construct of this provision in all of
its past waiver decisions. EPA has previously said that it is virtually
impossible for an applicant to demonstrate that a new fuel or fuel
additive does not cause or contribute to any vehicle or engine failing
to meet its emissions standards. Instead, EPA and the courts allow
applicants to satisfy this statutory provision through technical
conclusions based on appropriately designed test programs and properly
reasoned engineering judgment. For example, the sample size in these
test programs does not include all motor vehicles in the current fleet;
the sample size is comprised of a statistically significant sample of
motor vehicles that, once tested, will enable the applicant to
extrapolate its findings and make its demonstration. EPA believes that
this practice of focusing on a relatively small but representative
subset of motor vehicles does not violate the statutory use of the word
`any' in this provision.
Since the waiver and the substantially similar provisions are
parallel and complementary provisions, this clearly raises the question
of whether a waiver can also be based on a subset of motor vehicles
meeting the criteria for a waiver. EPA believes the text and
construction of section 211(f)(4) supports this interpretation.
First, the term `waive' as used in section 211(f)(4) is not
modified in any way. Normally one would read this provision as a
general grant of waiver authority, encompassing both partial and total
waivers, as long as the waiver criteria are met. Second, the waiver
criteria, like section 211(f)(1), have evolved over time. In 1977, the
criteria were phrased as providing for a waiver when the fuel or fuel
additive `will not cause or contribute to a failure of any emission
control device or system (over the useful life of any vehicle in which
such device or system is used) to achieve compliance by the vehicle
with the emission standards to which it has been certified.' This was
not modified in the 1990 amendments. In EISA 2007, Congress amended the
waiver criteria, providing for a waiver when the fuel or fuel additive
will not `cause or contribute to a failure of any emission control
device or system (over the useful life of the motor vehicle, motor
vehicle engine, nonroad engine or nonroad vehicle in which such device
or system is used) to achieve compliance by the vehicle or engine with
the emission standards to which it has been certified.' Congress uses
the term `any' in section 211(f)(4), as it does in several places in
section 211(f)(1). One use of the term `any' was deleted in the 2007
amendments, when the parenthetical was broadened to include
consideration of nonroad engines and nonroad vehicles as well as motor
vehicles. The term `any,' however, has always been paired with the
consistent use of the singular when referring to vehicles and emissions
control systems--`the vehicle' and the emissions standards to which
`it' is certified, and the `vehicle in which such device or system is
used.' Certainly Congress did not state that the applicant has to
demonstrate that the fuel or fuel additive would not cause any devices
or control systems, over the useful lives of the motor vehicles or
nonroad products in which they are used, to fail to achieve the
emissions standards to which they are certified. If Congress had stated
that, then it would be clear, as one commenter suggests, that EPA
should only grant a waiver if all emission control devices in all the
types of mobile sources listed would not be impacted by the fuel. But
Congress did not state that.
Several aspects of section 211(f) thus support the reasonableness
of EPA's interpretation. The prohibition and the waiver provisions are
properly seen as parallel and complementary, and the prohibition
properly can be evaluated in terms of appropriate subsets of motor
vehicles, notwithstanding the use of the term `any' to modify several
parts of the prohibition. This clearly raises the concept of also
applying the waiver criteria to appropriate subsets of motor vehicles.
`Waive' is reasonably seen as a broad term that generally encompasses a
total and a partial waiver, as well as the discretion to impose
appropriate conditions. The criteria for a waiver also refer to `any'
but the entire provision does not provide a clear indication that
Congress intended to preclude consideration of subsets of motor
vehicles when considering an application for a waiver. Finally, a
partial waiver gives full meaning to all of the provisions at issue.
For example, in this case, granting a partial waiver means that E15
can be introduced into commerce for use in a subset of motor vehicles,
MY2007 and newer light-duty motor vehicles, and only for use in those
motor vehicles. For those motor vehicles, EPA is not making a finding
of it being substantially similar, but E15 has been demonstrated to not
cause or contribute to these motor vehicles exceeding their applicable
emissions standards. It will also not cause any other motor vehicles or
any other on- or off-road vehicles or engines to exceed their emissions
standards since it may not be introduced into commerce for use in any
other motor vehicles or any other vehicles or engines. Thus, under a
partial waiver, as the commenter suggested, all emission control
devices in all the types of mobile sources listed will not be adversely
impacted by the fuel. It can only be introduced into commerce for those
vehicles and engines where it has been shown not to cause emissions
problems; for other types of mobile sources, it cannot be introduced
into commerce for use in such vehicles and engines. In concept,
therefore, the combination of this partial waiver, with appropriate
conditions, and partial retention of the substantially similar
prohibition, has the same effect as when the criteria for a total
waiver has been met--the fuel or fuel additive will only be introduced
into commerce for use in a manner that will not cause violations across
the fleet of motor vehicles and nonroad products. It can only be
introduced into commerce for use in vehicles and engines where it has
been shown not to cause violations of the emissions standards, and may
not be introduced into commerce for use in other vehicles or engines.
EPA recognizes that a partial waiver raises implementation issues
regarding how to ensure that a fuel or fuel additive is only introduced
into commerce for use in the specified subset of motor vehicles. The
discretion to grant a partial waiver includes the authority and
responsibility for determining and imposing reasonable conditions that
will allow for effective implementation of a partial waiver. In this
case, EPA has conditioned the waiver on various actions that the fuel
or fuel additive manufacturer must take. The actions are all designed
to help ensure that E15 is only used by the MY2007 and later motor
vehicles specified by the waiver. If a fuel or fuel additive
manufacturer does not comply with the conditions, then EPA will
consider their fuel or fuel additive as having been introduced into
commerce for use by a broader group of vehicles and engines than is
allowed under the waiver, constituting a violation of the section
211(f)(1) prohibition.
EPA recognizes, as several commenters have suggested, that EPA can
impose waiver conditions only on those parties who are subject to the
section 211(f)(1) prohibition and the waiver of that prohibition. These
parties are the fuel and fuel additive manufacturers. Waiver conditions
can apply to them but cannot apply directly to various downstream
parties, such as a retailer who is not also a fuel or fuel additive
manufacturer. This is one reason EPA is also proposing specific
misfueling mitigation measures in a separate rulemaking under section
211(c), to minimize any risk of misfueling. This will also facilitate
compliance with certain of the waiver conditions.
Many commenters suggested that before EPA can grant a waiver of any
type under section 211(f)(4), the Agency must first issue a rule under
section 211(c) that addresses the proper prohibition and control of a
new fuel or fuel additive to the extent necessary before such fuel or
fuel additive is permitted under section 211(f)(4). However, there is
no mention of timing in these two statutory provisions and EPA believes
it appropriate to consider the merits of a section 211(f)(4) waiver
request on its face.''
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Partial Grant and Partial
Denial of Clean Air Act Waiver Application Submitted by Growth Energy
To Increase the Allowable Ethanol Content of Gasoline to 15 Percent;
Decision of the Administrator, 75 Fed. Reg. 68094, 68144-46 (Nov. 4,
2010) (internal citations omitted).

D. Explanation of the Quoted Excerpts from Our Article

Again, the quoted statement from our article is presented out of
context in Representative Harris' question. In our article, the
statement is preceded by noting that ``[i]f we unpack the CAA's fuel
waiver language, some important and possibly misleading ideas emerge.''
As this paper was intended for a non-legally trained audience, this
portion of the article was intended to compare and contrast the way a
non-lawyer would read the plain language of the CAA with the way in
which EPA administers the fuel waiver process (i.e., the statement was
not intended to suggest that the EPA's approach ``contradict[s]'' the
language of the CAA in a legal sense). In doing so, we remain
completely agnostic as to whether or not the EPA's approach is proper.
In another article of mine, Making Regulatory Innovation Keep Pace with
Technological Innovation, we again mention this issue in an agnostic
manner, but go on to opine that if the EPA is willing to conditionally
grant a fuel waiver for use in some vehicles/engines and deny it for
use in others, then the applicant should be permitted to ex ante
specify which types of vehicles/engines it is seeking a waiver for and
thereby mitigate the costs associated with seeking a fuel waiver (i.e.,
negate the need to incur the cost of testing the waiver fuel in the
types of vehicles/engines that are not the subject of the application.
Responses by Mr. Bob Greco, Group Director for
Downstream and Industry Operations, American Petroleum Institute

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

Q1.  What does API think ought to be done by the EPA to prevent the
impending RFS ``trainwreck,'' i.e., the coming encounter with the E10
blend wall and the severe shortage of advanced technology renewable
fuels? What role could Congress play?

A1.  Congress should amend EISA to align the mandated biofuels volumes
with the capacity of the existing vehicle fleet to safely use them.
Congress should give authority to and require EPA to adjust the RFS
requirement when the annual volume of any renewable fuel anticipated
for meeting the RFS in any given calendar year exceeds that which can
be reasonably produced; delivered through existing infrastructure; and
consumed as determined by original equipment manufacturers' warranties
at the time of manufacture of the vehicle or engine.

Q2.  The requirements in the Energy Independence and Security Act are
driving us into the E10 blend wall. Will EPA's waiver to allow the use
of E15 in today's automobiles be of any help in averting the coming
confrontation?

A2.  No, it will not. EPA prematurely waived Clean Air Act (CAA)
requirements to allow ethanol blends of up to 15% for model year 2001
and newer cars and light trucks prior to the completion of
comprehensive auto and oil industry studies on the vehicle safety,
performance, and durability impacts associated with use of the new
fuel. Should the driving public experience problems with their cars,
the concern is that drivers could demand E0, which would make RFS
compliance more difficult than it already is. Widespread consumer
problems occurring because of the waivers (either misfueling non-road
equipment and pre-2001 vehicle problems or 2001 and later model year
vehicle problems) would put the entire renewable fuels program at risk.
Even if E15 is eventually given a green light by auto manufacturers
after completion of comprehensive research, it will take several years
before E15 can be introduced into the marketplace due to other
regulatory hurdles and necessary changes to retail station
infrastructure.

Q3.  I understand that, in addition to the Baker & O'Brien analysis of
potential Tier 3 regulation impacts, there have also been other studies
released that project some smaller economic effects. Could you provide
some context to these studies and their methodologies? \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Baker & O'Brien: ``Potential Supply and Cost Impacts of Lower
Sulfur, Lower RVP Gasoline,'' July, 2011.

A3.  We are aware of studies conducted by the consulting firm, MathPro,
which analyzed the refining economic impacts of prospective gasoline
standards, but MathPro in each of these studies used methodologies that
are much less rigorous and realistic than the Baker & O'Brien analysis.
\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  MathPro: ``Refining Economics of a National Clean Gasoline
Standard for PADDS 1-3,'' June 27, 2008; MathPro: ``Refining Economics
of a Single Octane National Clean Gasoline Standard,'' October 8, 2010;
MathPro: ``Refining Economics of a National Low Sulfur, Low RVP
Gasoline Standard,'' October 25, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The main flaws in the MathPro's analytical approach are in the
areas of modeling methodologies and study assumptions:

Capital expenditure/refinery investment: The MathPro
approach does not account for the unique characteristics and challenges
of individual refineries. Instead, MathPro treats an entire PADD as one
large ``notional'' refinery, and implies that adding required refining
capacity can occur at the same rate and economies of scale across all
refineries within the PADD. This results in over-optimization and an
underestimate of compliance costs.
In contrast, the Baker & O'Brien analysis employs a stepwise
approach in its refinery-by-refinery economic assessment of investment
required for compliance, modeling 112 refineries on an individual
basis. The Baker & O'Brien analysis, which allows for refineries to
shut down, makes an assessment of required new and expanded capacities.

Treatment of natural gas liquids and refinery operation
costs: The linear programming constraints and modeling assumptions
employed by MathPro were unrealistic because they do not track how
refineries are actually run. The constraints and assumptions forces the
``notional'' refinery to increase the amount of crude oil used to
offset the volumes of gasoline lost from reducing RVP. In reality,
refiners may consider options which include reducing production of
refined products or shutting down. The MathPro approach does not allow
for refinery shutdowns, and recent history demonstrates that individual
refineries have shut down. In addition, the MathPro model does not
accurately account for how the petrochemicals marketplace will react to
the excess natural gas liquids created by reducing gasoline RVP.

Q4.  Are further reductions in the sulfur content of gasoline necessary
to meet the 2008 Ozone National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS)?

A4.  No. Nationwide concentrations of the key ozone precursor nitrogen
dioxide (NO
2
) have dropped about 35% over the last 10 years.
\3\ Additional mobile source reductions of NO
2
will occur
with vehicle turnover because of existing gasoline and diesel fuel on-
road requirements, mandated increased fuel economy standards, and
reductions projected from recent diesel standards for off-road
vehicles. \4\ Stationary source NO
2
is projected to decrease
with implementation of the Cross States Air Pollution Rule and
achievement of existing requirements written into State Implementation
Plans to meet ozone standards. There are a variety of options to reduce
the NO
2
emissions and thereby reduce ozone, but further
reductions of sulfur content in gasoline are not necessary to meet the
2008 ozone standards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  http://www.epa.gov/airtrends/nitrogen.html.
\4\  By 2030, this program will reduce annual emissions of NO
2

by about 800,000 tons, and further reductions will be made after 2030;
see: http://www.epa.gov/otaq/regs/nonroad/420f08004.htm.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions Submitted by Ranking Member Brad Miller

Q1.  What technology advancements have the blenders made in the four
years since enactment of legislation mandating the current RFS to
prepare for compliance with the standard? What technology advancements
are planned for the future?

A1.  Blenders have made significant changes to ensure that 10% ethanol
gasoline can be sold in the majority of fuel in the country to give us
the best opportunity to meet the biofuel volumes mandated in the RFS.
Gasoline suppliers (blenders) have increased the use of rail and truck
deliveries to their terminals to accommodate the increased volumes of
ethanol. Since ethanol must be stored in separate tanks at terminals--
it cannot be moved via pipeline due to technical concerns--suppliers
have installed tanks or converted them from other fuel service to store
the ethanol. They have also installed advanced automated equipment that
ensures that ethanol can be efficiently and accurately blended with
gasoline to make a product that meets the specifications and State and
federal requirements.
However, as my testimony indicates, the blendwall is coming
quickly, and our members have not been sitting idle. They have been
conducting research to understand how to bring more biofuels to market.
For example, research is ongoing to determine how to mitigate the
technical concerns of moving ethanol in pipelines. If the results can
be applied in areas where pipelines move product in the right
direction, namely mid-continent to the east coast or to/ from marine
terminals for transportation via barge, there could be improvements in
efficiently moving fuel grade ethanol to market. But, of course, more
ethanol simply exacerbates the blendwall problem. The technological
solution is the development and commercialization of biohydrocarbons
identical to those from petroleum sources that can be dropped into
current petroleum products. To that end, the biofuels and oil
industries continue to conduct research to create such a fuel. However,
time is not on our side. Development of biohydrocarbons is seriously
lagging and offers little promise of being available in time to avert
the blendwall.
E15 is sometimes held out to be a solution. While the Department of
Energy and API have completed research on the ability of the existing
retail gasoline station equipment to store and dispense gasoline with
greater than 10% ethanol, the results of this research show that there
are serious issues with using any equipment that is not specifically
listed for a 15% ethanol fuel (E15) and the majority of equipment was
not built for that fuel. Beyond the technical issues associated with
storing/dispensing E15, suppliers and station owners have concerns
regarding selling E15 to the consumer. Other research on the vehicle
shows that some cars and trucks will be damaged by E15, and 14
automobile manufacturers wrote letters to Rep. Sensenbrenner that their
warranties would not cover damage that resulted from a vehicle that was
refueled with E15. Taken together, there are significant concerns
associated with storing and selling a fuel that has more than 10%
ethanol that may require Congressional action to mitigate these
concerns. Moreover, even if the green light were given to E15 today,
the blendwall is approaching faster than the ability of the industry to
upgrade the infrastructure needed to accommodate the huge volumes that
would be required to avoid it.
Responses by Mr. David Hilbert,
Thermodynamic Development Engineer, Mercury Marine

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

Q1a-c.  There have been some criticisms of the NREL report,
specifically that it was a very limited study and tested only a few
engines. (a) Are you aware of any plans by either the Department of
Energy or EPA to conduct a larger study on the effects of higher
ethanol fuel blends on marine engines? (b) If no other study is
planned, are you aware of any other studies that are comparable to the
one you conducted? (c) As an engineer, absent information beyond what
was produced in this study, what is your opinion of the performance of
marine engines running on higher ethanol blend fuels?

A1a-c.  Despite the limited nature of the testing, several issues were
identified. The most striking example of these issues was the failed
exhaust valves on the 300 HP supercharged four-stroke engine. The
exhaust valve failure mechanism observed in the testing on E15 fuel was
not experienced previously in the tens of thousands of hours of engine
testing during the development and validation of this engine family on
E0 and E10 fuel. The previous experience with the development and
validation of the 300 HP engine family were outside the scope of this
specific study, but was certainly taken into consideration by the
Mercury Marine engineering team when assessing the risk presented by
the different fuel. Thus, it presented a new failure mode due to the
change in fuel.
(a) Mercury Marine initially proposed a much more extensive program
that totaled $3.8M and would have been a more comprehensive study. We
were told by DOE and NREL that the only funds available for this
testing were $300K-$400K. Mercury provided 50% cost sharing even though
there was little incentive for us to do so. We are not aware of any
larger studies being planned.
(b) A comparable study was conducted by personnel at Volvo Penta at
the same time we at Mercury Marine were doing our study. It was also
funded by the Department of Energy, and it tested one engine family: a
4.3 liter sterndrive based on a General Motors-derived engine. The
results of that study can be found at http://www.nrel.gov/docs/
fy12osti/52577.pdf. This study noted difficulty in starting the engine
when operated on E15 fuel.
(c) The study showed that the 300 HP supercharged four-stroke
engine had a major engine component failure and an increase in certain
exhaust emissions due to E15 fuel. The 9.9 HP four-stroke engine showed
a fuel system component material compatibility problem and also an
increase in certain exhaust emissions due to E15 fuel. The 200 HP two-
stroke engine suffered the failure of a major internal engine component
that relies on the fuel to carry lubricating oil to it, which calls
into question if the ethanol portion affected the lubrication of that
component. The number of problems observed in this study compared with
the small sample of engines tested would suggest that the performance
of E15 fuel was unacceptable.

Q2.  How many marine and other off-road or small engines could
potentially be at risk of misfueling with E15?

A2.  Higher ethanol blend fuels certainly create a risk to all marine
engines currently in use. Virtually none of the marine engines
currently in use were ever calibrated for higher ethanol blends. As the
fuel blends keep changing, at some point the legacy engines can no
longer tolerate the fuels and will certainly exhibit an increased
failure rate. In addition, materials used in the older engines were not
designed to tolerate ethanol fuels, and increasing the allowable
ethanol concentration will likely only add to the problem.
The National Marine Manufacturers Association (NMMA) estimates
there are 12 million engine-powered marine vessels in the U.S. with
about 90% being gasoline engine boats. As to small engines, we have
seen reports from such groups as the Outdoor Power Equipment Institute
(OPEI) that estimate that there are more than 200 million legacy small
engines in use in the United States. Other off-road and small engine
categories should be addressed by those industries, so please defer to
those organizations for further detail.

Q3.  What is the estimated cost of replacing small engines that may
fail or be damaged when using E15?

A3.  For marine engines, outboards range from 2 HP to 350 HP and
sterndrive engines range from 130 HP to over 1,000 HP. Replacement cost
of individual engines can range from $500 to $15,000 for outboards and
from $3,000 to $100,000 for sterndrive engines. For other engine types
for other engine categories, please defer to those organizations for
further detail.

Q4.  In the event that an E15 waiver is granted for off-road vehicles
as well, in response, what would the marine engine manufacturing
industry be doing to ensure its products are able to run safely and
reliably on this higher blend? Are there additional costs to making
marine engines resistant to the corrosion associated with higher
ethanol blends, including E15? What technological advances would be
required?

A4.  To answer this question, I need to break this question down into
several parts. First, I will treat the existing legacy fleet separately
from newly manufactured engines. Second, I will speak to the technical
difficulties, and then finally to the other aspects of this topic. The
technical aspects will be centered around materials compatibility/
corrosion resistance of the fuel system and also recalibrating the fuel
system to supply the appropriate amount of fuel based on the fuel blend
differences. There would likely be other technical challenges that
would be discovered once the redesign process would begin, so the
answer to this question is not meant to be all-encompassing.

Legacy engines: Considering the millions of engines in
the legacy fleet, there is no practical way to convert those legacy
engines to operate on a fuel so very different from what they were
designed to run on. To re-engineer 30+ years of service parts to have
proper material compatibility, corrosion protection, and fuel delivery
is simply impractical.

Newly manufactured engines: Materials compatibility of
the fuel system or any component that could come in contact with the
fuel or fuel vapor (such as components that could be exposed to
inadvertent contact with fuel during refueling or having fuel vapor
cause problems) would need to be investigated and redesigned as
necessary. Any type of elastomer, polymer, or sealant/adhesive must be
subjected to ``aggressive'' ethanol blend exposure tests. Examples of
these types of components would be gaskets, seals, o-rings, fuel hoses,
etc. The ``aggressive'' ethanol blend refers to the fact that the fluid
that the components are exposed to contains the proper chemistry to
simulate real-world fuel with all of the contaminates, acidity, water
content (including salt water), etc., that the engines will see. If the
materials were found to be incompatible, more robust materials would
need to be selected and then re-qualified with more bench tests and
also running engine tests. The metal components, such as fuel
reservoirs and fittings, must be tested for corrosion with the
aggressive ethanol. If corrosion issues are found, the materials must
be upgraded to metals with higher corrosion resistance or be coated
with a corrosion-resistant coating, such as anodizing. The technology
currently exists for the materials compatibility aspects, as evidenced
by the use of Flex Fuel Vehicles in the automotive segment; however,
the changes needed would likely increase the production cost of the
engines.

Mercury Marine manufactures three different types of engines sold
in the USA that need to be considered separately when discussing fuel
mixture control. The fuel system would need to be recalibrated to
supply the appropriate amount of fuel based on the ethanol blend, but
this would present difficulty in accounting for the range of fuels from
E0, which is still available, to E15. The three types of engines are:
electronically controlled four-strokes, carbureted four-strokes, and
direct fuel-injected two-strokes. The main considerations for
recalibrating the fuel system are exhaust emissions, engine durability
due to exhaust gas temperatures (example: broken exhaust valve in
original study), fuel economy, and other operating characteristics.
Electronically controlled four-strokes offer the best potential for
accepting E15 fuel. Electronically controlled outboard engines could be
modified to include an oxygen sensor in the exhaust system to
compensate for different fuels. On most outboard marine engines, the
exhaust system is integrally cast into the cylinder block and cylinder
head. The inclusion of a port for an oxygen sensor would mean that the
block and/or cylinder head casting would have to be modified. There may
also be other components that would need to be redesigned to make room
for the sensor protruding out of the exhaust passage, which would also
increase cost. The electronic engine controllers on many outboards
would need to be redesigned to account for the additional sensor input,
as well as developing and validating the software to control the oxygen
sensor.
Most of outboard marine engines 30 horsepower or lower are
carburated and cannot be calibrated to run optimally on E0 and E15
while still maintaining emissions compliance and acceptable operating
characteristics. Common industry practice from the small off-road
engine manufacturers identifies a 10% ethanol blend tolerance window
(example 0-10% or 5-15%) in which carburated engines can be calibrated.
[See the testimony of Kris Kiser: ``Statement of the Outdoor Power
Equipment Institute before the Committee on Environment and Public
Works-- U.S. Senate,'' April 13, 2011]. The carburated engines cannot
use an oxygen sensor since the fuel system is not electronically
controlled. There is no obvious or easily implemented solution to deal
with the carburated models to make them tolerant of a wide variety of
fuel blends. The technology that would need to be developed to remedy
this problem would be a closed-loop electronic fuel injection system
that would be competitive to a carburator in terms of cost (very cost
sensitive on these small engines), reliability, and ease of service.
Direct-injected two-stroke engines pose a different challenge. The
nature of the direct injected two-stroke engine causes fresh air to
bypass the combustion chamber and go directly to the exhaust. As such,
an oxygen sensor in the exhaust system senses this fresh air and cannot
reliably control the fueling rate on this type of engine at all speeds
and loads. Therefore, there is no way to adjust for differences in fuel
blends with an oxygen sensor in this type of engine. Some other means
to provide sensor input into a closed-loop fuel controller to adjust
for fueling differences would need to be developed.
To estimate the total cost to redesign the current product
offering, retool the necessary changes, validate the changes with
analysis and physical testing, and move into production is a complete
study in and of itself. The $3.8 million proposal mentioned in the
answer to question 1.a. above reflects the scope of the preliminary
investigation into this topic. The end result could be hundreds of
millions of dollars of investment and lost opportunities to develop
other more competitive products. The end result would be products that
cost more to produce due to the higher-grade materials needed and more
sophisticated control systems.

Other considerations: When considering new engine
installations into new boats, in many cases the boat hull and engine
are from different manufacturers. The boat hull often contains a large
portion of the fuel system such as the fuel tank, fuel lines, etc. The
boat manufacturers would also have to validate the fuel systems on new
boats with E15 fuel.

Another point to consider is that many new marine engines are sold
to replace worn-out engines in existing boat hulls. Even if the new
engines are compatible with E15 fuel, the legacy boat in which they are
installed may not be. There have been documented cases of older boat
fuel systems which are incompatible with ethanol blended fuels. The
legacy boat fuel system would need to be reevaluated to see if there
are material compatibility issues. This would further exacerbate the
issues of misfueling if there were some marine engines approved for E15
and others that were not and also some boat fuel systems which are
approved for E15 and others that are not.

Q5.  It has been suggested that the endurance and emissions problems
you witnessed when testing marine engines with E15 would not occur with
advanced biofuels. Why is that the case? What properties of advanced
biofuels make them more suitable for use in a marine engine as compared
with ethanol? Are there any studies available to support this
suggestion?

A5.  What are being proposed as ``advanced biofuels'' are synthetically
made fuels that are nearly chemically identical to current gasoline,
diesel, and jet fuels. As such, they would not have the higher oxygen
content of ethanol fuels, would not cause enleanment of the engine
which leads to the increased engine operating temperature, would not
have the material compatibility issues, and not absorb water. All
proposed fuels require extensive testing, but the characteristics
proposed for these ``drop-in'' fuels suggest that they will behave very
much like the petroleum fuels they would replace.

Questions Submitted by Subcommittee Ranking Member Brad Miller

Q1.  Please provide your name and employing organization(s).

A1.  David Hilbert--Thermodynamic Development Engineer, Mercury Marine
Division of Brunswick Corporation.

Q2a.  Are you an officer or employee of, or otherwise compensated by,
any other organization that may have an interest in the topic of this
hearing?

A2a.  No

Q3a.  In the last three calendar years, including this one, have you
been a registered lobbyist?

A3a.  No

Q4.  If you have worked as an attorney, contractor, consultant, paid
analyst, or in any other professional services capacity, please provide
a list of all of your firm's clients who you know to have an interest
in the subject matter of this hearing. These should be clients that you
have personally worked with in the last three calendar years (including
the present year). Provide the name of the client, the matter on which
you worked and the date range of that work. If there was a deliverable,
please describe that product.

A4.  I was the technical leader of a test of E15 blend fuel in three
different Mercury outboard engines. These tests were conducted at the
Mercury Marine test facility in Fond du Lac in 2010-2011 by Mercury
personnel under contract to the U.S. Department of Energy and
coordinated by the National Renewable Energy Lab (NREL). The final
report was released by the Department of Energy in October 2011. This
test was entitled, ``High Ethanol Fuel Endurance: A Study of the
Effects of Running Gasoline with 15% Ethanol Concentration in Current
Production Outboard Four-Stroke Engines and Conventional Two-Stroke
Outboard Marine Engines,'' and it formed the basis for my testimony
before the Subcommittee. It can be accessed on the Web site of DOE's
National Renewable Energy Laboratory at the following URL: http://
www.nrel.gov/docs/fy12osti/52909.pdf.

Q5.  Please provide a list of all publications on which you have
received an author or coauthor credit relevant to the subject of this
hearing. If the list is extensive, the 10 most recent publications
would be sufficient.

A5.  ``High Ethanol Fuel Endurance: A Study of the Effects of Running
Gasoline with 15% Ethanol Concentration in Current Production Outboard
Four-Stroke Engines and Conventional Two-Stroke Outboard Marine
Engines''--as listed in question 4 above.
Responses by Mr. Jack Huttner,
Executive Vice President, Commercial and Public Affairs,
Gevo, Incorporated

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

Q1a-1e.  In your written testimony, you discuss Gevo's projections for
estimated biobutanol production capacity in the coming years and out to
2015. You state that by 2015, Gevo plans to have approximately 350
million gallons on biobutanol production capacity at an estimated nine
plants. (a) How much biobutanol is Gevo currently producing? (b) Could
you please explain how the composition of EPA's pending Tier 3
standards may impact your projected production capacity? (c) Could you
explain how this uncertainty over forthcoming standards has impacted
your company and the industry in general? (d) What impact would the
establishment of E15 as the new certification fuel for new tailpipe
emissions standards have on Gevo's projected production capacity, the
company's business model, and on the product's anticipated economic and
environmental contributions? (e) What would be the broader impact for
all fuel-based industries?

A1a-1e.  As I stated in my testimony, Gevo currently is converting two
existing ethanol plants for isobutanol production, with the first 18
million gallon per year (MGPY) facility expected to be online by mid-
2012 and the second with an additional 38 MGPY in 2013. Until the first
commercial plant is in production, Gevo is producing isobutanol at its
one MGPY demonstration plant in St. Joseph, MI, as needed by customers
for product specification and qualification. Gevo's business plan is to
build on the success of these early biobutanol units and accelerate the
conversion of ethanol facilities to biobutanol manufacturing plants to
reach approximately 350 million gallons of production from nine
biobutanol plants by the end of 2015.
EPA is not expected to propose its Tier 3 standards regulations
until early 2012 and it is far from clear what the details on that
proposal will be or whether the final Tier 3 standards--scheduled for
adoption in late 2012 or early 2013--will be similar or significantly
different from the proposal. With those caveats, however, EPA has
conducted briefings with stakeholders regarding the direction of their
Tier 3 Standards deliberations and, based on what Gevo has heard from
EPA and other stakeholders, the proposal will have the following
impacts on our projected production capacity and business plan.
EPA is expected to require reductions in gasoline sulfur levels in
the Tier 3 proposal. Given biobutanol has almost no sulfur content,
Gevo anticipates that gasoline standards requiring lower sulfur content
will increase demand for a renewable biofuel such as biobutanol. Our
product's extremely low sulfur content will make it a very attractive
biofuel blendstock for refiners and other obligated parties under the
projected Tier 3 standards.
EPA also has discussed reducing gasoline ``volatility''--measured
by Reid Vapor Pressure, or RVP, measured in pounds per square inch--
under the Tier 3 proposal, to control ozone precursors. Biobutanol has
a lower RVP than ethanol, again making Gevo's product a more attractive
biofuel blendstock for obligated parties under the Tier 3 standards if
RVP is restricted. However, in conventional gasoline areas of the
country, Congress has allowed ethanol a ``one-pound'' RVP waiver for 10
percent ethanol/gasoline blends (so-called E10). This ethanol RVP
waiver limits the effectiveness of EPA's RVP constraints in terms of
environmental protection, and reduces the competitive advantage that
biobutanol's inherently lower RVP should bring to its blenders in the
marketplace. Thus, in a vacuum, Tier 3 standards that constrain RVP
should be advantageous to Gevo and biobutanol. With the presence of the
one-pound ethanol waiver, however, that advantage is minimized or
eliminated.
A third matter EPA has floated as part of the Tier 3 proposal is
changing the ``certification fuel''--the fuel used to certify vehicles
and engines to the Tier 3 emissions standards--from ethanol-free,
``neat'' gasoline (E0) to either E10 or E15. EPA posits that E10 is a
prevalent gasoline blend sold across the United States today and that,
given the Renewable Fuel Standard under the 2007 energy bill, E15 will
be the prevalent gasoline blend sold across the country in the coming
decade. Gevo has not taken a position on a re-designation of the
certification fuel from E0, but we do have concerns about such a
proposal.
Gevo is concerned that moving to a certification fuel containing a
specific biofuel, such as ethanol, as would be the case with E10, would
create barriers to entry for non-ethanol biofuels such as biobutanol
and a competitive advantage for ethanol over advanced biofuels as the
latter seek to penetrate the gasoline markets in the coming years. Gevo
continues to consider this matter and looks forward to reviewing the
rationale that EPA will put forward in its Tier 3 proposal before
taking a formal position on a re-designation of a certification fuel.
Uncertainty is anathema to any business, and that includes the
motor fuels production and biofuels production industries. It is very
difficult for any business to make a commitment to a new capital
project, a plant expansion or conversion, or a new business partnership
when the business does not know what environmental standards it will be
required to meet in the future. Thus, the mere fact that EPA is
considering these Tier 3 Standards injects a degree of uncertainty into
our industry--an uncertainly that impacts Gevo in the same manner as
every other biofuels manufacturer. I am not able to identify a specific
project that Gevo has not undertaken, or a commercial relationship with
a refiner or marketer that has not developed, due to the uncertainty
caused by the pending Tier 3 Standards. One cannot prove a negative.
As noted in the response to 1(b) above, Gevo has not taken a
position on re-designating the certification fuel at this time. We do
have concerns about designating a biofuel such as ethanol as the
``incumbent'' renewable blendstock in gasoline, but it may be that such
concerns can be ameliorated by EPA or by other circumstances. To Gevo,
however, it does not make sense to designate E15--a fuel that is not
yet registered by EPA and thus not legal to sell anywhere in the United
States--as the certification fuel. Many vehicle and small engine
manufacturers have stated on the record that their engines will not
operate well on E15 and that they likely will not warrant repairs
caused by use of E15. Thus, it is unclear whether E15 will ever enter
the marketplace in substantial volumes. Given this uncertainty, EPA
should not force engine manufacturers to certify their engines using a
fuel that is neither widely used by nor widely available to consumers
across the United States.
Gevo's concern with the designation of E10 as the emissions
certification fuel is focused on preventing ethanol from converting 30
years of federal tax and production supports for ethanol into a virtual
monopoly of the renewable biofuels blendstocks for gasoline in the
coming months and years. Congress intended the 2007 Renewable Fuel
Standard to be technology neutral. If designating E10 as the
certification fuel runs afoul of that neutrality, then Congress should
monitor EPA's actions very closely on this matter.

Q2a-2c.  You state in your written testimony that you are ``in the
fairly early stages of discussion with the EPA and hope to resolve'' .
. . ``the issue of finding a way to permit the commingling of E10 and
butanol so that a new, lower Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP) biofuels can
enter the market, lower evaporative emissions, and contribute to
cleaner air.'' (a) Could you please characterize the nature of the
``early stages of discussion'' currently ongoing with the EPA? (b) What
progress has been made on this issue? (c) What do you anticipate will
be the upcoming stages of discussion and progress toward ``technology
neutrality'' in the RFS2 that you emphasize elsewhere in your
testimony?

A2a-2c.  Gevo would characterize its discussions with EPA to date as
preliminary, but positive and productive. Gevo has explained its
concerns to EPA staff in Ms. Oge's office, but has not yet discussed
the commingling issue directly with Ms. Oge. Her staff has acknowledged
the existence of the commingling issue and that, unless EPA guidance is
altered, the commingling restriction will present a hurdle to the
introduction of biobutanol and other renewable, non-ethanol biofuels to
the marketplace. Gevo looks forward to the continuation of these
discussions with EPA in the near future and to achieving what I believe
is a joint goal of environmental protection and eliminating a barrier
to the widespread introduction of a variety of biofuels into the
gasoline market in the coming decade.
Gevo has not had further discussions with EPA staff on this matter
since the hearing, but expects to do so in the near future.
Congress and EPA must remain vigilant to protect the technology
neutrality built into the RFS2 program. While the RFS2 is a government
program, it is regulating for-profit business entities seeking sales
and income for their companies and positive returns for their
shareholders. Thus, some may be tempted to seek to skew current or
future EPA regulations towards one particular biofuel technology,
process or molecule in an attempt to gain a competitive and economic
advantage through government regulation. Gevo opposes such tactics and
urges Congress and EPA to resist such efforts when they occur.
Ultimately, consumers will decide the ``winners'' and ``losers'' under
the RFS2 program and legislators and regulators should not seek to
substitute their judgment for the harsh but generally accurate judgment
of the competitive marketplace.

Q3-3a.  You briefly mention that Gevo continues to face challenges that
relate directly to the conflicts and unintended consequences of the
motor fuel standards that are the subject of today's hearing. You then
limit your discussion of these challenges to the issues of commingling
and that of the Tier 3 standards, and their specific relevance to Gevo.
(a) From your perspective, could you please offer a broader assessment
of these conflicts and unintended consequences, including issues
directly related to your company, as well as a more general assessment
of their impact on industry at large--and the subsequent impact on the
U.S. economy?

A3-3a.  Federal and state regulation of motor fuels is a patchwork
quilt of statutes and regulations adopted over the last three decades
with, at times, conflicting public policy goals in mind. These public
policy goals have variously ranged from increased overall production to
environment protection to energy security to decreased use of fossil
fuels. No observer should be surprised that these conflicting goals
have given rise to conflicts and unintended consequences as one program
or regulation is overlaid by others. If one adds to this mix the fact
that principles of federalism and history allow States to regulate
motor fuels in ways that in some cases contradict federal law, then it
actually surprising that the system works as well as it does.
With respect to federal and State regulation of biofuels and
biofuels production, this patchwork quilt has been woven over several
decades of good intentions into a complex web of incentives and
mandates that may or may not be achieving today's public policy goals.
Gevo encourages Congress and the States to review and to the extent
necessary revise these statutes and regulations to promote renewable
biofuels with the following common characteristics: (1) high energy
content; (2) low environmental impact with respect to traditional
criteria pollutants and greenhouse gases; and, (3) compatibility with
the Nation's liquid transportation fuel infrastructure and existing
motor vehicle and non-road engines.

Q4.  Are you currently or do you have plans to use cornstarch in
isobutanol production? If so, would this biofuel qualify as a second-
general biofuel?

A4.  Gevo's business model is to convert ethanol from cornstarch plants
to produce isobutanol. This strategy is meant to leverage the installed
capital base (14 BGPY) of the current generation ethanol industry to
make a fermentation alcohol with better gasoline-blending
characteristics. But, we can also convert cellulosic sugars into
biobutanol when the technology to convert biomass becomes economically
competitive. In other words, Gevo's production technology does not
require the use of cornstarch to produce biobutanol, but currently
cornstarch is the most economically competitive and fastest route to
our volume objectives available to Gevo.
With respect to qualification as a ``second-generation biofuel,'' I
suspect this question refers to whether Gevo's biobutanol will be
certified as an ``advanced biofuel'' under the RFS2 program. The short
answer to this question is yes, if the biobutanol pathway could show a
greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction of 50% compared to 2005 gasoline. Gevo
can achieve the GHG reduction if we were to invest the capital
necessary to power our plants with renewable energy rather than fossil
energy sources. While the RFS2 restricts cornstarch ethanol from ever
qualifying as an advanced biofuel, there is no such restriction on
biobutanol.

Q5a-5b.  When the RFS was passed in 2005 and expanded in 2007, wasn't
the goal of Congress to move beyond food crops for fuel and instead use
waste products and other non-food feedstocks to product second-
generation biofuels like cellulosic ethanol? (a) Does the RFS2 create a
situation in which corn-based ethanol has the competitive advantage?
How does that work? (b) What recommendations do you have for changes in
the RFS that would allow for increased production of advanced biofuels?

A5a-5b.  Yes, that is Gevo's understanding. However, the development
and commercialization of non-food feedstocks has not kept pace with the
optimism inherent in the RFS2 statute's goals for advanced biofuels.
Biobutanol is arguably, a second-generation biofuel, even if produced
from grain derived fermentable sugars. It is a second-generation
biofuel by virtue of its performance characteristics, i.e., its higher
energy density, compatibility with existing infrastructure (engines,
pipelines, dispensers) and its easy conversion into hydrocarbon fuels,
like jet, diesel and gasoline.
Gevo does not believe that the RFS2 program, as passed by Congress,
inherently advantages corn-based ethanol. Rather, corn-based ethanol's
competitive advantage stems from 30 years of federal and State support
for ethanol through tax, energy and environmental policies. In all,
this governmental support runs into the tens of billions of dollars. We
believe that if ethanol (one fermentation alcohol) is to be supported
by public policy, the same support should also be available to other
fermentation alcohols, indeed other biofuels, so they may compete with
ethanol on their performance and price characteristics. Otherwise,
ethanol policy is a competitive barrier to the entry of other biofuel
molecules.
A technology-neutral RFS2, as Congress intended, would enable
biobutanol a very good chance of challenging corn-based ethanol's
current dominance of the renewable biofuel gasoline blendstock market
in the coming years and decades.
Gevo does not have a comprehensive set of recommendations for RFS2
program changes to provide to the Committee, but again offers the
following recommendations with respect to potential statutory changes
to the RFS2 program and to future EPA implementation of the existing
RFS2 program--Congress and EPA must promote renewable biofuels with the
following common characteristics: (1) high energy content; (2) low
environmental impact with respect to traditional criteria pollutants
and greenhouse gases; and, (3) compatibility with the nation's liquid
transportation fuel infrastructure and existing motor vehicle and non-
road engines.

Questions Submitted by Ranking Member Brad Miller

Q1.  Please provide your name and employing organization.

A1.  Jack Huttner, Executive Vice President, Gevo, Inc.

Q2a.  Are you an officer or employee of, or otherwise compensated by,
any other organization(s) that may have an interest in the topic of
this hearing?

A2a.  Yes.

Q2b.  If the answer to question 2a is ``yes,'' please specify the
organization(s) and the nature of your relationship with the
organization(s).

A2b.  I am the Vice Chairman of the Advanced Biofuels Association,
which has an interest in the topic of this hearing, but receive no
compensation from the Advanced Biofuels Association and I did not
submit testimony on behalf of the association for this hearing. I am
also on the governing board of the industrial and environmental section
at the Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO).

Q3a.  In the last three calendar years, including this one, have you
been a registered lobbyist?

A3a.  No.

Q4.  If you have worked as an attorney, contractor, consultant, paid
analyst, or in any other professional services capacity, please provide
a list of your firm's clients who you now to have an interest in the
subject matter of this hearing. These should be clients that you have
personally worked with in the last three calendar years (including the
present year). Provide the name of the client, the matter on which you
worked, and the date range of that work. If there was a deliverable,
please describe that product.

A4.  I am an employee of Gevo, Inc., and have no clients that may have
an interest in the subject matter of this hearing.

Q5.  Please provide a list of all publications on which you have
received an author or coauthor credit relevant to the subject of this
hearing. If the list is extensive, the 10 most recent publications will
be sufficient.

A5.  I have not authored or coauthored any such publications relevant
to the subject of this hearing.
Appendix 2

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Additional Material for the Record
Letter to Chairman Andy Harris from Dr. Virginia H. Dale,
Member, National Academies Biofuels Panel

Letter to Honorable Lisa P. Jackson, Adminstrator,
Environmental Protection Agency, and White Paper, from Mitch Bainwol,
President and CEO, Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers

Letter to Honorable Lisa P. Jackson,
Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency,
from Michael J. Stanton, President and CEO,
Association of Global Automakers, Inc.

Letters Submitted to Honorable Lisa P. Jackson,
Adminstrator, Environmental Protection Agency,
from Neschaum, Ozone Transport Commission, and NACAA

Slide Presentation from Mr. David Hilbert,
Thermodynamic Development Engineer, Mercury Marine

Presentation from Mr. David Hilbert,
Thermodynamic Development Engineer, Mercury Marine

Gevo White Paper from the Testimony of Mr. Jack Huttner,
Executive Vice President, Commercial and Public Affairs, Gevo,
Incorporated

Potential Supply and Cost Impacts of Lower Sulfur, Lower RVP Gasoline,
Prepared for the American Petroleum Institute, July 2011,
by Baker and O'Brien Incorporated

Letters from Autobile Manufacturers to Honorable Lisa Jackson,
Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency

Letters to Representative F. James Sensenbrenner, Jr.,
from Briggs & Stratton, Subaru, General Motors, and Mercury Marine

Association of International Automobile Manufacturers, Inc:
Response to EPA Decision To Approve E15 Ethanol Fuel
for 2001-2006 MY Vehicles

National Research Council of the National Academies:
Renewable Fuel Standard: Potential Economic and
Environmental Effects of U.S. Biofuel Policy

Letter from Chairman Ralph M. Hall to Honorable Lisa Jackson,
Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency

Letter to Chairman Ralph M. Hall from
Honorable Gina McCarthy, Assistant Administrator,
Environmental Protection Agency


