- REVIEW OF HYDRAULIC FRACTURING TECHNOLOGY AND PRACTICES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REVIEW OF HYDRAULIC FRACTURING
TECHNOLOGY AND PRACTICES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, MAY 11, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-17

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-221 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DAVID WU, Oregon
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 PAUL D. TONKO, New York
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JERRY McNERNEY, California
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
Tennessee                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, May 11, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Ralph M. Hall, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    11
Written Statement............................................    12

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking
Minority Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
U.S. House of Representatives..................................    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Witnesses: Panel I

Mrs. Elizabeth Ames Jones, Commissioner, Texas Railroad
Commission
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    19

Dr. Robert M. Summers, Secretary, Maryland Department of the
Environment
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    25

Mr. Harold Fitch, Michigan State Geologist; Director, Office of
Geological Survey, Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality; and Board Member, Ground Water Protection Council
Oral Statement...............................................    29
Written Statement............................................    31

Dr. Cal Cooper, Manager, Worldwide Environmental Technologies,
Greenhouse Gas, and Hydraulic Fracturing, Apache Corporation
Oral Statement...............................................    34
Written Statement............................................    36

Dr. Michael Economides, Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering, University of Houston
Oral Statement...............................................    39
Written Statement............................................    40

Witnesses: Panel II

Dr. Paul Anastas, Administrator, Office of Research and
Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Oral Statement...............................................    76
Written Statement............................................    77

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mrs. Elizabeth Ames Jones, Commissioner, Texas Railroad
Commission.....................................................    96

Dr. Robert M. Summers, Secretary, Maryland Department of the
Environment....................................................   103

Mr. Harold Fitch, Michigan State Geologist; Director, Office of
Geological Survey, Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality; and Board Member, Ground Water Protection Council.....   106

Dr. Cal Cooper, Manager, Worldwide Environmental Technologies,
Greenhouse Gas, and Hydraulic Fracturing, Apache Corporation...   108

Dr. Michael Economides, Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering, University of Houston.............................   112

Dr. Paul Anastas, Administrator, Office of Research and
Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency..............   116

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Additional Material Submitted for the Record by Dr. Michael
Economides, Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering,
University of Houston..........................................   146

REVIEW OF HYDRAULIC FRACTURING TECHNOLOGY AND PRACTICES

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 11, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in Room
2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ralph M. Hall
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.

Chairman Hall. Okay. The Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology will come to order, and we all say good morning and
welcome to today's hearing entitled a Review of Hydraulic
Fracturing Technology and Practices.
In front of each of you are packets containing the written
testimony, biographies, and truth in testimony disclosures by
today's witnesses. Today's hearing includes two panels which is
not the typical practice of our Committee. I will have more to
say about that a little bit later.
All right. I recognize myself for the first five minutes
for an opening statement.
I want to welcome everyone here today for this hearing to
review hydraulic fracturing technology and practices, and I
thank you for your time. I know it took time to prepare
yourself to travel here and to give us this time, and we are
very grateful to you. The empty seats here shouldn't startle
anybody because everybody has two or three Committees, and they
are on them. They will be in and out of here today, but your
testimony has been taken down by experts here, and it will be
in the Congressional Record for the next 200 years for people
to read. So we do read these things.
The primary focus of today's hearing is our study on
hydraulic fracturing, and hydraulic fracturing, so far as I
understand it, or fracking, is the process by which water,
sand, and a small amount of additives are pumped into a well to
create enough pressure to fracture formations deep within the
earth. That is pretty simple, but that is what they wrote out
for me to say here.
Advances in this 60-year-old technology, combined with
horizontal drilling, have transformed the production of natural
gas along with the natural gas industry.
Access to shale gas that was until recently uneconomical
and technically unrecoverable is driving state and local
economic growth all around the country with providing new
sources of domestic energy to meet growing demand. As with all
energy development, deep gas drilling is not without risk and
concerns about potential environmental effects. This has to be
examined.
However, we have to be careful to ensure that such concerns
are evaluated with objectivity and within the proper context
and with care taken to avoid the influence of political
rhetoric. Science must drive that discussion. For example, the
University of Texas just announced a comprehensive study that
will do just that, separate fact and try to look at facts
separate from fiction regarding the potential environmental
studies of hydraulic fracturing.
Unfortunately, objectivity is not EPA's strong suit, and
its draft study plan is yet another example of this
Administration's desire to stop domestic energy development
through regulation.
The study intends to identify the potential impacts of
hydraulic fracturing on drinking water, without even taking
into consideration the probability that such an effect may
occur or the ability of industry best practices, state laws and
direct oversight, and existing Federal laws to manage the risk
associated with hydraulic fracturing. No regulation or law can
totally eliminate risk. A study that does not quantify
environmental risks using standard practices is useless to
regulators and risk managers and as such, is a waste of
taxpayers' money.
With that in regards to process, that is the process we are
going through today, I want to note my disappointment with the
lack of cooperation from the Administration in assembling this
hearing. I am well aware that many of the members sit on
multiple Committees and as such, we try to be as respectful as
possible on the time demands of our members. Unfortunately,
this Administration is not so respectful. We have invited six
witnesses to testify this morning on hydraulic fracturing, and
as you can see, there is plenty of room at the witness table to
accommodate all six. However, the Environmental Protection
Agency refused to permit Dr. Anastas to testify unless he was
given his own panel.
This demand is counter to longstanding Committee precedent.
In the last decade, EPA Senate-confirmed officials testified on
single panels alongside with non-government witnesses at least
eight times that we have records of. I personally wrote
Administrator Jackson several weeks ago inquiring as to the
rationale behind EPA's decision to treat this situation
differently from prior practice and consistent with this
Administration's refusal to work with the Congress, this
Administrator failed to even acknowledge, let alone, respond to
my letter.
The lack of courtesy and the lack of professionalism being
displayed is counter to President's stated goal that his
Administration would work cooperatively with the 112th
Congress. Of course he wants to work cooperatively, work
together now, especially in the House, and his previous
attitude was we won. I hope we never go that far. EPA's actions
are unacceptable, are absolutely unacceptable and going to be
long remembered.
I thank the witnesses for even being here.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hall follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Ralph Hall
I want to welcome everyone here today for this hearing to review
hydraulic fracturing technology and practices.
The primary focus of today's hearing is EPA's draft study of
hydraulic fracturing. Hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, is the process
by which water, sand, and a small amount of additives are pumped into a
well to create enough pressure to fracture formations deep within the
Earth.
Advances in this 60-year old technology, combined with horizontal
drilling, have transformed the production of natural gas along with the
natural gas industry.
Access to shale gas that was until recently uneconomical and
technically unrecoverable is driving State and local economic growth
all around the country while providing new sources of domestic energy
to meet growing demand. As with all energy development, deep gas
drilling is not without risk and concerns about (potential)
environmental effects must be examined.
However, we must be careful to ensure that such concerns are
evaluated objectively and within the proper context and with care taken
to avoid the influence of political rhetoric. Science must drive this
discussion. For example, the University of Texas just announced a
comprehensive study that will do just that--separate fact from fiction
regarding the potential environmental risks of hydraulic fracturing.
Unfortunately, objectivity is not EPA's strong suit, and its draft
study plan is yet another example of this Administration's desire to
stop domestic energy development through regulation.
The study intends to identify the potential impacts of hydraulic
fracturing on drinking water, without ever taking into consideration
the probability that such an effect may occur, or the ability of
industry best practices, state laws and direct oversight, and existing
Federal laws to manage the risk associated with hydraulic fracturing.
No regulation or law can totally eliminate risk. A study that does
not quantify environmental risks using standard practices is useless to
regulators and risk managers and as such, is a waste of taxpayer money.
With regards to process, I want to note my disappointment with the
lack of cooperation from the Administration in assembling this hearing.
I am well aware that many of our Members sit on multiple Committees
and as such, we try to be as respectful as possible on the time demands
our Members have. Unfortunately, this Administration is not as
respectful.
I have invited six witnesses to testify this morning on hydraulic
fracturing, and as you can see, there is plenty of room at the witness
table to accommodate all six.
However, the Environmental Protection Agency refused to permit Dr.
Anastas to testify unless he was given his own panel.
This demand is counter to long-standing Committee precedent--in the
last decade, EPA Senate-confirmed officials testified on single panels
alongside non-government witnesses at least eight different times. I
personally wrote Administrator Jackson several weeks ago inquiring as
to the rationale behind EPA's decision to treat this situation
differently from prior practice.
Consistent with this Administration's refusal to work with this
Congress, the Administrator failed to acknowledge, let alone respond,
to my letter.
The lack of courtesy and professionalism being displayed is counter
the President's stated goal that his Administration would work
cooperatively with the 112th Congress. EPA's actions are unacceptable
and will be remembered.
I thank the witnesses for being here, and I now recognize Ranking
Member Johnson for five minutes for her opening statement.

Chairman Hall. And I now recognize Ranking Member Mrs.
Johnson for five minutes for her opening statement. Ms.
Johnson.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I must
say that this is my third meeting this morning and the last two
that I left many of the Committee members were still there, so
I am sure they will drift in.
Thank you for holding this hearing. As Texans, Chairman
Hall and I know well the importance of oil and natural gas in
this country. Fossil fuels power our manufacturing base, our
transportation sector, our culture sector, and more, and for
the foreseeable future we rely on these resources and
technologies to achieve our energy, economic, national
security, and in some cases our environmental objectives.
Unconventional shale gas produced through hydraulic
fracturing may very well be an integral part of our future
energy mix, however, we also know that fossil fuels carry
significant environmental risks. In this I am speaking of the
oceans we fish, the soil we farm, the air we breathe, and the
water we drink, all of which have real economic value. Nobody
gets rich from clean water and air. But everybody benefits, and
nobody should have the right to take those away. The Congress
has acted in the past to protect these commons through
legislation such as the Clean Air Act and the Safe Water
Drinking Act, and results have been just that, cleaner air and
safer drinking water.
However, in 2005, Congress exempted hydraulic fracturing
from the Safe Drinking Water Act, and now we need to understand
at what cost. Today we will hear that such regulations hinder
the development of unconventional oil and gas and that more
stringent regulations are not needed to protect public health
and the environment.
That may or may not be the case, but we simply do not have
enough data yet to say, nor will we if industry refuses to
disclose the chemicals it uses and if EPA cannot do its job of
determining the risks. EPA study is just in the beginning. In
the next few years efforts by other agencies, various state
regulators, and academic groups such as the one being
undertaken by the University of Texas Energy Institute will add
to our understanding of hydraulic fracturing.
In the process EPA has also identified a number of serious
issues which will be covered in subsequent studies beyond the
effects on drinking water. Contrary to the industry's claim
that it has been doing this safely for 60 years, this is a new
suit of technologies that may have very different environmental
impacts, especially given the scale of operations we see today.
Ultimately, I believe the science will speak for itself,
and I sincerely hope that hydraulic fracturing proves to be as
benign as the industry asserts. Regardless of the outcome of
these studies let us not be fooled into believing that the
drilling industry alone out of sheer benevolence will implement
cleaner and potentially more costly technologies and practices.
It has never worked that way and likely never will.
Without regulations to level the playing field there are
few incentives to improve the environmental performance.
Precaution is warranted here. We have seen recently how flawed
industry practices, inadequate training and technologies,
poorly-designed systems, short-sighted risk assessments, lacks
governmental oversight, and sheer bad luck can have tragic and
unimaginable consequences. Major disasters such as Fukushima
and the Deep Water Horizon remind us of the real risk of
catastrophic accidents, but they also overshadow the frequency
of smaller safety incidents and spills and the pollution that
escapes regulators' attentions every day. We do not have to
accept this as the cost of our energy addictions. We can do
better.
That said, I want to focus on what I believe is a guiding
principle of this Committee, which is that technology should
evolve and in the case of drilling for unconventional oil and
natural gas become more efficient, safe, environmentally
sustainable, and economically viable. I want to hear how
advances in drilling technologies, chemicals, and practices can
protect public health while providing energy to our Nation.
As the President has said, natural gas can a viable
domestically-sourced option for significantly decreasing both
air pollution and America's reliance on oil. I agree with the
President, but I don't believe we have to compromise our values
and violate the rights of Americans to cleaner water and air in
the process. If hydraulic fracturing has problems, let's
acknowledge it and work to advance technologies to get around
them.
I look forward to this hearing and any future ones on this
subject. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.[The prepared
statement of Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson follows.]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson
Thank you, Chairman Hall, for holding this important hearing.
As Texans, Chairman Hall and I know well the importance and the
impact of oil and natural gas development in this country. Our economy
has relied on fossil fuels to power our manufacturing base, our
transportation sector, our agricultural sector, and more. And, for the
foreseeable future, the country will continue to develop these
resources and technologies to achieve our energy, economic, national
security, and, in some cases, our environmental objectives.
Unconventional shale gas produced through hydraulic fracturing may very
well play an integral role in meeting these goals.
However, we must acknowledge that the development of any fossil
resource can have significant negative environmental impacts. I am not
speaking of the environment for its own sake, but of the very oceans we
fish, the air we breathe, and the water we drink. Like oil and gas,
these too have real economic value. While few people get rich from
clean air and water, everybody benefits. Likewise, nobody should have
the right to take those away, regardless of the potential for financial
profit. This strikes me as something on which most all of our
constituents would agree.
The Congress has acted in the past to protect these commons through
legislation such as the Clean Air Act and the Safe Drinking Water Act,
and the results have been just that --cleaner air and safer drinking
water. However, in 2005, anticipating the boom to come, Congress
awarded drillers with an exemption from the Safe Drinking Water Act for
hydraulic fracturing.
Today we will hear from some Members and witnesses that such
regulations make it difficult and more costly to extract unconventional
oil and gas, and that industry does not need more stringent regulations
to protect public health and the environment. Maybe we do, or maybe we
don't. We simply do not have enough data yet to say, nor will we if
industry is not forthcoming in disclosing the chemicals it uses and if
Congress does not allow the EPA to do its job of determining the risks
of these practices.
EPA's work is just the beginning. In the next few years efforts by
the Department of Energy, various state regulators, and
interdisciplinary academic projects, such as the one being undertaken
by the University of Texas Energy Institute, and others will add to the
overall understanding of the impacts of this new suite of technologies
known as hydraulic fracturing. And, let us be clear that, contrary to
industry claims that it has been doing this safely for 60 years, this
is a new suite of technologies that may have very different and lasting
environmental impacts, especially when compounded by the sheer scale of
operations we see today.
If there is conclusive evidence that the chemicals and practices
used by the drilling industry contaminate water supplies, Congress has
a responsibility to acknowledge these new risks and protect the public.
I believe the science will ultimately speak for itself, and I sincerely
hope that hydraulic fracturing proves to be as benign as the industry
claims.
No matter what the outcome, let us not be fooled into believing
that we can rely on the industry, out of sheer benevolence, to change
the way they operate or to implement cleaner, but potentially more
costly, technologies. With very few exceptions, it has never worked
that way, and likely never will. Without regulations to level the
playing field, they simply do not have the financial incentive to do
so.
It is not alarmist to exercise precaution here, nor is it
unwarranted. Too often we are reminded of how flawed industry
practices, inadequate training and technologies, poorly designed
systems, shortsighted risk assessments, lax governmental oversight, and
sheer bad luck can contribute to tragedies in the energy industry.
Major disasters such as Fukushima and the Deepwater Horizon serve to
remind us of the risk of truly catastrophic, and previously
unimaginable, events. But, they also overshadow the frequency of
smaller safety incidents and spills, as well as the lower-level
pollution that escapes regulators' attention every day. We do not have
to accept this as the cost of our energy addiction. We can do better.
That being said, I want to focus on what I believe is a guiding
principle of this Committee, which is that technology should continue
to evolve, and, in the case of drilling for unconventional oil and
natural gas, become more efficient, safer, environmentally sustainable,
and economically viable. I want to hear from this panel how
advancements in everything from casing technologies to the recycling of
water and the greening of chemicals can protect public health while
still producing domestic energy sources.
Additionally, I want to hear what role the Federal Government
should play in both developing and understanding the impacts of these
technologies. The Department of Energy was instrumental in developing
new technologies to make extraction of unconventional natural gas from
shale formations feasible, and I would like to hear how such federal
resources could now be leveraged to clean up these processes.
So I look forward to learning about the study that Congress has
directed EPA to conduct on the impacts of hydraulic fracturing on
water. While I had hoped that EPA would have been able to cover some
important issues related to hydraulic fracturing other than drinking
water, such as air quality, it is clear that this may have to be
covered in a different study.
As the President has said, natural gas has the potential to be a
viable domestically-sourced option for significantly decreasing air
pollution while reducing America's reliance on oil. I agree with the
President, but I don't believe we have to compromise our values and
violate the rights of Americans to cleaner water and air to get there.
If there are problems with hydraulic fracturing, let's acknowledge them
and work to advance technologies that remedy them.
I look forward to this and future hearings on this subject.
Thank you.

Chairman Hall. The gentlelady from Texas yields back.
If there are other members who wish to submit additional
opening statements, your statements will be added to the record
at this point.
At this time I would like to introduce the first panel of
witnesses.
Our first witness is Mrs. Elizabeth Ames Jones, Chairman.
She is the leader of the Texas Railroad Commission. That is the
state agency that oversees all aspects of Texas oil and gas,
natural gas industry. Mrs. Jones is a member of the Interstate
Oil and Gas Compact Commission and a former member of the
National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners and
the Southern States Energy Board. Prior to her appointment to
the Railroad Commission Mrs. Jones served as a member of the
Texas House of Representatives. Her family are and have been
long-time leaders in the energy field, and Chairwoman Jones is
recognized as knowing as much or more about energy than most
public servants. We are very happy to have you with us, and
thank you for traveling from Austin and leaving that
legislature in session there, and I hope they are working on a
good Congressional District for Mrs. Johnson and for me and for
the others.
Our second witness is Dr. Robert Summers, and at this time
I yield to Mr. Sarbanes, the gentleman from Maryland, to
introduce Dr. Summers.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity
to introduce to the Committee Dr. Robert Summers, who was very
recently named by our governor, Martin O'Malley, to be the
Secretary of the Maryland Department of the Environment, but he
has served in the Maryland Department of the Environment for
many years. He was Deputy Secretary from January of 2007, he
became Acting Secretary in December of 2010, and Dr. Summers
leads the Department's planning, regulatory, management, and
financing programs focusing on restoring public health,
insuring a safe and reliable water supply, restoring and
protecting air quality, wetlands and waterways, et cetera.
He has served the citizens of Maryland for over 27 years in
a variety of capacities within Maryland's environmental
programs, emphasizing scientific and technical issues related
to water pollution control, drinking water protection, and
federal, state, and local government environmental laws and
regulations.
He has a very, I think, sophisticated understanding of the
interplay between the different levels of government oversight
relating to these kinds of issues. It is a pleasure to have him
before the Committee today, and I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back. Reclaiming my
time I thank you, Mr. Sarbanes, for that introduction.
Our third witness is Mr. Harold Fitch. Mr. Fitch is a
Michigan State Geologist, Director of the Office of Geological
Survey at the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and
a Board Member of the Groundwater Protection Council. He
oversees the regulation of oil, natural gas, and mining
operations in the State of Michigan, and we thank you for being
here.
Our fourth witness, Dr. Cal Cooper, is the Worldwide
Manager of Environmental Technologies, Greenhouse Gas, and
Hydraulic Fracturing for Apache Corporation. For the past few
years he served on technical committees for industry
associations and has spearheaded the move to publicly disclose
fracturing fluids and produced waters. Prior to the service
with Apache, Dr. Cooper worked for several multinational oil
and gas companies throughout his career and is considered an
expert in subsurface geosciences.
Our final witness on the first panel is Dr. Michael
Economides, a Chemical and Petroleum Engineer and expert on
energy geopolitics and a Professor at the Cullen College of
Environmental at the University of Houston. Dr. Economides, am
I saying that right?
Dr. Economides. Pretty close.
Chairman Hall. He served as a technical advisor at the
energy companies in Europe, Asia, and South America. He is also
Editor-in-Chief of the Energy Tribune and of the Peer Reviewed
Journal of Natural Gas, Science, and Engineering.
As our witnesses should know and probably do know, your
testimony is limited to five minutes. We hope you can stay
there, but if you go over a little, we respect that. We are not
going to have a hard gamut. You have given us your time and
preparation and you are here, which is more than some of the
others would do. After which each Member here will have five
minutes to ask each of you questions or all of you together
questions, and we will stay pretty close to that five minutes
if we can.
I recognize our first witness, Mrs. Elizabeth Ames Jones
from the Texas Railroad Commission. Mrs. Jones.

STATEMENT OF MRS. ELIZABETH AMES JONES, COMMISSIONER, TEXAS RAILROAD
COMMISSION

Mrs. Jones. Thank you, Chairman Hall and Ranking Member
Johnson and Members of this Committee for the opportunity to be
here before you today. I am delighted to represent the
interests of Texas, a state that you so eloquently stated is
prominent in the regulation of oil and natural gas. We are, in
fact, the top-producing state in the country, and we regulate,
have a lot of hydraulic fracturing that goes on and has been
ongoing in the State of Texas for over 50 years.
So to that extent I would say that we have a little bit of
expertise in this arena that everybody across the country is so
interested in now. As chairman of the Texas Railroad Commission
I am head of the agency that oversees Texas's rich energy
resources.
Over 45 percent of all of all the rigs running in the
America are running in Texas, so it is fair to say I have a
bird's eye view of American energy production in the world's
most prolific shale but not quite the biggest yet but the most
prolific, the Barnett Shale.
My statutory obligation as an elected official who is, in
fact, very, very happy to be here today, Chairman, I might add,
on a panel with these distinguished panelists, it is my
obligation to protect private property rights of mineral owners
and to see that our energy assets, oil and natural gas, are not
wasted.
As a steward of Texas's energy resources I am also a
steward of the environment. As an elected official I am
accountable to the people, and I must have a targeted focus and
particular sensitivity to protecting public health and public
safety.
The regulation of oil and gas activities including
hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling but not limited to
that, fall under the jurisdiction of the states, and we are
doing a good job in this arena. The state-centered approach
assures a win-win for citizens, industry, and the environment.
Part of that win-win is increased energy security for America.
When we produce more oil and gas in America, we import less. By
putting the newest technologies to work for us across the
Nation, we increase our domestic supply of oil and natural gas,
and it can be quantified.
Last month the U.S. Energy Information Agency reported that
natural gas imports to America declined in 2010, for the third
consecutive year. Over the past 4-1/2 years we have cut our
reliance on imported natural gas by a third.
So what happened? America's shale gas production more than
tripled from 2007, to 2010. The point is this. Producing more
of our own resources really does mean energy security for our
country, and I mean, if that is--these facts are not a
definition of that energy security, I don't know what is.
The good news is the American people have a reliable energy
source we can call our own, and we have it because the
technologies developed in America, by Americans, and I might
add that was primarily right there in the Barnett Shale field
today, in the last 20 years, this technology is making it
possible.
The bad news is the current proliferation of
misrepresentation and myths regarding this proven technology,
and I am talking about hydraulic fracturing, the subject of
today's Committee hearing. It is a technology that generates
American jobs and lowers energy costs for American consumers,
and it has the potential to fuel the economic recovery of this
country.
It would be a travesty if the mistruths succeeded in
driving up energy costs and forcing Americans to abandon the
most promising and prolific energy source to come along in 100
years, natural gas. The truth is that all Americans benefit
mightily from hydraulic fracturing and the horizontal drilling
that is going on and the oil because it is also producing oil
and natural gas resources produced.
There are those, unfortunately, who are willing to
undermine this technological innovation by raising false
specters of environmental hazards and unsafe drinking water.
Americans deserve better. Americans deserve the truth, not a
fractured fairytale. I will tell you right now. As an elected
official of the State of Texas, not once has a case of
groundwater contamination from hydraulic fracturing ever been
confirmed by the Railroad Commission of Texas. For fracturing
fluid or the natural gas or oil to affect the water table in
Texas, those substances would have to migrate upwards of
thousands of feet of rock, sometimes even miles. It is simply
geologically impossible. The stories of environmental damage or
contaminated drinking water from hydraulic fracturing are
simply untrue. You have a better chance frankly of hitting the
moon with a Roman candle than fracturing into fresh water zones
by hydraulic fracturing shale rock.
Furthermore, I believe it is morally wrong to deprive
Americans of the benefit of their God-given natural energy
resources because a few special interest Grimm Brothers insist
on perpetrating fairytales. If the EPA falls victim to this
disinformation and institutes the new regulations that are
being considered today, over half our oil and natural gas wells
would be eliminated. Nearly 200,000 barrels of oil per day, 245
billion cubic feet of natural gas a year would stay buried in
the ground. The Federal Government would lose billions, up to
$4 billion supposedly in revenue, states could lose $785
million in revenue, not to mention the lost jobs.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here today. You can tell
that I do have an opinion on this subject, and I am glad to be
able to share it and will look forward to the questions. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Ames Jones follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mrs. Elizabeth Ames Jones, Commissioner, Texas
Railroad Commission

Introduction

The regulation of oil and gas exploration and production
activities, including hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling
falls within the jurisdiction of the states. The Texas Railroad
Commission (RRC) has been regulating the mining of hydrocarbons for 100
years. The Commission no longer over sees the rail industry.
Texas is the largest producer of oil and natural gas in the
country. From the drill bit to the burner tip, the oversight of the oil
and natural gas industries that operate in Texas, including the
responsibility to prevent and to abate surface and ground water
pollution related to oil and gas development in state lands and waters,
falls under the jurisdiction of the Railroad Commission of Texas. With
over one million wells drilled, the RRC is responsible for more oil and
gas wells than any other entity in the nation. Currently, 45% of all
the rigs running in the United States of America are in Texas. Market
forces and the introduction of new technologies developed in Texas,
like hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling, made shale gas
production profitable in the 1990s. Since then, Texas' natural gas
production has increased more than 50 percent. Never in this period has
hydraulic fracturing been a contributor to groundwater contamination.

The Railroad Commission of Texas and Hydraulic Fracturing

The RRC's regulatory framework for well construction and water
protection, which extends well beyond just hydraulic fracturing,
protects surface water and groundwater in a very effective manner. Like
other aspects of our comprehensive regulatory framework that covers
virtually all oil and gas activities, our regulatory practices
addressing hydraulic fracturing are the culmination of over 50 years of
experience. The recent expansion in hydraulic fracturing activity in
the Barnett Shale produced more than 13,000 gas wells. Even with such a
dramatic increase in activity, not once has Texas experienced a case of
groundwater contamination caused by hydraulic fracturing. I do not know
of a single reported case of contamination nationwide.
The Texas regulatory framework emphasizes well construction with
multiple layers of protection for groundwater. Our inspectors conduct
thousands of inspections and tests annually to ensure regulatory
compliance.
Protection of water resources that can be used for human
consumption should be of the utmost importance to every community, and
it certainly is to the RRC. The location and depth of the underground
strata from which that water is taken is very important when discussing
hydraulic fracturing. While those depths vary regionally, in Texas the
strata from which water to be used for human consumption is generally
thousands of feet, perhaps miles, above the targeted formations during
the hydraulic fracturing process. For example, the water table can
extend to a depth of 1000 feet in some areas of the Barnett Shale. The
horizontal lateral pipes are located more than one and a half miles
below the surface.
Additionally, the volumes of fluids other than water that are being
injected must also be kept in mind. Water typically makes up more than
99% of the liquids in fracturing fluid; e.g., the percentage of non-
H
2
O compounds may be approximately 0.05% in a job utilizing
5 million gallons of water.
Cooperation among governmental agencies is a necessity to
successfully ensure environmental mitigation. Before permitting a well
for hydraulic fracturing, we must receive certification from our sister
agency, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), that
identifies where the location and depths of groundwater must be
protected by cement and steel casing. TCEQ geologists and hydrologists
evaluate the well logs from previous wells in the area around any
proposed well to determine the required depth of surface casing to
ensure the protection of fresh water formations. An operator must
obtain this certification from the TCEQ and must present it to the RRC
before we will even consider issuing a drilling permit. In every new
well, the RRC requires that heavy steel surface casing extend beyond
the deepest fresh water formation. Surface casing must be pressure
tested for leakage before restarting drilling activity as an additional
safeguard.
Whether it is fracturing fluid, oil or natural gas, to affect the
usable quality of water, those substances would have to migrate upward
through thousands of feet of rock. That is physically impossible. For
produced water that is recovered at the surface from the well to
contaminate fresh water formations, a leak in the heavy steel surface
casing and a breach of the other protections would have to occur. There
is no evidence or history of that ever occurring in Texas.

Interstate Coordination

Since the regulations of these activities fall under the states'
jurisdiction, it is essential for oil and gas producing states to work
cooperatively and to share information. The RRC actively participates
in the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission (IOGCC), the national
Groundwater Protection Council (GWPC), and STRONGER (State Review of
Oil and Natural Gas Environmental Regulations). The RRC is proud to
state that our Chief Geologist was the chair of the STRONGER workgroup
that developed their guidelines for hydraulic fracturing. Our staff may
be some of the most talented available today.
Participation with the GWPC and the IOGCC led to the initiation of
a national registry to voluntarily disclose the chemicals used during
hydraulic fracturing. Our heavy involvement with the GWPC and the IOGCC
led to the development of the website-FracFocus. This coordinated
effort worked closely with producers and service companies to develop a
format allowing the submission of well and chemical data. Many of the
active shale gas producers have stated their intent to provide this
information, and numerous regional and national oil and gas
associations have endorsed the project.
STRONGER was initially directed to review state drilling fluids and
produced water management. This purview was expanded in 2010 to address
hydraulic fracturing regulations in response to public concerns. As
stated above, the RRC was heavily involved in that process. Since then,
STRONGER has conducted reviews in multiple states. These reviews
provide significant benefits to the states demonstrating the
effectiveness of regulatory programs by bringing in experts from across
the nation to identify possible regulatory improvements. Some of these
experts are RRC employees. STRONGER reviews demonstrate in a clear and
public process that state programs are sound and effective. Our program
is sound and effective.

Risk Management and Drinking Water

The best avenue to risk management is concentrated and prudently
developed experience. The history of hydraulic fracturing goes back
decades. It was first commercially employed in 1948. As many of you
know, the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) was enacted in 1974 to protect
public water. Hydraulic fracturing had been commercially utilized for
25 years at that time, and the SDWA never considered it as an issue.
For the next 22 years the SDWA was debated and amended only twice, and
both times hydraulic fracturing was never discussed. In 1997, a court
case, Legal Environmental Assistance Foundation (LEAF) vs.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), brought the process of hydraulic
fracturing into question without considering any legislative history or
environmental impacts.
In 2002, for the first time ever, the EPA released a draft study on
hydraulic fracturing concluding the process does not pose a risk to
drinking water. To lay the alarm to rest, the US House passed the
bipartisan 2005 Energy Bill clarifying that Congress never intended for
hydraulic fracturing to be regulated under the SDWA. Only recently has
there been a growing impetus to further regulate the fracturing process
even though over 50 years of history record no harm to drinking water
from the process. And, for over those 50 years, the RRC has cautiously,
expeditiously and thoroughly monitored the process and collected data
while upholding our goals to protect public health and safety and to
prevent the waste of our mineral assets.
Through our many years of experience with the hydraulic fracturing
process, we have developed a reliable regulatory framework based on
sound science, technical expertise and common sense. The RRC
regulations address pad site surface operations, water use and
wastewater disposal/storage, casing requirements and injection
procedures. Any state experiencing the economic blessings of shale
developments concerned with acquiring appropriate regulatory schemes
should look to Texas.
A very important aspect of being a regulator is managing complaints
and properly conducting inspections by competent geologists, engineers
and other scientists to ensure regulatory policies are upheld and
enforced. At the RRC, handling complaints is one of the most critical
functions of our Field Operations section. Frequently, responsible
industry participants will notify us of bad operators in an attempt to
avoid the industry-wide problems and publicity caused by irresponsible
oil and gas operators.
Once a complaint is received and a docket is assigned, an initial
inspection is made with or without the complainant. This inspection is
immediate in the case of imminent danger due to pollution or a threat
to public health. Both parties, the complainant and the respondent, are
entitled to our inspection report to ensure transparency and due
process.
Once the field personnel are deployed to investigate a
contamination, they utilize a variety of procedures to confirm if
contamination exists, what the source is, and how to eliminate the
source and to initiate clean up if necessary. To make this
determination, field staff collects water samples from the well and
other water wells in the area for testing and comparison analysis. They
also collect samples of produced water from oil or gas wells within a
quarter-mile of the subject water well. Bacteriological samples are
forwarded to the local health department, and the surrounding area
approximately a quarter-mile from where the subject water well is
inspected. This area inspection includes an investigation into disposal
or injection wells, oil and gas storage and treatment facilities, both
current and abandoned pits, flow-lines, evidence of past leaks or
spills, any creeks and streams, and any other situation that may shed
light on a possible contamination. If a water contamination is
verified, the case is sent to the Site Remediation division for clean
up efforts. If enforcement action is necessary, our Office of General
Counsel pursues the necessary filings.
A recent case of interest where the RRC applied these sound
principles and due process is the situation in which the EPA alleged
that natural gas from a well operated by Range Resources, a Texas-based
company, migrated into water wells in North Texas. Our Commission field
staff fully vetted the area and sent those investigative reports to our
administrative hearings' examiners to either confirm a contamination
had occurred and if so then to determine the source. After weeks of
technical and legal investigations and the presentation of arguments in
keeping with the Administrative Procedures Act, my fellow commissioners
and I ruled there was no evidence of natural gas contamination
attributed to Range Resources. We are confident in our ruling, and we
stand behind the RRC process. This case exemplifies the RRC's success
in properly regulating the Texas energy industry, which regulation
includes making decisions based on sound science and accepted and
approved testing methods, while ensuring that mineral interest owners
can enjoy the monetary benefit of their property ownership and that the
state benefits accordingly.

EPA's Draft Plan

The EPA's original charge was not to study the ``full life cycle''
of an oil and gas well, inclusive of all oil and gas exploration and
production activity such as site selection and development, production,
storage and transportation, all of which are unrelated to hydraulic
fracturing. EPA's own Science Advisory Board rightfully concluded that
the scope of the study should be restricted, at least initially, to
researching sources and pathways of the potential impacts of hydraulic
fracturing on water resources. The RRC submitted comments on the draft
plan a month and a half ago. We concur with the EPA's Science Advisory
Board and believe that the scope of the draft plan remains broader than
that which Congress may have intended. This raises concerns of scope
creep.
Our two main concerns about the EPA's study are that it proposes to
delve into areas beyond the reach of federal law and that it also
proposes to study areas beyond the practice of hydraulic fracturing.
Specifically, the EPA now includes a study of how water withdrawals
might impact water availability and water quality. Water availability
and water withdrawal have historically been the issues of state law,
and we believe is beyond the reach of federal law and regulation. In
addition, the EPA proposes to study the potential impacts of spills,
containment, treatment, and disposal of wastewaters resulting from
hydraulic fracturing. There is no need for the EPA to enter into these
issues since there already exist controls on oil and gas activities in
federal law, which include the SDWA, Clean Water Act (CWA), Clean Air
Act (CAA), and Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).
Furthermore, there are a myriad of state laws and regulations actively
being enforced by the states that care just as deeply for our state and
national resources. Another federal study is just a waste of taxpayer
money.
The EPA has performed similar studies in the past. In the 1980s,
the EPA performed an exhaustive study of oil and gas activities and
wastes with respect to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA). There is no need for new information on the comprehensive
process of oil and gas exploration and production. For this reason and
in an effort to save time and money, we recommended the scope of study
return to that directed by Congress-focus on practices directly
associated with hydraulic fracturing and drinking water resources. With
that said, I have offered the RRC and its staff as a resource to both
the EPA and the Science Advisory Board in this endeavor to conduct an
evaluation of the chemicals used in the fracturing process.
Furthermore, I would eagerly join the discussion on the development of
other alternatives, the evaluation of well construction and
maintenance, evaluation of fracture development, and development of
best management practices. As stated above, we have been doing this in
Texas for over 60 years, the technology to advance these practices and
make shale development possible was pioneered in Texas, and we have the
most experience with the largest shale play in the nation.
Finally, when operators complete the required RRC forms, they list
the amount and kind of material used during hydraulic fracturing.
Additionally, service companies are required by the Office of the
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to post on site Material Safety
Data Sheets of all chemicals used on a drilling location for on-site
employees and emergency first responders.

Economic Generator

Hydraulic fracturing has made the impossible possible. It allows
access to oil and natural gas trapped in areas that were unobtainable
in the past. This process is responsible for 30% of the nation's
domestically recoverable oil and natural gas. Seven billion barrels of
oil and 600 trillion cubic feet of natural gas have been recovered by
hydraulic fracturing.
Some say that up to 90% of wells operating today are because of
hydraulic fracturing and 60-80% of new wells will need hydraulic
fracturing to continue to production.
In 2007, $226 billion was invested in domestic exploration and
production. This is an economic generator that supports local
businesses and creates American jobs. Royalties paid totaled $30
billion in 2007. Without delving too far into how this business drives
up local, state and federal tax revenue, it is exciting to note that 33
school districts in Texas are funded mostly by oil and gas dollars
alone.
If some of the new EPA regulations considered today are
implemented, more than half our oil and natural gas wells could be
eliminated. America's production of domestic energy resources would
diminish by 183,000 barrels of oil per day and 245 billion cubic feet
of natural gas annually. The Federal Government would lose $4 billion
in revenue, and the states would lose $785 million in taxes, not
counting the additional jobs lost.
The American Petroleum Institute engaged IHS Global Insight to
study potential impacts of policy changes for hydraulic fracturing.
They reported that all states will feel a decline in economic activity,
but some states are more affected than others. The most affected will
be Texas. By 2015, Texas could lose up to 364,000 jobs. These are jobs
that paid an estimated $30,000 per job in taxes and royalties to Texas
in 2009 and provide the average oil and gas worker with a salary of
about $107,000 per year. For comparison, consider that the rest of the
private sector workforce in Texas earns an average of $44,000 per year.
The report concludes that Texas could experience a loss of nearly $37
billion in gross state product. The country will suffer when a domestic
homegrown energy source is diminished.
Texas is not the only state affected. The analysis concludes that
in addition to Texas, Oklahoma, Kentucky and West Virginia will suffer
the largest natural gas production decline. Wyoming joins the
aforementioned group in terms of employment and real output declines in
the excess of 7%. Nevada, Colorado, Montana, Arizona, and Florida are
all mentioned. And, if development does not continue in New York and
Pennsylvania, then they will see a loss also.

Summary

In closing, I understand there is a broad concern in the public
related to hydraulic fracturing. I am not here to belittle or to
disregard that concern. Rather, I am here to provide confidence to the
public that these activities can be, and in Texas are, safe, secure and
sufficiently regulated. Furthermore, the production increase due to
these operations is a blessing to our nation, and we should be proud of
the technological innovations discovered and perfected in America, more
specifically, in Texas.
There is a French delegation back in Texas meeting with RRC staff
learning how to establish appropriate regulatory protocols for all
activities related to natural gas production via the process of
hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling. These foreign officials
are already convinced of the benefits. These are not the only foreign
officials to visit. In the past year, we have had numerous foreign
consulates and ambassadors knocking on our door wanting to learn from
our successes in Texas and apply our process to their respective
countries. Technology is working the way it was intended- improving our
quality of life.
The numbers do not lie. In Texas alone, we could lose over 364,000
jobs and almost $37 billion if this practice is outlawed. The numbers
for the entire country are even greater. The truth is that America and
Texas benefit substantially due to the practice of hydraulic fracturing
and horizontal drilling. Any stories of environmental damage or
contamination of drinking water from hydraulic fracturing are fairy
tales.
From 2007 to up until last year, net imports of natural gas have
decreased by about 1.2 trillion cubic feet. My goal as Chairman of the
Railroad Commission is energy security for our country; a diminished
reliance on imported energy of any kind, be it natural gas or oil.
Declining imports that are a direct result of increased domestic supply
that result from putting technology to work is the news the American
people want to hear. They are sick and tired of fractured fairy tales
and they deserve to hear the truth. Thank you for the opportunity to
speak it today.

Chairman Hall. Well, I do thank you, and at this time I
recognize Dr. Robert Summers, Secretary for the Maryland
Department of the Environment, to present his testimony.
Dr. Summers.

STATEMENT OF DR. ROBERT M. SUMMERS, SECRETARY, MARYLAND
DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT

Dr. Summers. Thank you, Chairman Hall and Ranking Member
Johnson and Congressman Sarbanes for your introduction and
other Members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity
to share Maryland's experience and concerns with hydraulic
fracturing.
I am Bob Summers, newly-appointed Secretary of the
Environment. Portions of the Marcellus Shale formation underlie
Garrett County and part of Allegheny County in Western
Maryland. In these two counties gas companies have leased gas
rates on more than 100,000 acres so far. An industry
representative has estimated as many as 2,200 wells could be
eventually drilled on 180,000 acres in Maryland, so obviously,
we are fairly small compared to my--the previous speaker.
But this represents about one well for every 80 acres
leased, and Western Maryland is a very popular recreation
destination for millions just living 3-1/2 hours to the east in
major metropolitan areas, and citizens and businesses in
Western Maryland are very concerned about the potential impact
of widespread drilling.
The Department of the Environment is the regulatory agency
with the responsibility for permitting gas wells in the state.
We currently have applications pending for drilling and
hydraulic fracturing, but no permits have been issued at this
point. We are mindful of the tremendous benefits that we just
heard about that can accrue to the economy by exploring and
developing our gas reserves.
At the same time we have observed events in Pennsylvania
during the first few years of drilling there, and we are
equally alert to the potential adverse impacts on public health
and the environment.
As a result, we are proceeding in a cautious and
deliberative manner. We have issued no permits, and we do not
intend to allow drilling and fracking in Maryland until the
issues are resolved to our satisfaction. There are numerous
issues that must be addressed before Maryland can conclude
whether and how drilling in Marcellus Shale can be done safely.
There include the adequacy and sustainability of regional
surface water and groundwater supplies needed for fracking,
minimum requirements for constructing, casing, cementing,
integrity testing of wells, installing and testing blow-out
prevention equipment, potential migration of gas from the well,
including migration from induced or naturally-occurring faults
and fractures. Toxicity transport and fate of fracking fluid,
proper handling and disposal of naturally-occurring radioactive
materials, best practices for managing and disposing of
flowback, drilling mud and drill cuttings, the need for
refracturing, its potential effect on well integrity, measures
to control air pollution, including greenhouse gas emissions
and ozone production.
We are also concerned about impacts to aquatic ecosystems,
habitat fragmentation, introduction or spread of invasive
species, and damage to wetlands and streams from access roads,
drill pads, gathering lines, and ancillary operations. Not to
mention increased truck traffic, public safety, and emergency
response services.
We anticipate moving forward in two stages. First, during
the next year to 18 months we will survey existing practices,
select best practices for drilling and fracking of wells. The
Department will consider permits for a small number of
exploratory wells to be drilled and fracked in the Marcellus
Shale using these standards and cites eligible for these
exploratory wells must be those who would present minimum risks
to human health and the environment.
The permits will be conditioned on the company's commitment
to collect and share data with the state regarding all aspects
of the drilling and fracking process, monitoring of wastes,
monitoring of surface and groundwater quality in the zone of
influence and the risks and adequacy of best practices.
Second, we will use the data from these wells, along with
the results of other research as it becomes available, to
evaluate the environmental viability of gas production from the
Marcellus Shale in Maryland. This phase will focus on long-term
and cumulative risks, including landscape level effects like I
mentioned with forest fragmentation. If we determine that gas
production can be accomplished without unreasonable risks, the
Department would then make decisions on applications for
production wells.
We are also concerned about the impact on our waters and
citizens from drilling and fracturing-associated activities in
nearby states. We are, in fact, pleased that EPA Region 3 has
recently taken a more active role in overseeing drilling
operations. The region has provided guidance on important
issues such as the need to reopen discharge permits of
facilities that treat Marcellus Shale fracking water and to
initiate monitoring to ensure drinking water supplies are not
impacted by the discharge of the treated waste water.
We need the Federal Government to take an active role in
studying, providing technical support to the state. We commend
Congress for directing EPA to conduct research to examine the
relationship between hydro fracking and drinking water
resources, and while we firming believe the states need to
retain the authority to enact more stringent requirements, the
Federal Regulatory floor would ensure at least basic protection
of the environment and public health.
Interstate waters such as the Susquehanna and Potomac
Rivers, Chesapeake Bay, are critical resources to all of the
jurisdictions in the region and provide drinking water for
millions of people. We need to ensure that these critical water
supplies are protected, and toward that end existing federal
regulatory exemptions for oil and gas drilling activities
should be re-examined. In this regard we support Fracturing
Responsibility Awareness of Chemicals Act, H.R. 1084, which was
introduced by Representative DeGette and co-sponsored by
Representatives Sarbanes, Tonko, and Woolsey, among others.
This would reinstate regulation of hydraulic fracturing under
the Safe Drinking Water Act, and we think this is an important
step.
The states need the Federal Government to provide guidance
and to lend its resources to this effort. We have a strong
federal-state partnership in Maryland with EPA and EPA Region 3
to protect our public health, safety, the environment, and
natural resources. And we need to maintain this. None of us
have the resources we need by ourselves to deal with these very
complex issues, and it is important that we have a strong team
approach.
Thank you for taking the initiative to inquire about this
important issue.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Summers follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Robert Summers, Secretary for the Maryland
Department of the Environment

``Hydraulic Fracturing Technology and Practices''--Major Points

Portions of the Marcellus Shale formation underlie Garrett County
and part of Allegany County in western Maryland. We are mindful of the
benefits that could accrue to the economy, but we are equally alert to
potential impacts on public health and the environment.
Maryland has issued no permits for exploration or production of gas
in the Marcellus Shale, and we do not intend to do so until the
legitimate issues are resolved to our satisfaction. Among the most
important are these:

Construction standards for wells and pads;

Testing standards for well integrity and blowout
prevention devices;

The potential for migration of gas from the well;

The toxicity, transport and fate of fracking fluid that
remain underground;

The proper handling and disposal of flowback and other
liquid wastes;

Control of air emissions, including greenhouse gases and
ozone; and

Landscape level impacts such as habitat fragmentation,
introduction or spread of invasive species, and damage to wetlands and
streams from access roads, drill pads, gathering lines, and ancillary
operations.

Maryland proposes to move forward in stages:

Identify best practices for on site operations from site
selection through fracking, and develop model permit provisions;

Allow a small number of exploratory wells to be drilled
and fracked in order to obtain data;

Depending on the results, these wells may then be
permitted to produce gas; and

Use the information obtained from the exploratory wells,
and other available information, to complete the evaluation of issues,
and decide whether and how to proceed with permitting.

We need the Federal Government to take an active role in studying,
providing technical support to States and assisting the States in
regulating activities such as deep drilling, horizontal drilling,
hydraulic fracturing, and waste disposal.

The EPA draft Hydraulic Fracturing Study Plan is a good
start, but there are important areas it does not address.

With sufficient direction, States could collect
monitoring data and data about drilling and fracking that EPA could use
in its study.

A federal regulatory ``floor'' would be helpful,
especially given the interstate nature of the surface and groundwater.

Existing federal regulations that exclude oil and gas
drilling wastes from coverage should be reexamined.

``Hydraulic Fracturing Technology and Practices''

Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson and honorable members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to share Maryland's experience
and concerns with hydraulic fracturing.

The Marcellus Shale in Maryland

In these two counties, gas companies have leased the gas rights on
more than 100,000 acres. The Department of the Environment is the
regulatory agency with responsibility for permitting gas wells in the
State. We currently have applications pending for drilling and
hydraulic fracturing (``fracking'') in the Marcellus Shale from two
companies for a total of five wells. An industry representative has
estimated that as many as 1,600 wells could be drilled in 128,000 acres
in Garrett County and another 637 wells in 51,000 drillable acres in
Allegany County. We are mindful of the tremendous benefits that could
accrue to the economy by exploring and developing our gas reserves.
Lease payments, royalties, and in Garrett County, severance taxes, and
the economic activity associated with drilling-related jobs could bring
significant economic benefits to these western counties. At the same
time, we have observed events in Pennsylvania during the first few
years of drilling there, and we are equally alert to potential adverse
impacts on public health and the environment. Our paramount concern is
protecting our ground and surface waters. As a result, we are
proceeding in a cautious and deliberative manner. We have issued no
permits, and we do not intend to allow drilling and fracking in
Maryland until the issues are resolved to our satisfaction.

Environmental, Public Health and Public Safety Concerns

There are numerous issues that must be addressed before Maryland
can conclude whether and how drilling in the Marcellus Shale can be
done safely. They include:

minimum requirements for constructing, casing and
cementing wells

minimum requirements for integrity testing of wells

minimum requirements for installing and testing blowout
prevention equipment

the potential migration of gas from the well, including
migration from induced or naturally occurring faults and fractures

the toxicity, transport and fate of fracking fluid

proper handling and disposal of naturally occurring
radioactive materials

best practices for managing and disposing of flowback

best practices for managing and disposing of drilling mud
and drill cuttings

best practices for containment and management of fuels
and other liquids

air pollution, including greenhouse gas emissions and
ozone production

re-fracturing and its potential effect on well integrity

habitat fragmentation, introduction or spread of invasive
species, and damage to wetlands and streams from access roads, drill
pads, gathering lines, and ancillary operations

other impacts to aquatic ecosystems, including stream
sedimentation from damaged roads and dust from truck traffic

the adequacy and sustainability of regional surface water
and ground water supplies needed for fracking

public safety and emergency response services

Additional research and study is needed in each of these areas in
order to be fully protective of public health and safety and the
environment.

Maryland Legislation

Public interest and concern brought the issue of Marcellus Shale
drilling to the attention of Maryland legislature this year, which
recently concluded its 90-day session. One bill was introduced to
accelerate the issuance of drilling permits, another to place the
burden on each applicant for a permit to demonstrate the safety of
drilling and fracking, and another to require a study before permits
could be issued. The Governor and the Department supported a bill to
require the State to perform a comprehensive study of short-term, long-
term and cumulative effects of hydraulic fracturing, to be paid for by
those gas companies holding leases in Maryland. None of the bills
passed.

How the Maryland Department of the Environment Proposes to Proceed

We anticipate moving forward in two stages. First, during the next
year to 18 months, we will survey existing practices \1\and select
``Best Practices'' for the drilling and fracking of wells. These Best
Practices will cover all aspects of site preparation and design,
delivery and management of materials, drilling, casing, cementing and
fracking. After we develop this interim ``gold standard'' the
Department will consider issuing permits for a small number of
exploratory wells to be drilled and fracked in the Marcellus Shale
using these standards. Sites eligible for these exploratory well
permits must present minimum risks to human health and the environment.
The permits will be conditioned on the company's commitment to collect
and share data with the State regarding all aspects of the drilling and
fracking process, monitoring of waste produced, monitoring of surface
and ground water quality in the zone of influence of the operation and
any other information needed to advance our understanding of the risks
and the adequacy of the Best Practices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ We will survey information from other states, but we note that
there are regional differences in geology, climate, and formation
composition that may limit the applicability of some methods in
Maryland. For example, disposal of wastewater in underground injection
wells, common in some areas, may not be feasible in Maryland.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, we will use the data from these exploratory wells, along
with the results of other research as it becomes available, to evaluate
the environmental viability of gas production from the Marcellus Shale
in Maryland. This phase will focus on long-term and cumulative risks,
and include landscape level effects like forest fragmentation. If we
determine that gas production can be accomplished without unreasonable
risk to human health and the environment, the Department could then
make decisions on applications for production wells. Permit conditions
would be drafted to reflect Best Practices and avoid environmental
harm. At this time, we have not identified a source of funding for this
work.
Maryland is also concerned about the impact on its own waters and
citizens from drilling and hydraulic fracturing and associated
activities in nearby states. Pennsylvania has experienced incidents of
well blowouts and releases of flowback. It has been reported that
inadequately treated hydraulic fracturing wastewater has been
discharged to surface water in Pennsylvania. The potential risk to
Maryland of repeated incidents in Pennsylvania, the most recent of
which resulted in it release of flowback to a tributary of the
Susquehanna River in April, prompted the Attorney General of Maryland
to send a notice letter to the companies involved in the April release,
asserting Maryland's right to bring a citizen suit for injunctive
relief and civil penalties under the provisions of the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and the Clean Water Act (CWA).

The Need for Federal Leadership

We need the Federal Government to take an active role in studying,
providing technical support to States and assisting the States in
regulating activities such as deep drilling, horizontal drilling,
hydraulic fracturing, and waste disposal. In the absence of a strong
federal regulatory program, the burden of assuring that wells can be
safely drilled and hydraulically fractured in the Marcellus Shale falls
on the states individually.
We commend Congress for directing the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) to conduct research to examine the relationship between
hydraulic fracturing and drinking water resources. EPA's Office of
Research and Development has developed a solid, comprehensive plan for
this study; however, we note that some important issues are beyond the
scope of the study, including re-fracturing, and impacts to air quality
and terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. These issues also need to be
studied.
At EPA's request, the Science Advisory Board (SAB) is reviewing the
study plan. Preliminary indications are that the SAB recognizes the
importance of the study, as well as the challenges posed by the limited
budget and time frame. It may suggest a narrowing of the focus of the
study, but also additional research activities. Among those mentioned
that Maryland considers to be of critical importance are: identifying
best practices for well construction and whether those practices
protect public water supply; and evaluating the potential release of
contaminants to underground sources of drinking water through naturally
occurring or induced faults.
While the states should retain the authority to enact more
stringent requirements, a federal regulatory ``floor'' would ensure at
least basic protection of the environment and public health. Federal
regulation is particularly important given the interstate nature of
surface and ground waters and the fact that states do not have
jurisdiction over out-of-state drilling and fracking activities, even
when those activities could have significant impacts on water quality
in neighboring states. Interstate waters such as the Susquehanna and
Potomac Rivers and the Chesapeake Bay, are critical resources to all of
the jurisdictions in the region.
Existing regulatory exemptions for oil and gas drilling activities
should be re-examined. For example, gas and oil exploration and
production wastes are currently excluded from RCRA Subtitle C
regulation. The Clean Water Act was amended to expand the regulatory
exemption for stormwater runoff to cover all oil and gas field
activities and operations, not just uncontaminated stormwater runoff
from certain operations. The injection of hydraulic fracturing fluids
is excluded from the Safe Drinking Water Act's Underground Injection
Program. In this regard, we support the Fracturing Responsibility and
Awareness of Chemicals Act, H.R. 1084, which was introduced on March
15, 2011, by Representative DeGette and co-sponsored by Representatives
Sarbanes, Tonko and Woolsey, among others. The Bill would reinstate
regulation of hydraulic fracturing under the Safe Drinking Water Act
and require the person conducting hydraulic fracturing operations to
disclose to the government all of the chemical constituents used in
hydraulic fracturing. This is a positive step forward. Under the bill,
however, proprietary chemical formulas could still be protected from
public disclosure, and we encourage a reexamination of the scope of
protection for proprietary information. The public has an important
interest in knowing what chemicals are being injected underground.
We note also that Region III of the EPA has recently taken a more
active role in overseeing drilling operations in the Marcellus Shale.
It provided guidance on important issues, such as the need to reopen
the discharge permits of facilities that treat Marcellus Shale fracking
wastewater, and to initiate monitoring to ensure that drinking water
supplies are not being impacted by the discharge of the treated
wastewater. More recently, following a release of fracking fluid at the
Chesapeake Energy gas well in Bradford County, Pennsylvania, EPA Region
III used its authority under the Clean Water Act, the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (commonly called
Superfund), and the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act to require
Chesapeake Energy to provide information and documents regarding the
release, including the exact chemical identity of each constituent in
the fracking fluid.
We are also encouraged by President Obama's ``Blueprint for a
Secure Energy Future,'' which he announced on March 30. In particular,
we welcome the plan to have the Energy Advisory Board establish a
subcommittee to identify immediate steps that can be taken to improve
the safety and environmental performance of fracking and to develop
consensus recommendations for federal agencies on practices that will
ensure the protection of public health and the environment. Secretary
of Energy Chu named the group on May 5. The planned establishment by
DOE and EPA of a mechanism to provide technical assistance to states to
assess the adequacy of existing state regulations is also welcome.
The states need the Federal Government to provide guidance and to
lend its resources to the effort. We need a strong state-federal
partnership. Timing and other factors probably preclude using an
exploratory well in Maryland for one of the prospective case studies
planned for the EPA study, but we hope that EPA will provide expanded
guidance on the study plan for the prospective case study so that
Maryland can gather the most relevant data, if a permit is issued for
an exploratory well. We would also welcome the technical assistance of
the US Geological Survey in determining what to monitor in the process
of drilling and fracking wells for exploration, and in analyzing the
data we obtain. A compilation of Best Practices and, until the EPA
study can' better delineate the subsurface zone that is potentially
impacted by hydraulic fracturing activities, preliminary guidance on
the proper spatial area for monitoring, would also be helpful. Lastly,
we urge EPA to develop water quality criteria for conductivity
(specific to chemical species), dissolved solids and salinity in
freshwater, as well as pretreatment standards for fracking flowback
that is protective of drinking water supplies and the health of the
citizens who rely upon those supplies.
The Chesapeake Bay Foundation and other groups have filed a
petition with the Federal Government for a Programmatic Environmental
Impact Statement to address the risks and cumulative impacts of the
extraction of natural gas from the Marcellus Shale formation in the
Chesapeake Bay watershed. We support the goal of a comprehensive
assessment, and we note that portions of the Marcellus Shale lie to the
west of the Eastern Continental Divide, and that the environment
outside the Chesapeake Bay watershed deserves protection, too.
Thank you for taking the initiative to inquire into this important
issue and for the opportunity to share Maryland's perspective.

Chairman Hall. Thank you, sir.
I now recognize Mr. Harold Fitch, Board Member of the
Groundwater Protection Council, for five minutes to present his
testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. HAROLD FITCH, MICHIGAN STATE GEOLOGIST,
DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF GEOLOGICAL STUDY, MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY, AND BOARD MEMBER, GROUNDWATER PROTECTION
COUNCIL

Mr. Fitch. Good morning, Chairman Hall and Members of the
Committee. I appreciate the opportunity to be here this
morning. In addition to my role as head of Michigan's
Regulatory Agency for Oil and Gas and my role on the Board of
Directors with the GWPC, I serve as Governor Snyder's official
representative to the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact
Commission, and I am chair of the IOGCC Shale Gas Director's
Task Force. I also serve on the Board of Directors of State
Review of Oil and Natural Gas Environmental Regulations
Incorporated or STRONGER. STRONGER has conducted focused
reviews of state hydraulic fracturing regulations in four
states over the past year.
I would like to talk first about regulation of hydraulic
fracturing by the states. Hydraulic fracturing has been
utilized throughout the United States for more than 60 years,
and the states have a long history of successful regulation of
the practice. I would say in contrast to Maryland, Michigan has
a longstanding regulatory program for oil and gas. We go back
to about 1925. We feel we have a very good handle on hydraulic
fracturing, as well as the other oil and gas issues out there,
and we believe that the states are the proper place to retain
that regulatory oversight.
In Michigan we have more than 12,000 wells that have been
hydraulically fractured. We don't have one instance of
groundwater contamination resulting from the practice.
The recent development of deep shale gas formations has
raised concern in Michigan and other states over about five
issues which I would like to address in turn.
The first issue is migration of gas or fracture fluids.
There has been a few recent incidents of gas migration into
aquifers in other states, but the cause has been well
construction problems and not hydraulic fracturing itself. In
fact, there are no cases of hydraulic fracturing directly
causing gas or fluids to migrate into fresh water zones. The
keys to preventing migration of gas or fluids are proper casing
and sealing of oil and gas wells and proper plugging of
abandoned wells.
The second issue is water use. A fractured treatment of a
typical shale gas well may require three million gallons of
water or more. To put that in perspective, three million
gallons is about the volume of water used by five or six acres
of corn in a year. The states have the regulatory tools to
address the issue in a manner tailored to their specific needs
and legal structures. In Michigan we require application of a
web-based water withdrawal assessment tool to evaluate those
large withdrawals.
Third issue is management of flowback water. After
fractures are created in the reservoir rock, 25 to 75 percent
of that fracturing fluid is recovered as flowback. In Michigan
and many other states flowback water is transported to licensed
deep disposal wells where it is isolated from the environment.
In some states flowback water may be hauled to wastewater
treatment plants where it is treated and discharged into
surface waters. There have been a few cases where that has
caused legitimate concerns over water quality impacts.
The fourth issue is surface spills. As with any industrial
operation, there is a potential for accidental spills or
releases related to hydraulic fracturing. However, the states
have requirements in place to minimize the risk of spills, to
reduce their impacts, including secondary containment, spill
reporting, and cleanup criteria.
And finally, the fifth issue is identification of chemical
additives. A growing number of public interest groups are
advocating for public disclosure of chemical additives used in
hydraulic fracturing fluids. Federal law requires posting of
material safety data sheets that provide information on
hazardous chemicals and their potential health and
environmental impacts. While the identities of some chemicals
are protected under federal laws and trade secrets, we believe
that the material safety data sheets provide enough information
to respond to and track spills.
Next I would like to talk about the Groundwater Protection
Council actions to address hydraulic fracturing. The GWPC has
been engaged on the issue for some time and has published two
very relevant reports on shale gas and state regulations to
protect water resources. Last September the GWPC in cooperation
with the IOGCC began development of a national registry of
chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing. The result is a website
called Frac Focus, www.fracfocus.org, launched on April 11. The
website gives the public and regulators access to comprehensive
information on chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing for
individual wells nationwide.
The website also contains other useful information on
hydraulic fracturing. Within its first month of operation 40
companies had agreed to participate, and information on more
than 450 wells had been loaded into the system.
Michigan and other states are encouraging the industry to
upload data to the Frac Focus website, and several states are
considering using Frac Focus as part of future rule changes.
Finally, let me comment on the pending U.S. EPA study.
While we believe the states have adequate programs, authority,
and expertise for regulating hydraulic fracturing, we also
acknowledge the potential benefits of a review by the EPA,
particularly in light of the intense controversy surrounding
the subject.
We appreciate the EPA's pledge to work with the states,
GWPC, and other stakeholders in conducting a study, and we are
committed to upholding our respective roles.
We do, however, have some concern with the scope of the
draft study plan. The plan calls for addressing a broad range
of questions, including the fracturing process itself, water
withdrawals, releases of fracturing fluids and flowback water,
and treatment of wastewaters. We are concerned that the study
would cover general oil and gas practices that are not specific
to hydraulic fracturing, and in addition, the broad scope of
the study as proposed would make it difficult to produce a
timely report.
EPA's Science Advisory Board has urged the agency to focus
on waste discharges, and we agreed with that recommendation.
In conclusion, the states and GWPC are committed to dealing
with the issues surrounding hydraulic fracturing and to
supporting a focused study by the EPA.
Thank you, again, for the opportunity to appear here, and I
would be glad to entertain any questions the Committee may
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fitch follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Harold Fitch, Michigan State Geologist,
Director, Office of Geological Study, Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality, and Board Member, Groundwater Protection Council
Summary
I am representing the State of Michigan and the Groundwater
Protection Council, or GWPC. I am the Director of the Office of
Geological Survey (OGS) of the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality and a member of the Board of Directors of the GWPC.
I want to discuss the experience in regulating hydraulic fracturing
in Michigan as well as other states, the GWPC's role in addressing some
of the controversies surrounding the technique, and the study that is
underway by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
Hydraulic fracturing has been utilized throughout the United States
for more than 60 years, and the states have a long history of
successful regulation of the practice. Recent concerns center on five
issues: (1) migration of gas or fracture fluids, (2) water use, (3)
management of produced water, (4) surface spills, and (5) disclosure of
chemical additives. I will discuss each in turn.
The GWPC has been engaged on the issue of hydraulic fracturing for
some time, and has published two very relevant reports on shale gas
development and hydraulic fracturing. On April the GWPC launched a
website called Frac Focus. The website gives the public and regulators
access to comprehensive information on chemical use in hydraulically-
fractured wells nationwide and contains much additional information
about hydraulic fracturing and related issues. It is already getting
extensive use.
We support in principle the U.S. EPA ``Draft Plan to Study the
Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing on Drinking Water
Resources.'' While we believe the states have adequate programs and
authority for regulating hydraulic fracturing and a very good
understanding of the technology and its potential for impacts, we also
acknowledge the potential benefits of a review by the EPA in light of
the intense controversy surrounding the subject. The states and GWPC
are committed to providing all pertinent information and other support
to the EPA in conducting the study, although we do have some concern
with the scope and timing.
TESTIMONY SUBMITTED TO THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND
TECHNOLOGY
Good morning Chairman Hall and members of the Subcommittee. My name
is Harold Fitch. I am here today representing the State of Michigan and
the Groundwater Protection Council, or GWPC. I am the Director of the
Office of Geological Survey (OGS) of the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality and have served in that capacity for the past 15
years. The OGS is charged with regulating oil, gas, and mineral
exploration and production operations in Michigan. The Ground Water
Protection Council is a national association of state ground water and
underground injection control agencies whose mission is to promote the
protection and conservation of ground water resources. I am a member of
the Board of Directors of the GWPC.
I am also involved in two other organizations that play prominent
roles in hydraulic fracturing issues: the Interstate Oil and Gas
Compact Commission, or IOGCC, and State Review of Oil and Natural Gas
Environmental Regulations, Inc., or STRONGER.
The IOGCC is an organization chartered by Congress that represents
the governors of more than 30 oil and gas producing states. Its mission
is to conserve domestic oil and gas resources while ensuring
environmental protection. I am Michigan's Official Representative to
the IOGCC, and I serve as Chair of the IOGCC Shale Gas Directors' Task
Force.
STRONGER is a non-profit organization representing states,
industry, and public interest groups whose purpose is evaluate state
oil and gas regulatory programs against a set of established
guidelines. I serve on the Board of Directors of STRONGER. Over the
past year we have conducted focused reviews of state hydraulic
fracturing requirements for Pennsylvania, Ohio, Oklahoma, and
Louisiana.
I appreciate this opportunity to address you on the important issue
of hydraulic fracturing. I want to talk briefly about the experience in
regulating hydraulic fracturing in Michigan as well as other states,
the GWPC's role in addressing some of the controversies surrounding the
technique, and the study that is underway by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA).

Regulation of Hydraulic Fracturing by the States

Hydraulic fracturing has been utilized throughout the United States
for more than 60 years, and the states have a long history of
successful regulation of the practice. In Michigan more than 12,000
wells have been hydraulically fractured, beginning in the 1970s. Most
of these are relatively shallow shale gas wells in the northern Lower
Peninsula. More recently, there has been interest in a deeper shale
formation that requires the drilling of long horizontal holes and
larger volumes of fracturing fluid for effective development. It is
this type of development that has raised concerns over hydraulic
fracturing in Michigan and other states. The concerns center on five
issues: (1) migration of gas or fracture fluids, (2) water use, (3)
management of produced water, (4) surface spills, and (5) disclosure of
chemical additives. Let me address each of those issues in turn.
Migration of gas or fracture fluids. Whenever an oil and gas well
is drilled through a fresh water aquifer there is a potential for
migration of gas or other fluids up the well bore and into the aquifer,
whether or not the oil and gas well is hydraulically fractured. There
have been a few recent incidents of gas migration in other states, but
the cause has been well construction problems and not hydraulic
fracturing itself. Because of rock characteristics and the physics of
the fracturing process, it is virtually impossible for an induced
fracture to propagate upward into fresh water zones. The key to
preventing migration of gas or fluids is installation of steel pipe, or
``casing,'' encased in cement. In addition, it is important to assure
there are no abandoned and inadequately plugged wells in the vicinity
that could constitute a conduit for movement of fluids or gas during a
hydraulic fracturing operation or during subsequent production
operations. The states have the regulatory tools to address these
issues.
Water use. A fracture treatment of a typical deep shale gas well
may require three million gallons of water or more. To put this in
perspective, three million gallons is the volume of water typically
used by five to six acres of corn during a growing season. While water
withdrawal regulations vary across the U.S., the states again have the
regulatory tools to address the issue in a manner tailored to their
specific needs and legal structures. In Michigan we require evaluation
of large water withdrawals for hydraulic fracturing using the same
methodology required of other large water users.
Management of flowback water. After fractures are induced in the
reservoir rock, pressure is released and a portion of the fracturing
fluids is recovered from the well. The recovered fluid is termed
``flowback.'' It typically constitutes 25 to 75 percent of the
fracturing fluid originally injected. The remainder stays in the
reservoir rock or is produced gradually along with the natural gas as
``produced water.'' In Michigan, flowback water must be contained in
steel tanks and transported to licensed disposal wells where it is
injected into deep rock layers that are isolated from fresh water
supplies. That is at least an option in many other states. In some
states flowback water may be hauled to wastewater treatment plants
where it is treated and discharged into surface waters. This has raised
issues with water quality because treatment plants may not be capable
of removing some constituents of the flowback water-particularly
dissolved salts that may be in the native reservoir fluids and be mixed
with the flowback. In some areas flowback water is stored and recycled.
Surface spills. Spills of chemical additives or flowback water can
have adverse environmental or public health impacts. As with any
industrial operation, there is a potential for accidental spills or
releases associated with hydraulic fracturing. However, the states have
safeguards in place to minimize the risk of spills and reduce their
impacts. Michigan requires secondary containment in areas where spills
may be most likely, and has strict requirements for spill reporting and
cleanup.
Identification of chemical additives. A growing number of public
interest groups are advocating for public disclosure of chemical
additives used in hydraulic fracturing fluid. A few states are taking
actions to require disclosure to a state regulatory agency, although
not to the general public. Under federal law information on chemicals
and potential health and environmental effects must be provided in
Material Safety Data Sheets (or MSDSs), which are posted wherever the
additives are stored, transported, or used. However, the chemical
identities and concentrations of some of the chemicals are exempted
from disclosure as trade secrets. Those details must be provided to
medical personnel in the event of an emergency. In Michigan we believe
the MSDSs provide enough information to respond to and track spills. We
are working to make that information more readily available to the
public.

GWPC Actions to Address the Hydraulic Fracturing Controversy

The GWPC has been engaged on the issue of hydraulic fracturing for
some time, and has published two very relevant reports. The first of
these reports is called Modern Shale Gas Development in the United
States: A Primer. The primer discusses the regulatory framework, policy
issues, and technical aspects of shale gas resources and provides
accurate technical information on hydraulic fracturing.
The second report is entitled State Oil and Gas Regulations
Designed to Protect Water Resources. The report is a comprehensive
state-by-state evaluation. It concludes that state oil and gas
regulations are in general adequately designed to directly protect
water resources. The report also recommends consideration of flexible
Best Management Practices; commends the STRONGER, Inc. process of
reviewing state programs; and supports increased digitization of state
data.
Last September the GWPC began a project in cooperation with the
IOGCC to develop a national registry of chemicals used in hydraulic
fracturing. The result is a website called Frac Focus,
www.fracfocus.org, launched on April 11. The U.S. Department of Energy
provided funding support for the project. The initiative provides oil
and gas exploration and production companies with a single-source means
to publicly disclose the chemical additives used in the hydraulic
fracturing process.
The Frac Focus website features an easy-to-use interface that gives
the public and regulators access to comprehensive information about
hydraulically-fractured wells nationwide. Searchable fields allow users
to identify wells by location, operator, state, and county, as well as
a standard well identification number, known as an API number.
The website also contains information about the process of
hydraulic fracturing, groundwater protection, chemical use, state
regulations, publications, and links to federal agencies, technical
resources and each participating company. Within its first months of
operation 40 companies had agreed to participate in the effort, more
than 450 wells were loaded into the system by 18 of these companies,
and the website was visited more than 28,000 times by people in 78
countries.
Future enhancements to the site will include an improved uploading
system that should result in quicker posting of greater numbers of
records, a Geographic Information System interface that will aid the
public in locating records more easily and links to more publications,
state agencies and other resources.
My agency in Michigan joins other states in strongly encouraging
the industry to upload data to the Frac Focus website. Several states
are considering using Frac Focus as part of future chemical disclosure
rule changes.

The Pending U.S. EPA Study

I have reviewed the U.S. EPA ``Draft Plan to Study the Potential
Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing on Drinking Water Resources'' that was
published February 7, 2011. We support the study plan in principle.
While we believe the states have adequate programs and authority for
regulating hydraulic fracturing and a very good understanding of the
technology and its potential for impacts, we also acknowledge the
potential benefits of a review by the EPA in light of the intense
controversy surrounding the subject.
We appreciate the EPA's pledge to work with the states, GWPC, and
other stakeholders in conducting the study and are committed to
upholding our respective roles. In particular, we want to assure that
the study adhere to the directive of Congress that the study utilize
the best available science; rely on independent sources of information;
be a transparent, peer-reviewed process; and incorporate consultation
with stakeholders.
We do have some concern with the scope and timing of the study. The
EPA intends to produce an interim report in 2012, and provide
additional results in a 2014 report. The EPA has identified a number of
questions to be addressed, including impacts of water withdrawals;
releases of fracturing fluids, flowback, and produced water; the
injection and fracturing process itself; and inadequate treatment of
hydraulic fracturing wastewaters. EPA's Science Advisory Board has
urged the agency to focus on waste discharges, and we agree with that
recommendation, particularly with respect to the interim report. We
believe that management of flowback and produced water is the primary
concern in hydraulic fracturing. We are concerned that the broad scope
of the study as proposed will make it difficult to produce a timely
report.
We have one final concern: President Obama has directed the
Department of Energy to establish a panel to address concerns regarding
potential negative impacts associated with hydraulic fracturing. Within
six months, the panel is to offer advice to other agencies on how to
better protect the environment from shale gas drilling. It is unclear
how the panel's study will be combined with the ongoing EPA study.

Conclusion

In conclusion, we believe the laws and rules in Michigan and other
states effectively protect water and other natural resources as well as
public health and safety from potential adverse effects of hydraulic
fracturing. Michigan is typical of the oil and gas producing states in
taking a proactive approach to address large-scale hydraulic fracturing
as well as other issues associated with deep shale gas development. The
GWPC will continue to assist states with their regulatory needs for the
purpose of protecting water, our most vital natural resource.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear here today. I would
be glad to entertain any questions the Committee may have.

Chairman Hall. Thank you, Mr. Fitch.
I now recognize Dr. Cal Cooper from Apache Corporation for
five minutes to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. CAL COOPER, MANAGER, WORLDWIDE ENVIRONMENTAL
TECHNOLOGIES, GREENHOUSE GAS, AND HYDRAULIC FRACTURING, APACHE
CORPORATION

Dr. Cooper. Mr. Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson, and
Members of the Committee, thank you.
For the oil and gas business hydraulic fracturing is one of
the most enabling technologies ever. It will unlock vast
amounts of hydrocarbons not only in shales but also in mature
fields and widespread unconventional reservoirs. Companies are
testing new applications every day. Our energy future is being
redefined, especially here at home. This is going to have a
really major economic impact.
We all agree we must rationally understand its risks. Based
on existing knowledge and practical experience we believe these
risks are minimum and manageable. We have faith that if a
problem is identified, industry will be able to innovate,
adapt, and resolve it.
Certainly the public deserves more than our assurances. As
a Nation our choice is to employ high-quality science to frame
and investigate concerns and then have rigorous scientific
review that validates our conclusions.
That means calm, dispassionate reasoning and analysis and
focused investigations, objectivity. The common good is not
advanced by emotionally-charged distortions and confrontational
media. This is not a game of gotcha. It is not entertainment.
It is about our future in every sense of the word.
Maybe some folks believe this is just about the Marcellus.
Well, Apache doesn't currently operate in the Marcellus Shale
Play, but we have a big acreage position in British Columbia
where the second-largest hydrocarbon producer in the Permian
Basin, and we have been doing quite a bit of fracking in
Western Oklahoma and the Texas Panhandle in the Granite Wash.
We know this technology is truly revitalizing production in
the North American Oil Patch, and it will rapidly expand
internationally.
Developing oil and gas resources requires continued
innovation to reduce costs, never compromising efforts to
improve environmental protection and safety. Ultimately we all
benefit from doing this correctly, but no formula applies
everywhere. Apache operates in states and provinces where we
are permitted to re-inject 100 percent of flowback and produced
water into deep underground reservoirs, completely isolated
from freshwater aquifers. We believe this is the safest option,
and it eliminates many potential conflicts. This is not done in
the Marcellus.
Recently we proved for our Canadian operations that we can
use high-sailing water instead of fresh water for our frack
jobs. Working with our partner, EnCana, we extract and treat
water from a deep saline reservoir known as the Debolt
formation. We do some treatment to it, and after fracking we
then re-inject the flowback and produce water into that same
formation in a closed loop system.
High-flow-rate brackish or salt water systems like the
Debolt, well, they are not present everywhere, and they are
probably not present in the Marcellus. But in the Permian Basin
we think that the Santa Rosa groundwater system can be adapted
for a similar purpose, and we are working hard to advance that
as fast as we can.
Apache has also made a real effort to help the industry
reach consensus regarding disclosure of the composition of
hydraulic fracturing fluids. We have committed to post the
composition of every U.S. frac job operated by us on the
FracFocus website that Mr. Fitch just described.
Well, the success of any scientific evaluation can usually
be predicted by the quality and commitment of the team
assembled to do the work, the clarity and focus of the
investigation to prioritize testing of what is important, and
the availability of the necessary tools and resources to get
the job done. Good oversight also helps. Based on those
criteria it is frankly difficult to expect much of value from
this EPA study. It aspires to do too much with too little, in
too short a time frame. It has no direction of priorities based
on testing existing knowledge. It reads like a shopping list
for research funding. Buy one of each.
The national interest may be well served by changing the
tone of the study. What can be done quickly for that budget?
Perhaps the EPA could collaborate with industry to identify and
prioritize concerns, perhaps rapid progress could be made to
identify the chemical additives of greatest concern based on
regionally-specific information and analysis about the ultimate
presence of those chemicals in produced waters and the
quantification of actual risks to the public. This would help
all of us.
I have met and discussed hydraulic fracturing with a great
many talented people, including some exceptional scientists in
industry, the EPA, national labs, universities, and committed
environmentalists. I consider it a privilege to have served as
a technical theme lead for an EPA hydraulic fracturing
workshop. We all have different perspectives, but we all agree.
Ultimately science must be objective. Sometimes it takes awhile
to realize that truth, and hydraulic fracturing is far too
important to be dismissed for the wrong reasons.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Cooper follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Cal Cooper, Manager, Worldwide Environmental
Technologies, Greenhouse Gas, and Hydraulic Fracturing, Apache
Corporation
Mr. Chairman, and members of the committee,
Thank you for this opportunity to provide an industry perspective
on the exciting, technology driven opportunity of hydraulic fracturing.
Today I hope to share with you some perspectives on both the technology
as a whole and on the proposed EPA draft plan to study the potential
impacts of hydraulic fracturing on drinking water resources.
Apache considers hydraulic fracturing (HF) one of the most enabling
technologies in the oil and gas business. It is a technique that
continues to evolve; and it benefits from constant innovation as
companies explore new applications every day. Literally the future of
the world energy supply is being re-written as economically recoverable
oil and gas supplies increase at dramatic rates thanks to advances in
hydraulic fracturing. With so much potential it is essential that we,
as a nation, investigate and rationally understand the risks associated
with hydraulic fracturing techniques by employing high quality science
and rigorous scientific review to validate our conclusions. The public
may not want to engage in the analytical techniques required for
understanding scientific tests, but it has every right to believe that
regulators, the scientific community and industry will collaborate to
investigate and ensure public safety, and especially to preserve
precious resources such as groundwater and clean air.
Given the rapid expansion of the technique, many are uncomfortable
and even afraid of the changes it brings. To complicate matters, public
understanding is not advanced by emotionally charged distortions and
confrontational media. It appears that many are content to criticize
techniques they barely begin to understand, and jump to conclusions
without also acknowledging that innovation is likely to overcome
obstacles as they are properly understood. The Society of Petroleum
Engineers has estimated that there have been over two million fracture
stimulation jobs done worldwide--more than one million in the United
States alone in the last 60 years; there is no doubt the technique has
improved considerably in the past five years. Science is about testing
ideas and solving problems. The oil and gas business has a long
tradition of technical innovation based on applied science and
engineering that has created enormous wealth for this country and
allowed Americans to enjoy high standards of living with relatively
low-cost energy.

Apache's hydraulic fracturing operations

Most focus on hydraulic fracturing in shale gas plays. Apache
believes hydraulic fracturing will unlock vast amounts of hydrocarbons
in both existing conventional and new unconventional reservoirs. While
Apache does not currently operate in the Marcellus shale play, it is
both a major player and a significant innovator elsewhere. We have a
leading acreage position in the Horn River Basin shale gas play in
British Columbia, Canada. Apache is the second-largest hydrocarbon
producer in the Permian Basin of West Texas and New Mexico, where we
are applying high-volume horizontal hydraulic fracturing techniques to
increase oil production from a very large inventory of drilling targets
in fields that have been producing for 60 years or more. In the
Anadarko basin of western Oklahoma and the Texas Panhandle, we have
achieved great success in advancing the Granite Wash play, producing
high flow rates of natural gas and condensate from a laterally
extensive tight sandstone reservoir that was originally developed using
fraced vertical wells beginning in the 1970s. We recently announced we
have extended this concept to another reservoir, the Hogshooter
formation, where two hydraulically fractured wells have provided
initial flow rates in excess of 2,000 barrels of oil and 3 million
cubic feet (MMcf) of gas per day. Hydraulic fracturing is revitalizing
production in the North American Oil Patch, and we are convinced it
will rapidly expand internationally. Apache is actively engaged in
hydraulic fracturing tests in unconventional reservoirs or resource
plays in Argentina and we expect to go forward with tests in the
Western Desert of Egypt. We recognize that our competitors also have
global ambitions to expand the use of the technology.
Hydraulic fracturing is a major transformative technology that
expands and leverages long-proven drilling standards and techniques in
order to massively increase the energy available to the growing
population of the planet. The question before you and the industry is
not whether it should be continued. Developing this expected flood of
supply will require continued innovation to reduce cost and increase
efficiency, aligned with efforts to improve environmental protection.
Sustainable performance requires us to consider how we can reduce the
footprint of our operations, best provide the water required and
protect local aquifers with responsible practices, and carefully select
and use the necessary chemicals. Ultimately we all benefit from doing
this correctly.

Managing risks and operating in a safe and responsible manner

Apache takes great care to protect drinking water and manage risks
associated with drilling and production everywhere it operates. It
surprises many that some places have little or no effective regulation
governing the standards of common water supply wells. We are not aware,
however, of any jurisdiction around the globe where drilling practices
and well-design standards do not explicitly address protection of
potable aquifers. Wells are drilled, fresh water is isolated behind
steel and cement barriers, and the barriers are tested before hydraulic
fracturing operations begin. Performance testing includes pressure
tests of each cemented section and full wellbore pressure tests before
hydraulic fracturing competitions begin. It is increasingly common for
months to pass between the time drilling operations cease and a well is
completed using hydraulic fracturing. Detailed continuous pressure
monitoring is standard with hydraulic fracturing operations, and
sometimes we employ micro-seismic monitoring techniques to help define
the shape and the lateral and vertical extent of the fractures and
injected fluids.
Apache operates in states and provinces where we are permitted to
re-inject 100 percent of flow-back and produced water into deep
underground reservoirs completely isolated from freshwater aquifers. In
Oklahoma and Texas, we normally make-up our frac fluids by mixing fresh
water produced from shallow groundwater sources and surface sources
that are purchased from land owners. Recently, we have learned a great
deal from our Canadian operations about using relatively high saline
water instead of fresh water, contrary to the general practices and
expectations of the industry. In the Horn River Basin, working with our
partner EnCana, we have developed a system for extracting water from a
saline aquifer in the Debolt formation and treating it in a built for
purpose plant to eliminate H2S. The water is piped to our well pad
where we add a minimum of chemicals to create an effective frac fluid.
After fracing we then re-inject the flow-back and produced water into
the Debolt formation in a closed-loop system. This water source
provides many operational advantages, and compliments efficiencies
provided by innovative high-density well pads that allow a minimum
surface footprint. We intend to continue to innovate to protect a
pristine environment using a minimum of surface water and disposing of
none into waterways.
High-flow-rate brackish or salt water aquifer systems are not
present everywhere. In the Permian Basin, Apache believes the brackish
Santa Rosa groundwater system can be adapted for a similar purpose as
the Debolt in parts of the Horn River Basin. We are currently
investigating tests of our concept for frac systems in oil reservoirs
using recycled brackish water as a base fluid. This has many
environmental advantages, and well as practical reservoir management
efficiencies, but it is especially good because if we are successful,
we will minimize our need for fresh water. This is a clear example
where technology enables our business and we aggressively explore what
is possible in order to succeed. So do many others, and we all benefit.
In addition to our general practice of water re-injection, we have
developed a program that tests the chemical composition of our make-up
water, whole frac fluid, flow-back and produced water at representative
wells. We test this water even though it gets re-injected into deep
reservoirs and would never be used for drinking. Information from these
tests helps us communicate with our service companies to reduce or
improve the chemical formulations in our operations.
In addition we have undertaken many performance-based comparisons
to aid in our selection of chemical additives. Basically, no one wants
to pay for chemicals they don't need, and we have found that we can
often replace non-biodegradable biocides with much less intrusive
chemicals or even with ultraviolet light in some circumstances. We
frequently eliminate clay control additives without detrimental
reactions.
Beyond our direct operational choices, Apache has made a real
effort help the industry reach consensus regarding disclosure of the
composition of hydraulic fracturing fluids; we have committed to post
the composition of every U.S. frac job operated by Apache on the
FracFocus hydraulic fracturing chemical registry. The www.fracfocus.org
website is a joint project of the Ground Water Protection Council and
the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission.

The EPA Draft Plan

Apache Corporation would be pleased if the U.S. scientific
community were to conduct robust scientific investigations that better
establish the risks of hydraulic fracturing on drinking water
resources. Based on existing knowledge and practical experience we
believe these risks are minimal and manageable; we have faith that if a
problem is identified, industry will be able to innovate and resolve
it. Society benefits from high-quality research that advances knowledge
and ultimately makes us more comfortable with the difficult choices we
face. Alarmist sensationalism, especially when it purports to be
science, is destructive, and this topic has enjoyed more that it's fair
share of that already.
The success of any scientific evaluation can usually be predicted
by the quality and commitment of the team assembled to do the work, the
clarity and focus of the investigation to prioritize testing what is
important, and the availability of the necessary tools and resources to
get the job done. Good oversight and guidance also helps. Based on
those criteria it is frankly difficult to expect much of value from
this study. It aspires to do too much with too little, in too short a
time frame. It has no direction of priorities based on testing existing
knowledge. If this committee believes that the topic merits
investigation, then Apache supports making adequate funds and oversight
available to achieve a well-defined goal.
One fundamental problem underlying this study is an unresolved
conflict: Is it intended to be a study of risks of hydraulic fracturing
in the Marcellus shale basin or fracturing throughout the United
States? Issues related to surface water discharge and use of publicly
operated treatment works (POTW) appear to be limited to the Marcellus,
yet the study tends to consider these major national issues, deserving
the highest priority.
Water resource management, at the scale required for hydraulic
fracturing, normally is the prerogative of states and local
governments, and there is substantial variation across geology and
jurisdiction about the net effect of water demand for any given water
resource. States are equipped with the skills required to manage water
resources and there is no need for this study to include the topic. Any
evaluation of the water resources required for hydraulic fracturing
needs to be made in the context of other major demands on water.
Lifecycle analysis of hydraulic fracturing techniques, in terms of
impact on water and air emissions, may deserve critical investigation,
but in this study it contributes little to the essential question
proposed by Congress. Likewise the proposed focus on repetitive
toxicology studies seems a misplaced priority at this level of funding.
Existing information should be mined and leveraged and focused studies
undertaken to test the conclusions.
The national interest may be well served by changing the tone of
the study. Instead of casting a wide and shallow net hoping to catch
something quickly, focus on developing more insightful fishing
techniques. It would be helpful for EPA to collaborate with industry to
identify and prioritize the chemical additives of greatest concern
based on regionally specific information and analysis about the
ultimate presence of these chemicals in produced waters and the actual
risks to the public. There are likely to be different answers for
different formations, and this aspect of study would help all parties
focus on the development of alternative additives and practices to best
protect the environment.
I would like to end on a very personal note. In my journey to
understand the real issues of hydraulic fracturing, I have met and
discussed technical material with a great many talented people
including some exceptional scientists in industry, the EPA, national
labs, universities and committed environmentalists. I consider it a
privilege to have served as a technical theme lead for an EPA hydraulic
fracturing workshop. It is true that there is simmering distrust
between scientists with different perspectives, but that is probably
healthy at some level. Government science sometimes seems to encourage
and expose our worst tendencies, especially when non-scientific issues
may be the root cause of polarization. Ultimately science is objective.
Sometimes it takes a while to realize that truth. Hydraulic fracturing
is far too important to be dismissed for the wrong reasons.

Chairman Hall. Thank you very much.
Now we will have Dr. Michael Economides, and I know I
pronounced it right that time. Recognize you for five minutes,
sir.

STATEMENT OF DR. MICHAEL ECONOMIDES, PROFESSOR OF CHEMICAL AND
BIOMOLECULAR ENGINEERING, UNIVERSITY OF HOUSTON

Dr. Economides. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have some
prepared remarks, but I am going to forego very much because I
don't want to review some of the----
Chairman Hall. Turn on your microphone, Doctor.
Dr. Economides. Can you hear me now?
Chairman Hall. Now you can start over, and your time will
start now.
Dr. Economides. Okay. Thank you. I said I have some
prepared remarks. I am going to make my presentation a bit
shorter because I don't want to repeat the things you have
heard already.
I want everybody in this room to realize a truism. No
frack, no gas. In other words, you cannot produce natural gas
anywhere in the world without hydraulic fracturing. The
business has evolved into a $13 billion exercise right now, and
personally I have worked in about 70 countries thus far on
hydraulic fracturing, and I can assure you that debates like
this are not going to find anywhere else except here. That is
fracturing is the quintessential way to produce natural gas.
End of the story.
Now, it has been the reason that natural gas has been
sustained as a very legitimate energy source in the United
States. You have heard earlier on that essentially we are
almost self-sufficient in natural gas, and in particular shale
gas is arguably the best story in the energy industry in the
last decade. We have ramped up production from about 0 percent
from shale gas about only four years ago to 17 percent of our
natural gas in the United States. There has never been a story
like this in the entire history of the oil and gas industry.
And yet there is a study by the EPA that they have
assembled together and the panelists, who are acknowledged
experts in their respective fields, but almost none of those
guys have any experience in fracturing. In fact, people like
myself, we are almost deliberately excluded from this panel
because we obtained it just because we have worked in hydraulic
fracturing. That is why.
The study plan fails to recognize some very salient points.
First of all, the entire report focuses on nanodarcy
permeability. This is shale gas, extra tight reservoirs, and
yet it is purported to draw conclusions for hydraulic
fracturing that can apply to just about everywhere else from
100 millidarcy to 200 millidarcy wells in the Gulf of Mexico to
everything in between.
One frack treatment in the Marcellus Shale may actually
have the EPA draw conclusions that would condemn an entire
industry, regardless of any technical differences in the
fracturing process.
There is even more drawbacks. For instance, the study does
not distinguish between 40 well construction, that is casing
problems, cementing problems, and so on, or some entirely
mythical subsurface communication as suggested in silly
documentaries like Gasland. In the study plan they are listed
under well injection, and this is supposed to be the Science
and Technology Committee, so here you have some scientific
results. What you see here is the depths of water table, the
top blue bars, and underneath are fractured heights that have
been actually measured in a great number of fracturing
treatments in the Marcellus Shale.
You can see they are separated by several thousand feet.
There is no physical way that fractured height migration due to
hydraulic fracturing can actually reach drinking water
aquifers.
And in summary, hydraulic fracturing has been used for six
decades without significant environmental consequence. The
approaches have been studied extensively ad nauseam by a number
of agencies, including the EPA, and the EPA study plan, the one
that is under question right now, in the review panel, have
been carefully designed in my view and selected to lead to only
one conclusion, in favor of EPA control at the crippling cost
to the production of U.S. natural gas.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Economides follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Michael Economides, Professor of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering, University of Houston

One Page Summary

1. Virtually all wells require hydraulic fracturing to produce
commercial quantities of gas (or oil).
2. It has taken industry over 20 years to figure out that
horizontal wellbores combined with hydraulic fracturing are the key to
producing commercial quantities of natural gas from shale formations.
3. Shale and tight gas now accounts for over 2/3 of the daily gas
produced in the United States, and has led to 87% of our natural gas
supply being produced domestically. It is important to realize that
this gas production wouldn't be possible without hydraulic fracturing.
4. Despite EPA having conducted several historical reviews of
hydraulic fracturing, and clearing the process as recently as 2004,
cap-and-trade proponents in Congress directed a new study in 2010.
However, this time the internet tools of facebook, privately funded
documentaries such as Gasland, and the national media have fueled a
frenzy of anti-fracturing sentiment previously unknown.
5. So the EPA initiated a study of hydraulic fracturing in 2010,
ostensibly to study the potential effects of hydraulic fracture on
drinking water.
6. I will show with a few examples, this process has been anything
but sound. The panel excludes outright some of the most highly regarded
individuals in the technical area of hydraulic fracturing; presumably
being an expert on the subject immediately condemns one as an industry
shrill.
7. Despite having thousands of hydraulically fractured wells to
consider, EPA ``stakeholder'' meetings identified several handfuls of
wells for their potential contamination to drinking water. Of these,
only four will receive forensic examination within the context of a
hydraulic fracturing water life cycle. The risk is that one bad well
will condemn an entire fracturing process with this study approach.
8. There are many, many deficiencies and concerns with respect to
EPA's hydraulic fracturing study. The examples given today illustrate
why the EPA's Hydraulic Fracturing Study is a Peep Show. On the outside
the world is seeing one thing, from within the view is quite different.
From within it is clear that the intent is to gain regulatory authority
over hydraulic fracturing. And the consumer will bear that cost.
9. My contention is that the hydraulic fracturing process is safe,
already well regulated by the various States, and the hysterical outcry
over this process is completely unjustified. Ultimately, the frenzy of
arguments over hydraulic fracturing distill to this single fact: Either
the United States wishes to utilize its natural gas resources, or it
doesn't. For development of shale or tight gas goes hand-in-hand with
hydraulic fracturing. Saying ``no' to hydraulic fracturing really means
you are saying ``no'' to natural gas production in the United States.

The Beverly Hillbillies entertained many generations, each program
starting with Jed Clampett shooting at the hills with crude oil
bubbling out of the ground. But the widely known image of Jed teaches
us two things that are simply not true. First, recovering hydrocarbons
isn't easy, particularly today, and secondly, the oil industry is far
more concerned for the environment than this.
It took many years for industry to realize that, by pumping
hydraulic pressure into a subsurface hydrocarbon filled rock, one could
create a crack that would make it much easier for oil, or gas, to flow
out of the rock. Today virtually all wells require this process to
produce commercial quantities of gas (or oil). And, as shown here, it
has taken industry over 20 years to figure out that horizontal
wellbores combined with hydraulic fracturing are the key to producing
commercial quantities of natural gas from shale formations.
This realization, combined with advancements in the ability to pump
multiple fracture treatments in tight rock and shale formation has led
to a huge boom in gas production. As shown here, shale and tight gas
now accounts for over 2/3 of the daily gas produced in the United
States, and has led to 87% of our natural gas supply being produced
domestically. It is important to realize that this gas production
wouldn't be possible without hydraulic fracturing.
Despite EPA having conducted several historical reviews of
hydraulic fracturing, and clearing the process as recently as 2004,
cap-and-trade proponents in Congress directed a new study in 2010.
However, this time the internet tools of facebook, privately funded
documentaries such as Gasland, and the national media have fueled a
frenzy of anti-fracturing sentiment previously unknown.
So the EPA initiated a study of hydraulic fracturing in 2010,
ostensibly to study the potential effects of hydraulic fracture on
drinking water. Their study was issued through their own Office of
Research, their hand-picked Science advisory council, and ultimately
through the Hydraulic Fracturing Review Study Panel--a group of
academics also selected by the EPA. The study is currently awaiting
feedback from the Study Panel.
Now, the mandate to EPA was to employ a transparent, peer review
process in this study of hydraulic fracturing. However, as I will show
with a few examples, this process has been anything but that. For sure
many of the 22-member Hydraulic Fracturing Study Panel are experts in
their own area of groundwater, public health, etc., but almost all have
no experience in hydraulic fracturing and no understanding of current
industry practices. The panel excludes outright some of the most highly
regarded individuals in the technical area of hydraulic fracturing;
presumably being an expert on the subject immediately condemns one as
an industry shrill.
And the lack of industry representation on the Panel is telling.
At the Stakeholder meetings held around the country (meetings the
Study Panel themselves could not attend) and subsequent to those
meetings, the public was encouraged to provide information about their
water wells--cases that might form the bedrock of a forensic review to
determine if fracturing had caused contamination.
Despite having thousands of hydraulically fractured wells to
consider, EPA ``stakeholder'' meetings identified several handfuls of
wells for their potential contamination to drinking water. Of these,
only four will receive forensic examination within the context of a
hydraulic fracturing water life cycle, including water source and
availability, chemical mixing, well injection, flowback and disposal.
Key drivers in selecting the four retrospective cases are focused
much more on data availability and likeliness of identifying problems,
rather than applicability in representing the normal range of
fracturing outcomes. From these limited cases EPA expects to draw
massive conclusions, stemming from a hurried, single year of
`research'.
There is simply no way four retrospective case studies can be
considered a representative, or fair sampling of any process,
regardless of how carefully those cases are selected. Our risk as a
nation is that one bad well will condemn an entire fracturing process
with this study approach.
And the expectation of research results in one year demonstrates
even more clearly the lack of credibility. I have been a professor for
many years and I rarely see funded projects that can even get started
in a year's time. With the EPA's approach we must already know the
answers.
Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Colorado and Wyoming each have over 60
years of extensive experience with the hydraulic fracturing process and
these States have well developed regulatory processes in place.
Treatments must be noticed to the State before they are performed, and
each State regulatory agency elects to witness treatments. There are
defined casing points, cementing and testing procedures, and treatment
monitoring. An overwhelming majority of hydraulic fracturing treatments
are witnessed by regulatory personnel.
In addition, STRONGER [State Review of Oil and Natural Gas
Environmental Regulations, a non-profit, multi-stakeholder
organization], is playing a clear role in unification of hydraulic
fracturing oversight a the State level.
Yet, amazingly, the EPA study specifically excludes the State
agencies experiences from the Study plan. There can be no question that
this omission is a deliberate attempt to direct the conclusions of the
fracturing study.
But ask yourself this question: Would it be more effective to have
experienced field engineers and regulators witnessing each treatment,
or an EPA clerk shuffling a stack of permits?
Last week there was a blowout from a tight gas well in the
Marcellus Shale. Wisely, the leadership in Pennsylvania calmly noted
that when we repeat a process thousands of times occasionally there is
a rare problem. An unexpected equipment failure allowed a release of
frac fluids at the surface. However, this was quickly rectified. My
point in raising this is the frenzy of negative press, both before and
after this event, is focused on creating the fractures, rather than
wellbore or equipment reliability. Wellbore construction and hydraulic
fracturing are completely different and after reading the Study Plan it
isn't clear that the committee even recognizes that.
So let me show you a picture of fracture treatments mapped by
Pinnacle in the Marcellus Shale. Each stage of fracture treatment is
plotted with the red line representing the mid depth where the
fractures originate. The shallowest point and deepest points are
plotted. At the top, the blue is a plot of the deepest groundwater. As
you can see, the fracture treatments are well confined heights, at
least a mile below the deepest groundwater. The chance of propagating a
fracture upward into groundwater is nil. You have a better chance of
winning the lottery.
Interestingly, we also see another aspect. As the depth of fracture
becomes shallower, fracture height decreases, reflecting the fact that
the overburden is becoming the smallest subsurface stress. With
continued decreases in depth, the fracture will become horizontal, also
preventing the fracture from propagating into groundwater.
But since all of this is happening in the subsurface, where it
cannot be seen, it's tough to overcome that frenzy of fear.
There are many, many deficiencies and concerns with respect to
EPA's hydraulic fracturing study. The examples given today illustrate
why the EPA's Hydraulic Fracturing Study is a Peep Show. On the outside
the world is seeing one thing, from within the view is quite different.
From within it is clear that the intent is to gain regulatory authority
over hydraulic fracturing. And the consumer will bear that cost.
My contention is that the hydraulic fracturing process is safe,
already well regulated by the various States, and the hysterical outcry
over this process is completely unjustified
Ultimately, the frenzy of arguments over hydraulic fracturing
distill to this single fact: Either the United States wishes to utilize
its natural gas resources, or it doesn't. For development of shale or
tight gas goes hand-in-hand with hydraulic fracturing. Saying ``no' to
hydraulic fracturing really means you are saying ``no'' to natural gas
production in the United States.

There is no ending to the energy wars that have become culture wars
and they have infested even ostensibly technocratic agencies of the
government that ordinarily should be held above ideology. Not so in the
imagery-loaded EPA under the Obama Administration.
The agency's latest foray is the establishment of a 22-member
Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) Panel, referred to as ``Panel for
Review of Hydraulic Fracturing Study Plan for Assessment of the
Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing on Drinking Water
Resources.'' Now one would think that this is a noble undertaking but a
look at the roster of the panelists, investigative approach,
exclusivity and ramrod urgency would put this notion to immediate rest.
Certainly many of the review panelists are experts in their
respective fields of ground water hydrology, toxicology, forestry, and
public health, etc., but almost all have little to no experience in the
well fracturing process and no understanding of current industry
practices. The panel excludes outright any of the arguably most famous
names on the subject: Holditch (author of 300 papers, author/editor of
SPE Monograph on the subject), Meyer, Barree, Cleary, Smith (the
creators of the four industry standard design softwares that could
actually model fracture dimensions and fracture height) and myself, the
author of 200 papers and five books on the subject. Presumably
publications on the subject would be against the candidacy of these
individuals as panelists, an outrageous presupposition that their
technical prowess would render them to be industry shills.
The almost surely intentional absence of industry participation,
except for briefly orchestrated public testimony, is to say the least,
curious. Coupling the absence of industry experts with the study plan
itself provides even greater insights.
Despite having thousands of wells to consider, EPA has held
``stakeholder'' meetings in which several handfuls of wells have been
identified for their potential contamination to drinking water. Of
these, four will receive forensic examination within the context of a
hydraulic fracturing water life cycle, including water source and
availability, chemical mixing, well injection, flowback and disposal.
Key drivers in selecting the four retrospective cases are focused
much more on data availability and likeliness of identifying problems,
rather than applicability in representing the normal range of
fracturing outcomes. From these limited cases EPA expects to draw
massive conclusions, stemming from a hurried, single year of
`research'. Given that the research has not yet been awarded, one
wonders if the answers are already foregone conclusions.
Other aspects of the study are equally worrisome; the entire report
focuses on nanodarcy, such as shale, rock completely ignoring the fact
that most wells are fracture stimulated upon completion, including
those in high permeability environments. Presumably one villain frac
treatment in shale condemns an entire industry practice regardless of
any technical differences in the fracturing process.
Most panel members simply could not distinguish (or probably would
not even care) whether any observed contamination could be the result
of faulty well construction (a rare but real possibility) or some
entirely mythical ``subsurface communication'' as suggested in silly
documentaries like Gasland. Wellbore construction and the fracturing
processes are not at all the same things, yet lack any separate
commentary under the header ``well injection' in the flawed study plan.
Only newly minted Ivy PhD's in public policy (likely those who wrote
this plan), or those pre-disposed against the production of any natural
gas, would fail to make this distinction.
Another concern is the wholesale disregard for current State
regulatory practices. The efficacy of existing regulations are not even
considered in the EPA draft study plan, discounting the efforts that
organizations such as STRONGER [State Review of Oil and Natural Gas
Environmental Regulations, a non-profit, multi-stakeholder
organization], have clearly played a unification and enforcement role
at the State level. Their work is not considered as part of the
proposed EPA Hydraulic Fracturing Study.
Even the outcomes of EPA modelers are misled. The study plan makes
no mention of the hydraulic fracturing models developed by industry
experts such as those noted herein, nor is there any mention of
modeling with the use of microseismic post fracture morphology
(fracturing height length) verifications from hundreds of treatments.
Rather, esteemed modelers of the EPA will ``assume'' a fracture within
the context of their subsurface hydrologic flow models, perhaps without
any geological context. This assumed fracture may bear no resemblance
whatsoever to the actual fractures resulting from a pumped treatment.
And the list goes on and on.
Let's fast forward a year and imagine the results, assuming that
EPA limits itself to study the four or so cases (out of hundreds of
thousands) where suspicions may have arisen of water contamination
either from natural gas production (unrelated to the fracturing itself,
even if the well was fractured) or to the even rarer possibility of
contamination because of fracturing fluid additives. Assuming that 3
out of 4 of these cases find some connection (the two Gasland examples
were debunked) then one can see the headline: ``EPA SAB finds that 75%
of water contamination incidents were in fact caused by hydraulic
fracturing,'' clearly a hatchet job, a truism that conveniently ignores
the incredible rarity of the three case out of hundreds of thousands
wells that are hydraulically fractured and, perhaps exactly, satisfying
the latent motives of the creators of the EPA SAB on hydraulic
fracturing.
A finding that contamination can happen through an accidental
defect in well construction, even if it has happened in one case in
100,000, is something that simply cannot be determined from limited
retrospective case studies, and any single official ``finding'' would
have only one effect: alarm unnecessarily the public and reinforce the
opinions of those that already have opinions on either side of the
issue.
There is a ``peep show'' quality to the whole affair, with EPA
actions occurring within the public eye but only `glimpses' of the real
picture within. With the introduction of the phrase ``area of
evaluation'' in the study plan, it becomes clear that the'' show
within'' is to impose area of review studies around any hydraulically
fractured well in the United States. Such regulatory authority could
shift the ``frac, no frac'' decision from State authorities to the EPA,
resulting in gas well drilling moratoriums similar to the drilling
largess now experienced in the Gulf of Mexico.
To somebody that understands (and believes in) the importance of
natural gas to the country's welfare it is clear that only those
predisposed against any hydraulic fracturing could be pleased with this
study. The EPA panel has served their role in sanctifying this EPA
hydraulic study plan, positioning researchers and other so-called
experts to legitimize a clearly illegitimate and ideologically loaded
attack on ``fracking'', done by people that are predisposed against any
natural gas production.
Rarely have intentions been more transparent.

Chairman Hall. Thank you, sir, and I thank all of you for
your testimony.
I remind all of our Members the Committee rules limit our
questions to five minutes, and the chair at this point will
open the round of questions, and I recognize myself for five
minutes.
I will start with Mrs. Jones, and it is hard to get a yes
or no answer, witnesses, but try to give me a yes or no on
these because I am going to try to get through--I want to ask
the last gentleman a question, and I am not sure how long it is
going to take him to answer it for me. I want to save as much
time as I can there. But I listened very closely to what you
said. It made a lot of sense to me.
Mrs. Jones, Madam Chairman, given that Texas produces more
oil and gas than any other state in the U.S. and that is not
just bragging, that is a hard cold fact. You know, Dizzy Dean
said it ain't bragging if you can do it.
The Railroad Commission is probably the most experienced
state regulator or as experienced a state regulator when it
comes to issues like hydraulic fracturing. So my question is
have any incidents regarding hydraulic fracturing arisen since
your tenure on the commission that you felt the state was
unable to respond to?
Mrs. Jones. No.
Chairman Hall. Can you think of any situation in which you
felt that the state regulatory mechanisms were inadequate to
properly oversee the use of this technology?
Mrs. Jones. No.
Chairman Hall. By golly I did get a yes or no.
There was an incident in Texas the past year that was
widely reported involving Range Resources in which the regional
office of the EPA shut down operations of the company in order
to investigate a claim of contamination of a drinking water
well. What was the Railroad Commission's role in this
investigation?
Mrs. Jones. The water well owner filed a complaint to the
Railroad Commission on August 6 of 2010. Apparently the EPA was
notified on August 17. We had ongoing investigation for several
months. It takes awhile when you are investigating a potential
contamination, and then I guess it was October 21, several
months later, we gave the EPA a recommendation. They had also
come in and were taking a parallel investigation and gave them
some recommendations of what to sample at that Range production
well, which was--the claim was made there was natural gas in a
water well.
We had worked very, very diligently. We concluded our
investigation in spite of the early pronouncements by the EPA.
We brought Range in, gave them the due process that our process
allows. The EPA, much like today, also did not show up at those
meetings at the Railroad Commissions Hearing Examiners, but we
found, in fact, through our DNA testing and the isotopes they
test and compare that, in fact, the natural gas in the water
well did not come from Range Resources, and to this day we are
still trying to determine the source, but there is a low-level
naturally-occurring gas field in which many of these water
wells for years have seen natural gas occurring in their water
wells.
So it is a phenomenon that is not--or whether it is not
unique. It is very ordinary over there where those water wells
are, and that is what we found, and in fact, after a very
thorough investigation and an ongoing thorough investigation
will determine where the natural gas is coming from.
But I would suggest that the EPA failed in their processes
to determine where that natural gas was properly.
Chairman Hall. Do you have any idea why the EPA stepped in
to shut down these operations?
Mrs. Jones. I have no idea, sir.
Chairman Hall. Did the EPA in your opinion overstep their
authority in doing so?
Mrs. Jones. Yes. I think they did.
Chairman Hall. How did the incident eventually turn out?
Mrs. Jones. We found through deliberate scientific
processes that the natural gas was not coming from the Range
Resources wells as the EPA had alleged, and in fact, I sleep
very well at night every single night. I have complete
confidence in the testing process of the Railroad Commission of
Texas. We are the gold standard, and we look forward to helping
the EPA if they would like to consult us, and in fact, have
made suggestions earlier on in the investigation.
Chairman Hall. I thank you for that.
Mrs. Jones. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. And thank you for your testimony.
Dr. Economides, are you aware of the Duke study on May the
9th, a study on methane contamination of drinking water? Are
you familiar with the study?
Dr. Economides. Yes, I am, sir.
Chairman Hall. Have you read that before?
Dr. Economides. Yes.
Chairman Hall. I call your attention to the report itself.
Do you have it?
Dr. Economides. Not here in front of me. No.
Chairman Hall. Actually, they say our results show evidence
for methane contamination of shallow drinking water systems in
at least three areas of the region and suggest the important
environmental risks accompanying shale gas exploration
worldwide.
You know, you see that, that is in there. That is where
they say they found those things.
Dr. Economides. Yes.
Chairman Hall. Then if you go on over to page 4 quickly----
Dr. Economides. Yes, sir.
Chairman Hall. On page four, line, down about ten lines,
read me what they say there beginning with table two.
Dr. Economides. ``Based on our data we found no evidence
for contamination of the shallow wells near active drilling
sites from deep brines and/or fracturing fluids.'' Is that what
you mean?
Chairman Hall. Yes.
Dr. Economides. Yes, sir.
Chairman Hall. And does it go on down there to say in sum,
the----
Dr. Economides. In sum, yes.
Chairman Hall. --geochemical and isotopic features for
water we measured?
Dr. Economides. Yes. ``In sum, the geochemical and isotopic
features for water we measured in the shallow wells from both
active and non-active areas are consistent with historical data
and inconsistent with contamination from mixing Marcellus Shale
formation water or saline fracturing fluids.''
Chairman Hall. My time is over. Just give me a quick, about
a 1-minute opinion on the Duke study and what their first
contention was and then they answered their own by saying there
was nothing found.
Dr. Economides. Well, you know, if this was not such a
serious issue, this would have been almost a comedy routine
because their first statement is that they just discovered
there is natural gas over there. You realize natural gas
methane in water has traditionally been an exploration tool for
the oil industry. We find it, we call them to come and drill
for gas. That is what they have found out.
In fact, had they had a baseline for their measurements,
most likely the methane in drinking water would have gone down
because production reduces the reservoir pressure, which is the
driving force for this gas, and therefore, it would have a
negative impact. They would have concluded that drilling
reduces manifestation of natural gas. It happened many times
before. It is not evidence of it here for their baseline.
Finally, their conclusion there is no fracturing speaks in
itself, and yet their conclusion which defies any kind of
technical in my view----
Chairman Hall. Okay. I could go on and listen to you all
morning, but my time is up.
Dr. Economides. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. And I owe them some time back.
I now recognize Ms. Johnson for five minutes.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It is clear
that a variety of perspectives on this panel, that we need more
information about hydraulic fracturing and other technologies,
and that is one of the reasons I do not understand why there is
resistance to getting more information, more research, and
better understanding as to what actually is going on across the
country.
For example, the chemical composition of fracturing fluid
should be made available to the public. It is a simplistic
issue. We are pumping chemicals into our environment, and these
chemicals might have an impact on public health.
Why should this information be hidden from the public?
Well, I know that the regulation to disclose the information
are outside the jurisdiction of this Committee. The EPA study
is not.
Therefore, I have to say that the EPA study is an
opportunity to gain more knowledge about the hydraulic
fracturing, and it should not be wasted by narrowing the scope
so much that we keep ourselves ignorant to this technology's
impact. And although I would have liked to have seen a broader
study with a scope that covered the impacts of hydraulic
fracturing on air quality, wildlife, or habitat and other
impacts, I understand that EPA does not have the funding or the
time to implement such a comprehensive study since the deadline
is upon them.
That being said, the public expects us to spend its dollars
wisely, so my question to this panel is what research is needed
to understand the impacts of the suite of technologies used
along the hydraulic fracturing to release unconventional
natural gas from these previously-untouched geological
structures such as the Marcellus Shale.
And any member of the panel or all.
Chairman Hall. Are you asking that of the panel?
Ms. Johnson. Yes.
Chairman Hall. Who wants to make a suggestion? Mrs. Ames.
Ms. Jones. I will----
Chairman Hall. Mrs. Jones.
Mrs. Jones. --suggest what studies that you were
requesting, what studies should we do. There have been a lot of
studies done. There are ongoing studies almost everywhere
coming out of every city. UT is now doing a study on
fracturing. There have been--is that what you were talking
about?
Ms. Johnson. The research that is needed to understand the
impact.
Mrs. Jones. Well, we do a lot of studies. The companies, it
is incumbent upon these companies to not want to go drill a
well where it is not going to be economic to the extent that
they try and minimize dry holes, and dry holes, in spite of all
this new technology and 3-D seismic things that they can look
at to determine, in fact, they still do drill dry holes. But I
would say that the research on what is down there is done even
by the companies who want to go and drill there.
But the research about the effects of hydraulic fracturing
have been--there has been so much research done and now with
seismic, I think we just saw the slide, which I think is
fascinating, about we are seeing firsthand the seismic of
exactly where those frack, the fractures are, and they are
very--they are thousands of feet below the Marcellus water
table. So there is a lot of information out there for people
who would like to stay up all night and read it to feel
comfortable that this is a safe technology.
So to the extent that universities want to do more
research, I--that is fine. I am also a steward of taxpayer
dollars, and I think it is important that research, less
research is funded by government where research has already
been done before, and we minimize duplicative research, but I
think information is available out there for people who want to
know. I know there are more studies and more research being
done, and we always want to be vigilant at all times on the
effects of things that are going on in industry and commerce.
But I have got to tell you hydraulic fracturing has been
fairly covered up in research that I know of, and I am still,
in spite of all the research, I feel very confident----
Ms. Johnson. Thank you. Let me get a few remarks from Dr.
Summers.
Mrs. Jones. Thank you.
Dr. Summers. Thank you. Obviously in Maryland we have
limited experience so far, and Marcellus Shale is just within
the last couple of years been--begun to be developed. There
have been a number of issues that have occurred due to in some
cases improper well casing or failure of well casing. There
have been spills, there have been explosions and fires and
releases.
In Maryland, obviously we don't have a lot of experience
with this. We, as I said, are very anxious to see the results
of the EPA study. Their Science Advisory Board states that they
believe EPA's research approach as presented is appropriate. I
think the linkage between a lot of these things we have been
talking about and drinking water is very important, and
citizens would like to know that this is a safe practice.
So we would like to see a gathering of appropriate
information specific to the Marcellus Shale as I have outlined
in my remarks.
Ms. Johnson. My time is expired. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman from California, Mr.
Rohrabacher, is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for holding this hearing, Mr. Chairman. It is really
important to the wellbeing of the citizens of this country that
we discuss this issue and do so in a very honest and scientific
way. Our people are suffering right now. My people in
California are suffering and throughout the country. We are in
the middle of an economic crisis that is affecting the standard
of living, the wellbeing of our people.
One of the reasons perhaps, the most important reason we
are suffering now and in the middle of a budget crisis here, as
well as family budget crises across America is--there have been
no new oil refineries in 30 years. There has been no
hydroelectric dams in 30 years. There has been no nuclear power
plants in 30 years. We, in fact, have seen any new offshore and
oil development deposits just controlled and regulated perhaps
to the point that they were unable to provide the oil and gas
that has been so important for our economy. Even in solar
energy we found that the Bureau of Land Management has been
refusing to grant permits for people who want to build solar
energy plants out in the middle of the desert.
So what we have had is an anti-energy policy in this
country, and Americans are suffering because of it. One of the
shining lights of hope is that we can now have a new source of
natural gas and oil because of a new methodology of bringing it
out of the earth and making it available to the people.
I am afraid--I was a young reporter, and I will tell you I
remember seeing the environmental movement come forward about
all sorts of things, and when I tried to check out what they
were talking about, it wasn't true. I mean, they would make
statements that just weren't true.
And so we better make sure we get to the truth of the
matter in this issue or our people are going to continue to
suffer.
Let me go straight to an important issue. Dr. Summers, you
have used the word drinking water probably about four or five
times since you have been here this morning. Can you give us an
example of where fracturing has polluted the drinking water,
give us one or two examples of where that has happened.
Dr. Summers. Well, there have been spills in Pennsylvania
that have gone into the rivers or the water supply. Monitoring
has not indicated so far that there has been contamination of
drinking water supplies from any of these incidents in
Pennsylvania that I am aware of----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. So----
Dr. Summers. --but it is a very significant water supply
for millions of people in the Susquehanna and the Potomac
Basin.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And has that been----
Dr. Summers. And we want to make sure that----
Mr. Rohrabacher. --polluted? Has there been an incident
where that drinking water has been----
Dr. Summers. There have been spills into that water supply,
that river. What I am saying is it has not been documented to
actually have gotten into a drinking water intake so far.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. So you have used the word drinking
water now again four times, but there is no example of where
the drinking water of the American people has been compromised
because of this. Is that right?
Dr. Summers. I am not familiar with things all over the
country. I can just say within the Susquehanna Basin where we
have had most of our experience with drilling, I am not aware
of any drinking water contamination.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, let me just note that you are
someone with a Ph.D. in environmental sciences, and you are
someone who holds authority. If there was a case around the
country, you probably would know about it, wouldn't you?
Dr. Summers. We are actively gathering that information
now. As I indicated this hydraulic fracturing is relatively new
to our region.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, it may be new to your region, but I
understand from Mrs. Jones that it is not new to Texas or the
rest of the panelists. It doesn't seem to be new to them.
Do any of you have an example where drinking water was
contaminated by this new process, by fracking? No. Why have we
heard the word drinking water being used over and over again,
and Mr. Summers, are you using this as a reason--you went
through all of these things that people are going to have to go
through in order to develop this new energy source for the
American people. I mean, from what you outlined in your plan,
we are talking about roadblock after roadblock after roadblock
just to make sure, and you are basing that on a situation where
you never had even one example of the pollution of water, of
drinking water.
I mean, this--you want to know why we haven't had any
hydroelectric dams, why we haven't had any nuclear power
plants? It is that type of attitude that is destroying the
economic wellbeing of our people.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. You could suggest that EPA came
in 1,000 feet of it being truthful, so that is one example he
could have used.
I recognize the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Sarbanes, for
five minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate it. I want to thank the panel.
I have been trying to step back and assess where the fault
lines in this conversation are, and I think part of what is
going on is you have one group that has got long experience
with hydraulic fracturing in one set of circumstances that vows
up and down that it is very safe. You have another group that
is new to it and is having to analyze the potential risks
associated with it under a different set of circumstances.
Those can be geologic, geographic, in terms of the density of
population, and other kinds of things, how you dispose of the
fracking fluid. These are all factors that are different in one
area from another area.
So we could make a deal. We could make a deal that you
won't brush with broad strokes the desire on the part of people
in the states affected by the Marcellus Shale to understand
more about the implications for there based on experience in
other places, and we will make a deal that we won't
automatically try to indict the whole industry for things that
have happened other places based on our concerns about what is
going on in the area of the Marcellus Shale, which is the
perspective I am bringing to this hearing because I represent a
state in the Chesapeake Bay watershed, and I share some of the
concerns that have been relayed to you by Dr. Summers about the
potential risks as this Marcellus Shale is explored.
Now, you have New York State, I believe Delaware and
Maryland either have formal or sort of unofficial moratorium in
place. West Virginia and Pennsylvania have moved ahead. In some
instances I think there has been a kind of head-long rush by
the industry to lay stakes in those areas. A lot of permits
have been issued, and there are things that are happening, and
I want to, I mean, Congressman Rohrabacher referred, Dr.
Summers, to your perspective as an attitude that is
problematic.
I want to thank you for bringing a perspective that says we
got to make sure this is done safely in an area where the
technology is relatively new and in an area where there have
already been some incidents that could cause real concern.
So I would encourage the industry as we head into this
discussion, I think it only would strengthen the position of
the industry, and valid points have been made on behalf of the
industry here today, to be absolutely transparent.
The ranking Member has raised a couple of times the issue
of the chemical additives and being completely transparent
about that. I think if industry steps up and goes sort of
beyond the call of duty in demonstrating that it is willing to
be open and candid about what is involved in these processes,
that puts you in a good position going forward in this
discussion, because we all understand the promise of this and
the potential benefits that it can yield.
So let us do it right on the front end, and doing it right
in places like Maryland and New York and Pennsylvania where
this new discovery has raised great hope may involve some
things that haven't been part of the mix in other parts of the
country. That is all I am saying. In many respects it is sort
of apples and oranges.
Dr. Summers, I am running out of time, of course, because I
took the first four minutes just to say something, but let me
ask you this question, and it goes, I think, to the importance
of having some baseline perspective that the Federal Government
can bring, and then obviously states can add layers of
additional oversight and requirements if they feel that that is
important.
But when I think of the Chesapeake Bay watershed, it knows
no state boundaries. We are talking about six states and the
District of Columbia that affect the health of the Chesapeake
Bay, the tributaries that flow into it.
And you just speak very briefly to why it is important to
get a perspective that can cut across state lines, even as the
states bring their own particular, you know, views to the
table? Thank you.
Dr. Summers. Thank you. Not only do we share the quantity
of water and I sit on our Susquehanna River Basin Commission,
which regulates withdraws from the river, and we have been
authorizing withdrawals from Marcellus Shale gas fracking in
the basin, so we share the quantity of water, and that same
water that is taken out there is critical for drinking water
supplies and for the Chesapeake Bay, which receives 50 percent
of its fresh water from the Susquehanna River.
Similarly, the Potomac River is the water supply for
Washington, D.C., and many communities in Maryland, and we need
to make sure that whatever we do is fully protective of that,
so not only the quantity of water but obviously the quality of
water, and as I indicated there have been some spills, and the
kinds of things that we say that we want to put in place before
we move forward with hydraulic fracturing are exactly the kinds
of protections and best management practices that it sounds
like the other states in the west have been doing for years.
So I think we need to gather that information. I appreciate
Congressman Sarbanes' remarks to that regard. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back.
Now recognize Dr. Harris, the gentleman from Maryland, for
five minutes, maybe six minutes.
Dr. Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you very much for holding this hearing because it is full of
surprises. For instance, I am actually surprised to learn that
there is actually no instance of drinking water having been
contaminated, no known instance, because if you read the lay
press and the environmental press, you would think it happened
everywhere.
So, Mrs. Jones, a question for you. So let me get it
straight. In Texas this has been going on for years, I mean,
the hydraulic fracturing, the--and you know, my analogy is to
medical care. I mean, you know, if you have a medical procedure
that has been going on for years and years and years, and you
are going to find either a new location or a new application
for it. It doesn't mean that you have to forget your experience
over all those years.
So this has been going on for years in the State of Texas I
take it.
Mrs. Jones. Absolutely. Decades, Congressman.
Dr. Harris. Okay, and my daughter actually goes to college
in Dallas, and my understanding is Dallas sits in one of the
areas of this shale formation, and when I flew there, over
there, Dallas uses reservoirs, don't they? For water. For
drinking water.
Mrs. Jones. Yes. I believe they do, but more Fort Worth,
but, yes, in the Dallas, Fort Worth area.
Dr. Harris. Yeah. The Dallas, Fort Worth area.
Mrs. Jones. Absolutely. Yes.
Dr. Harris. So your concern would be exactly the same as
any concern anywhere in the country with regards to the use of
hydraulic fracturing in proximity to drinking water sources.
Mrs. Jones. Absolutely. It doesn't hold any water, if you
would pardon----
Dr. Harris. Sure. No. I kind of get that. So, Dr. Summers,
I am just puzzled, and you know, in the context of, you know,
an executive branch versus legislative branch struggle, it just
went on in the State of Maryland, because my understanding is
the State of Maryland attempted to pass the House, lower House
pass date a two-year study moratorium on hydraulic fracturing
which the Senate did not agree to.
Did the Department support that two-year moratorium?
Dr. Summers. Actually, sir, it was a two-phase study. Wells
would be authorized after the first year. As I described in my
testimony, we referred to them as exploratory----
Dr. Harris. Very limited numbers but did the Department
support the moratorium?
Dr. Summers. Yes.
Dr. Harris. So you had kind of the same--even in Maryland
you had the same struggle between the executive branch and the
legislative branch.
Now, Dr. Summers, I have got to ask you because, you know,
and I was concerned when I first read about what was going on
in Pennsylvania, but, you know, you bring up the flow of the
Potomac, you bring up the Potomac and other rivers. Let's put
it in perspective. It is up to three million gallons in one
well. What is the flow rate of the Potomac River in a given
day?
Dr. Summers. I don't know, and----
Dr. Harris. Could you get back to me on that because I
suspect----
Dr. Summers. It is under----
Dr. Harris. Right, but even if, you know, my gosh, ten
percent of the hydraulic fracturing fluid would flow right into
the river, you would be measuring parts per billion, maybe
parts per million of some of these things, and what is the
largest spills that have occurred of raw sewage coming out of
Baltimore into the bay? Because when I was on the Committee I
recall spills of a quarter million gallons in one day. Is that
right?
Dr. Summers. A quarter million sounds a little high but
certainly millions of gallons have--sewage have been----
Dr. Harris. Right, and do we allow the sewage system to
still exist in Baltimore City? Because this is a direct
analogy. I mean, and I will tell you as a physician, I would
almost rather, much rather drink a slight amount of drilling
fluid, hydraulic drilling fluids, than I would--of this that
was thrown into the bay.
What has the Department done about the hundreds of
thousands of gallons of raw sewage that flow into the bay out
of the Baltimore City system? This Department that wants to put
our economic vitality of the country at stake by limiting
access to energy because that, you know, and, again, and I
represent a part of the state like Western Maryland but it is
economically disadvantaged. The Eastern part of the state that
I represent has high unemployment or economic disadvantage, and
what you are doing is by this policy you are actually not only
hurting that economically-disadvantaged part of the state, I
think, and I agree with the Congressman from California,
actually harming our economy and the country.
So if you could just tell me what the Department has done
for that--those sewage spills, which are known spills, have
absolutely contaminated drinking water sources in the state.
What do you do?
Dr. Summers. We have issued judicial consent decrees in
conjunction with the Department of Justice and EPA. Baltimore
City, specifically right now is spending over $1 billion to
make corrections and upgrades to its system. Systems throughout
the watershed all the way up the Susquehanna and the Potomac
have very similar problems. It is a national issue, and we are
taking very aggressive action to deal with that, and I am not
suggesting that we can't do Marcellus Shale gas development in
Maryland. I am just suggesting that we need some more facts,
and I think based on what I have heard today there is a lot of
good information that ought to be able to help us move forward
with this. It needs to be pulled together, though.
Dr. Harris. Thank you very much, and I don't have anymore
time unless that 6-minute limit was there. I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
North Carolina, Mr. Miller, for six minutes.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mrs. Jones, in your testimony you said that recently a
French delegation had come to Texas to meet with your staff to
hear all about fracking procedures, and they left very
convinced, your testimony is, these foreign officials are
already convinced of the benefits. They went back to France
apparently saying we can't wait to get back there so we can do
more fracking.
But there was an article in Bloomberg this morning, this
morning, today, France should ban shale explorations on risk,
minister says. And the minister is a minister of the
environment. I will not attempt to pronounce the name because I
would prove myself to be a bumpkin, which everyone knows
anyway.
But it says, `` I am against hydraulic fracking, we have
seen the results in the U.S., they are risk for the water
tables, and these risks we don't want to take.'' She said it
was an error to have issued some exploratory permits, they
should never have been granted--an environmental evaluation
should have been done before giving permits and not after. She
said it is a technology we haven't totally mastered. There is
only one technology that can be used today to produce shale
gas, and that is hydraulic fracturing, and we don't want it,
and it violated the precaution prevention requirements of their
environmental laws.
Do you have any idea what happened after that delegation
got back to France?
Mrs. Jones. Excuse me, Congressman. Actually, they were
there yesterday, and I was here, so I haven't had the time to
talk and find out how the meeting went, but I suspect that
they--I can't put words in their mouth, but as soon as I have
the report back I will call you and let you know what their
impression was. I can't imagine that they were over trying to
find out our protocols unless they had some interest in
pursuing the same for their country.
Certainly I think France could benefit mightily from the
production of their energy resources, and that brings me to
something I think that is very interesting, and I would like to
share with this Committee.
Mr. Miller. Well, actually, it is----
Mrs. Jones. We have had several delegations----
Mr. Miller. Particularly on this point of the French
delegation, but I would otherwise like to move on because I
don't have----
Mrs. Jones. Okay. Well----
Mr. Miller. --that much time.
Mrs. Jones. --anyway, we have a lot of delegations coming
and going.
Mr. Miller. All right. Thank you.
Mrs. Jones. Thank you.
Mr. Miller. Dr. Economides.
Dr. Economides. Yes, sir.
Mr. Miller. In your testimony or the shortened version, the
one page summary, you said that pretty much anyone associated
with the industry who were the only ones who really had
expertise in the area, was immediately condemned as being an
industry shill from having been in the industry.
You mentioned a Duke study, and you were very critical of
that study, and in general I would--generally I embrace anyone
who criticizes Duke, but in this one case do you have any--do
you fault the qualifications of those scientists at Duke who
performed that study? Were they unqualified to do the study?
And second, do you know of any economic interests they may
have had that would have affected, might have affected their
judgment?
Dr. Economides. I do not know the people, I do not know
their motives, but I do have some very serious reservations
about their conclusions. If they were my students, I would give
them an F.
Mr. Miller. Okay. Well, you did, again, that you--and I
agree with you. I don't think it is fair to say anyone who is
associated with industry is an industry shill, but do you not
think it is that the American people and Congress have a right
to know if anyone offering expertise has a financial interest
in the subject matter about which they are offering their
expertise?
Dr. Economides. No question about that.
Mr. Miller. Okay. Well, in your biographical sketch, your
statement of economic interest for the Committee was
unrevealing as they all are, but you say that you are--you have
a faculty position at the University of Houston. Is that
correct? And you are managing partner of Dr. Michael J.
Economides Consultants, Inc.
What percentage of your income comes from your faculty
position and what comes from your consultancy?
Dr. Economides. I get paid only $1 a year from the
university. I give my salary back to the university.
Mr. Miller. Okay, and how much do you make from your
consulting?
Dr. Economides. You mean personally?
Mr. Miller. Yes.
Dr. Economides. About a million dollars a year.
Mr. Miller. Okay, and you say that your clients include
national oil companies. What are those national oil companies?
Dr. Economides. I am the senior advisor to Sinopec and CNOC
to Chinese companies. I am the senior advisor to ENI,
international oil company. I am--I work for two Australian oil
companies on retainer. I work in Angola, Nigeria, Ghana, and
Kazakhstan.
Mr. Miller. And what is the nature of the consulting that
you provide them?
Dr. Economides. I am a technical person. I am an engineer.
I am the person that has written the textbooks on hydraulic
fracturing.
Mr. Miller. Okay. So you are providing engineering
expertise to companies doing fracking?
Dr. Economides. Fracturing.
Mr. Miller. Fracturing wells?
Dr. Economides. Yes. I have personally done more than 2,000
fracturing jobs through the world. I am one of the first
persons to start the fracturing on the wells in West Texas, so
I have worked in 70 countries as I testified.
Mr. Miller. Okay. My light is red in error, but I will
yield back the last 21 seconds of my time.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Neugebauer.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thanks to Chairman Hall, and thank you for
having this important hearing.
Mrs. Jones, I think you wanted to enlighten the Committee
on something that you started, and I would yield you some time
to do that.
Mrs. Jones. Thank you, Congressman, so much.
We have missions, if you will, trade missions come over
from all over the world to the Railroad Commission offices to
see how we implement regulatory oversight of oil and gas
operations, and in fact, I would like to extend the opportunity
for those from Maryland, Dr. Summers, we may have some ideas
that you might be able to apply on the ground in Maryland,
because certainly it is true that we have had a lot of
experience in doing this.
But this natural gas, this new renaissance, if you will,
and energy is not just for America. It is for the entire globe,
Congressman Neugebauer, and it is very important, I believe,
that other countries, in fact, can benefit from the energy
security that their own natural gas resources under their
ground might give them as well.
So I would go so far as to say that natural gas is indeed a
great development for America but also for the entire world as
these people want to employ the great minds that we have here
sitting at this table, in fact, for advice and to consult on
how to safely and responsibly get their natural gas out.
I would suggest also that there is not one size fits all as
you all have seen. Certainly Maryland and the Marcellus has
different challenges, and there are some challenges that they
will have to meet that we don't have here in Texas, and I am
very cognizant of that, and I think the argument can be made
that, in fact, yes, it is true, one size does not fit all, and
that is why it is incumbent upon the states to regulate their
own patch, if you will, and Maryland will get put to speed,
they will get the experience and the know how, you ought to be
seeking the information from us, from your sister producing
states now that you are going to become one. Welcome aboard,
but you should be seeking our advice and other states in how
you accommodate the groundwater or rather dispose of the
flowback and how best practices are used.
And so that is how states can work together. The Interstate
Oil and Gas Compact Commission is there for us to work
together. You might establish your own compact on your oil and
gas drilling operations in the Chesapeake Basins.
So I welcome the states, I welcome new kids on the block. I
think it is exciting for America, and we serve to serve at the
Railroad Commission, and I am not saying that we don't need,
they don't need oversight. I am just repeating, and you
certainly know full well from your home district, which is very
important what we do to you all, that we must let the states
regulate and oversee this process because only we know what is
best for our citizens.
Thank you.
Mr. Neugebauer. Dr. Michael.
Dr. Economides. Yes.
Mr. Neugebauer. I wasn't going to try that last name
because you probably won't try my last name.
Dr. Economides. It is all Greek to me. Don't worry.
Mr. Neugebauer. I hear you. I hear you. Well, I knew you
weren't from East Texas, so I think that one of the most
important things that you started off with, and you threw your
presentation up there, but you said no frack, no gas.
Dr. Economides. Right.
Mr. Neugebauer. You know, and I think maybe it would be
helpful for people just a little bit of time here left to talk
about the geology and why that, the statement that you made is
a true statement.
Dr. Economides. Okay. Most gas wells in the world are in
what we call very low permeability formations. There is no
difference between oil and gas. Gas has been older and broke
down. Long hydrocarbons have become short, methane. And so the
same reason that made it gas made also the rock very tight. So
you cannot have economic production with what we call ready
flow. It is very inefficient.
Fracturing alters the way the fluid enters the well. We
clear the reservoir. That is a hydraulic fracture. So if you do
not fracture, you cannot produce gas.
There is another problem with higher level complexity
called turbulence effect. The higher the reservoir
permeability, the gas jumps itself. It is almost like a lot of
people trying to run out of a stadium that want to kill each
other. That is the same thing that happens, and it commits
suicide.
So in other words we want to frack again to alleviate
turbulence in high permeability reservoirs. So air forces the
double negative. You cannot afford not to frack any gas well in
the world and expect to make any money.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, and just one last question. You
know, I think the chart that you put up there showing where the
groundwater is in relationship----
Mr. Economides. Right.
Dr. Neugebauer. --to where most gas wells--I think another
thing that most people don't realize is the depth of gas wells,
but I am going to go back to Mrs. Jones just for a quick one.
What do you think the average depth of a gas well in Texas
is?
Mrs. Jones. We have some that are over a mile deep, so it
is geologically impossible for those fracks to get anywhere
close to the water table in Texas.
Mr. Neugebauer. And just for the folks----
Mrs. Jones. About 10,000 feet deep. The Barnett Shale and
the Eagle Ford Shale that is in South Texas that is producing
oil, too, I want to reiterate that there is also an increase in
oil production due to hydraulic fracturing as well.
Mr. Neugebauer. I thank the Chairman for my six minutes.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Clark, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just, to any of the
panelists, I come from Detroit. I represent metro Detroit. We
are the home of the auto industry which is a very fuel-
intensive industry which has innovated greatly in the last few
years to power automobiles from energy sources, different
energy sources, including natural gas.
Now, there are concerns that hydraulic fracturing, and I'm
looking at the whole process including, you know, well
construction issues, could release contaminants into the air
and the water. How do you believe that we can innovate in this
area to reduce the likelihood of those contaminants getting
into the air and water? How can we apply that same type of
innovation to hydraulic fracturing so we can make this a more
clean and green process?
Dr. Cooper. I think the industry is actively engaging quite
a bit to figure out many different innovative ways to clean up
the water that has to be disposed on the surface. Now, I want
to reiterate that in a lot of the United States, there is no
reason to dispose of water on the surface. But in areas where
it is necessary, or maybe there is some beneficial reason to
put the water on the surface--you know, a lot of this so-called
frack water, produced water, isn't that far from a drinking
water standard, and it can be cleaned up. So I would say that
there are literally hundreds of entrepreneurs and a lot of very
big companies that are working on a lot of different techniques
to clean up water, and there are existing techniques that are
very simple that have been used for decades. So a lot of action
is happening there.
I think in the air, pretty much the same story. It is a
little harder to collect air, but it is definitely not so hard
to figure out ways to reduce some of the major pollutants that
might be going into the air.
Mr. Fitch. If I could add, I know a lot of the service
companies that conduct the hydraulic fracturing operations are
working on greener additives. They are already making a lot of
progress that way, and I think that is another area that could
bear fruit.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you. With the time that I have remaining,
I would like to pose another question, and that comes from my
review of the EPA's draft plan to study the potential impact of
hydraulic fracturing on drinking water resources, and this is
the issue that was raised on page 49. It is not a technical, it
is regarding environmental justice, and what I mean by that is
how can we help minimize the environmental justice impact of
hydraulic fracturing, meaning this, reduce the likelihood that
poorer people or certain communities that have certain ethnic
or racial populations are disproportionately impacted by the
contaminants that they could be exposed to as a result of
hydraulic fracturing? Let me illustrate the point clearly. In
the area that I represent, we have got an incinerator,
refinery, waste water treatment plant, and even though I
represent Detroit in the suburbs, all of those facilities are
located in Detroit in poor, African American areas. Those are
my people that are being impacted by those operations. I just
want to make sure that that doesn't happen with hydraulic
fracturing.
Mr. Fitch. I would be glad to respond to that as a fellow
Michigander. The real issue here is that natural gas is where
nature puts it. You can't move a well. You can move a well a
certain, a little bit, but you know, not miles. You have to tap
those reservoirs where they occur in nature. So I will say
though that most--there is kind of a bias toward developing in
more rural areas because it is lot easier to obtain land, it is
a lot easier to obtain drilling sites. So there is kind of a
natural mechanism there that would tend to move that kind of
development out of the cites, out of the more built-up areas.
Mr. Clarke. Let me just for the brief time mention what my
concern is. Typically because the drilling agreements are
between the well operators and landowners, I am concerned that
neighbors and tenants may not really have a voice in this
process.
Mr. Fitch. That is a part of the scheme of development of
oil and natural gas. The people that own or control the mineral
rights have a right to benefit from their development. I am not
sure beyond that what the answer would be.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you. I yield back my limited time.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back his time. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I know
you have already welcomed Elizabeth Ames Jones, our Texas
Railroad Commissioner, to the Committee hearing today, but I
would like to do so as well.
Over the years, I have been her constituent, and she has
been my constituent, so I am pleased to have her expertise
available for Members right now.
Mrs. Jones, I have a couple of questions for you. You
mentioned in your written testimony, and I will quote you,
``Our two main concerns about the EPA study are that it
proposes to delve into areas beyond the reach of federal law
and that it also proposes to study areas beyond the practice of
hydraulic fracturing.''
Mrs. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Smith. Could you go into more details about why you
have those concerns?
Mrs. Jones. Yes, and thank you so much, Congressman. I will
report back home how great it is to see you, to your family.
It is called scope creep or mission creep, and the intent
was first to study the effects on water. They are now
supposedly going to be looking at more, in fact, upstream, well
pad site, how water is procured by operators, so not just the
hydraulic fracturing and any affect it might have anything, but
in fact, if you will, the contract, the private contract
between willing buyers and sellers on how to put a well
together and how to drill a well. I think this is scope creep
and it is not within the purview of the Federal Government or
the EPA to, in fact, go that far, be that broad, if you will,
and I have grave concerns about that.
Mr. Smith. Has the EPA asked you for your opinion or your
input in any way considering the expertise you bring and
considering the role of Texas in the production of oil and gas?
Mrs. Jones. We have made comments. We have provided
comments to this draft study for the EPA. We submitted, if you
will, comments to that, and that would be the extent. We don't
get called and asked for our expertise often.
Mr. Smith. I assume that they have not addressed your
concerns, is that correct as well? ----
Mrs. Jones. No.
Mr. Smith. Mrs. Jones, I want to ask you another question,
and this is actually a question we might ask the witness in the
second panel, but I would like to get your opinion as well.
You may or may not be aware of this, but the 2011
definition by the EPA of hydraulic fracturing is far broader
than the 2004 definition of hydraulic fracturing that they used
back then. We can find no basis whatsoever for this broadening
of their definition, no basis in fact, no basis in any kind of
a reputable source. I would ask you to speculate a little bit
here, but why do you think the EPA would suddenly come up with
such a broad definition of hydraulic fracturing that is broader
than they have ever used before?
Mrs. Jones. Thank you. I can only, or if it would not be
too bold for me to assume, that they would like to expand their
footprint when even since then, in 2004, the footprint of
drilling operations gets smaller and smaller every year.
Technology is used the way it is meant for. It allows the
industry to go in with a smaller footprint and be more
efficient and in fact efficient in water use that they need to
frack a well, and we at the Railroad Commission look at pilot
projects of water reuse and hope and encourage them to do that.
The market affects that, and it is moving very quickly.
Technology is moving quickly. They are getting smaller, their
footprint is smaller, we encourage it. The EPA seems to want a
larger footprint.
Mr. Smith. That is my explanation as well. Thank you, Mrs.
Jones. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman from New Mexico, Mr. Lujan.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate all the witnesses' time today as well.
Mr. Chairman, based on the testimony that I heard today and
that was filed, I would just like to ask the witnesses, and I
appreciate your efficiency, Mr. Chairman, when you were able to
get a yes or no answer, and I only strive to be able to live up
to those expectations, Mr. Chairman. So I will do my best to be
like you, Ralph Hall, and see what we can do there, Mr.
Chairman.
But with that being said, Mrs. Jones, I appreciate you
being here as well. Do you believe there are best practices
that exist within hydraulic fracturing today across the
country, but especially in Texas?
Mrs. Jones. I do.
Mr. Lujan. Dr. Summers, do you believe there to be best
practices?
Dr. Summers. We do not have them in place for the Marcellus
I believe, and as I have said, I think we need to look at other
areas.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Fitch?
Mr. Fitch. Yes, we do.
Mr. Lujan. Dr. Cooper?
Dr. Cooper. Yes, I believe so.
Mr. Lujan. Dr. Economides, is that correct, sir?
Dr. Economides. Yes, of course. I mean, we do 80,000
fracturing jobs in the United States per year right now.
Mr. Lujan. With that being said, Mr. Chairman, do any of
the witnesses believe that those best practices should be
adopted? Commissioner Jones?
Mrs. Jones. I think that one size does not fit all because
the different areas of the country have different--even their
road make-up, their population, their disposal of frack water.
So I would like to help Maryland have a railroad commission of
Maryland and just be able to regulate their industry so that
they can reap the benefits like we have here in Texas.
But what I am saying is that they have to look at the facts
of what is really happening because if they don't, they will be
distracted, and there may be something that really does need
attention. And so I think it is incumbent on public servants to
look at the facts so that they are actually addressing a
problem if it does exist and not basically just chasing
rainbows.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that. Dr. Cooper, when you have
teams that are training to do fracking jobs in different parts
of the country, different parts of the world in our local
areas, they train to do a fracking job, and they have standards
that they operate under. Is that fair to say?
Dr. Cooper. Yes.
Mr. Lujan. And so if we are talking about creating
certainty for the industry, certainty across the country and
also certainty with the workforce and the teams that I have
seen move forward with this, does it make sense that we have
standards so that way when they are drilling in Texas and they
are fracking in different parts of the country, that they are
able to know how to go in, do that most efficiently and make
sure that they are protecting that groundwater as well?
Dr. Cooper. I think we have very high standards, especially
in New Mexico.
Mr. Lujan. So does it make sense that there should be some
standards so that when those teams are fracking in Texas or
fracking in New Mexico that they should live up to those same
standards, even if they are minimum?
Dr. Cooper. I think they already exist.
Mr. Lujan. So if there are already minimum standards, is
there objection by any of the witnesses that we should adopt
minimum standards that should be followed, at least a floor,
across the country? Any objection?
Dr. Cooper. I think we would prefer if the State of New
Mexico regulated the State of New Mexico and the State of Texas
regulates the State of Texas and on and on.
Mr. Fitch. I would just like to add I think each state is
best equipped to deal with the issues that are unique to their
state. There are differences in terrain, differences in climate
obviously, differences in the geologic formations where the gas
occurs, and I think the states are best equipped to tailor
their regulations to those specific instances.
Mr. Lujan. Real quick there. In New Mexico, there are no
direct fracking laws, but there is underground injection
control law that prohibits drilling out of zone or into
drinking water. Is that something that makes sense that should
be adopted nationally?
Mrs. Jones. I am perfectly comfortable with our Railroad
Commission standards. I don't need to adopt New Mexican
standards for Texas.
Mr. Lujan. That is fair. I appreciate that, Commissioner.
And Commissioner, the water that was talked about by the
Chairman a bit ago in Texas where the EPA went in, did that
meet safe drinking water standards when the EPA stepped in
there?
Mrs. Jones. Which water?
Mr. Lujan. The water that you answered that there was no
contamination----
Mrs. Jones. Oh, the Range Resources water. In fact, that
water well owner----
Mr. Lujan. Well, Mr. Chairman, if I may, Commissioner
Jones, did that water meet safe drinking water standards?
Mrs. Jones. It had gas in it before we even came into the
picture. So he had already cut the pipe from his house and was
not drinking from it. But several people do use it to water
their lawn.
Mr. Lujan. Commissioner, would you drink that water?
Mrs. Jones. In fact, one of the homes did have a vent, and
they were venting out the natural gas and using it.
Mr. Lujan. That is not my question.
Mrs. Jones. If I was at their house and they served it to
me? Yes, I would drink it.
Mr. Lujan. Well, I have been around some areas that meet
some safe drinking water standards that I wouldn't drink and I
wouldn't want kids or nephews or nieces exposed to. The one
thing I hope, Mr. Chairman, that we can agree on is that as we
look as what needs to be done in this area, understanding the
needs of what needs to be done to be able to take advantage of
natural gas across the country, is understand that I don't
think there is any fault in trying to adopt some minimum
standards at the very least. In New Mexico, several groups have
gone forward and adopted some closed-loop standards which I
would look forward to hearing from some of the witnesses as
well, Mr. Chairman, but I certainly hope that we can find some
common ground on this and at least adopt some agreement to
begin the conversation about adopting minimum standards as
opposed to saying, you know, what is good for us is not good
for anyone else when we are looking at protecting our water as
opposed to accommodating our water resources. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. The Chair recognizes the
gentlelady from Florida, Mrs. Wilson, for five minutes.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Ranking Member
Johnson for holding this hearing.
This is a question for all of the panelists. I am from
Florida, and we had fallout from the BP tragedy, Deepwater
Horizon tragedy. And that particular tragedy illustrated
tremendous forces and inhospitable conditions in which modern-
day deepwater drilling takes place as well as increased risk
that comes with these activities. Equipment and operators must
be up to the task with no room for error. In that case, they
were not.
We learned that relatively simple things such as greater
automation and more monitoring to catch irregularities could
prevent accidents. Just last month a blowout at a gas well in
Pennsylvania demonstrated that these risks are not confined to
the deepwater. In the business of hydraulic fracturing, what
steps is industry taking to reduce and manage these risks; how
are wells monitored, and are all wells monitored this way; and
how do safety-related lessons learned in the off-shore industry
transfer to the on-shore, unconventional sector and vice-versa?
Mrs. Jones. Thank you, Congresswoman. I would like to say
that unlike the Federal Government oversight of the off-shore,
the Railroad Commission's oversight of the Texas oil and gas
operations has not generated such a traumatic event. And I
would be willing also to work with BOEMRE and any other federal
agency, formerly the Minerals Management Service, to apply the
maximum standards that we use at the Railroad Commission to
ensure the responsible operations.
One of the things you mentioned, specifically, hydraulic
fracturing. We have spacing rules that operators come in when
they want to get a permit to drill a well, distance rules.
Communities are putting in some of their own distance rules,
but mainly our oversight is of the down hole and the disposal
of any water that comes back. In our State, we have strict well
casing rules to make sure that water cannot migrate out of the
well. Cementing, they run cement logs. We have pages of rules
and regulations to ensure responsible down-hole drilling
operations of the industry, and we also want to make sure that
people benefit who own the minerals. And now with urban-
suburban drilling, there are a lot more people who are reaping
the financial benefits because they own the minerals. But it is
true, if they don't own the minerals, sometimes they are
inconvenienced by a well that might go in near to their
neighborhood. But the severance tax that they pay off the top
from that natural gas goes into state coffers and funds
schools, permanent school fund to some extent, but a rainy-day
fund primarily. And 33 school districts are funded by the taxes
of oil and natural gas production right off the top at the well
head, for them in taxes and for the State as well.
So we have a protocol in place that is ensuring that we
maximize our resources, use them to the best of our ability and
one of our mission statements is the protection of the
environment as well. And I can tell you, I remain vigilant
every single day. In fact, I would prefer that Texans remain
vigilant in Texas, and perhaps if the Federal Government had
been as vigilant as we are, the BP accident or disaster would
not have taken place.
Chairman Hall. Yes? You yield back?
Ms. Wilson. Want to respond? It was just thrown out there.
Chairman Hall. Oh.
Mr. Fitch. I could say a few words to that, I guess. I am
not sure exactly the details behind that Pennsylvania blowout,
but I think I can safely say it was not a fracturing issue, per
se. It was a well control issue. You can have that with any
kind of well, whether it is fractured or not. To echo Texas,
the states do have safeguards. We require casing programs,
blowout preventer programs to counteract those kinds of things.
However, nothing is ever going to be totally risk free.
Dr. Economides. Let me, if I might, add a couple of
comments here. First of all, fracking and drilling are not the
same thing. People bunch them together. We drill wells, then we
frack them. They are not connected as processes.
There is no such thing as risk free. If you are familiar
with the rule of nines, in other words, nine, nine, nine, nine,
there is always one probability out there for something
horrible to happen.
In this respect, the oil and gas industry is one of the
safest industries in the world, in spite of sensational
accidents. You don't stop flying because an airplane crashes,
and the same thing, we don't stop drilling for this very vital
commodity, oil and gas, just because one errant well had an
accident.
Chairman Hall. Does the gentlelady yield back?
Ms. Wilson. Mr. Chair, I don't want to assume or give you
the impression that we should stop because of one accident.
However, my question was, what safeguards do you have in place
to prevent accidents.
Dr. Economides. Well, there are plenty of them. We are
computer monitored in everything we do. We take great lengths
to do measurements before and after any action we do. We take
into account integrity of the well. We do everything in our
power to prevent spills. We do everything in our power to
prevent zonal communication with adjoining geological
structures, let alone some things that are thousands of feet
away.
So in other words, the industry has no economic interest to
be careless. The industry, on the contrary, environmental
sensibilities notwithstanding, has a financial interest to do
things right, and they do it right.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. Before we recognize the gentleman
from Michigan, Mr. Benishek, I want to recognize our astronauts
on the back stage there. I would like for you all to stand up
and let us honor you from STS 133, you just landed when,
yesterday or the day before?
Voice. We got back Saturday morning.
Chairman Hall. Well, that is about how up to date I am. But
we appreciate you very, very much. And you are the Columbuses
and Magellans of space. We are proud of you. Thank you. And
don't any of you come back and run against any of us in our
district because you would get elected.
Okay. The gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Benishek, is
recognized.
Mr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Fitch is here
from Michigan, and I think I will address this question to you.
There have been numerous comments filed with the EPA including
the Administration's Department of Energy. They have pointed
out that the EPA draft study does not objectively characterize
the risk of this drinking water fracking in part because they
selectively focused on cases that have had negative outcomes
reported, although not necessarily confirmed. Do you agree with
the concern that there is no quantitative analysis of the risk
that may skew the results?
Mr. Fitch. I do agree with that. I think any activity you
look at out there you can find potential problems or actual
problems, and by not putting it in context, I think it at least
certainly lends itself to being misused by people who are
opposed to energy development, and that would be our concern. I
think it needs to be put in perspective.
Mr. Benishek. Thank you. Does anyone else on the panel have
any other comments on sort of that line of thinking?
Dr. Cooper. I think we are asked to quantify risk all the
time, and I think it is a big glaring hole that EPA doesn't
seem to think that they need to quantify risk.
Mr. Benishek. Thank you very much, gentlemen. I yield back
the remainder of my time.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back. Dr. Broun, do you
have questions? The gentlelady from California, Ms. Woolsey, is
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Woolsey. Congresswoman Woolsey does not have a
question. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. Congresswoman Woolsey is recognized for six
minutes. It doesn't take her long to use up her six minutes.
All right. I thank the witnesses for your very valuable
testimony, and I thank the Members for their questions. We are
going to now move to the second panel, and if Dr. Anastas takes
his seat at the table--somebody call Dr. Anastas and tell him
he is on.
Dr. Broun. Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Hall. The Chair recognizes--
Dr. Broun. Before this panel leaves, I would like to ask a
quick question, if I may.
Chairman Hall. All right. You may.
Dr. Broun. I apologize for throwing the wrench in the works
here while we are waiting for the next panel to come.
I wanted to follow up on what Mr. Lujan was saying. I
believe in the Constitution as our Founding Fathers meant for
it to be, and Mr. Lujan is going down a track, talking about we
needed to see up some federal minimum standards. And frankly, I
think the states personally can set whatever standards are
necessary to make improvements or protect the environment
within their own states. Do any of the five of you see any
necessity to having a federal standard or can you, within your
own state, within your own purview, set up standards that are
necessary to protect your own state's drinking waters and make
sure that your citizens continue to be safe? Very quickly.
Dr. Summers. I believe we do need to have minimum standards
and specifically in my testimony I mentioned the fact that we
have interstate waters, and we need to make sure that all the
states are doing at least minimal level of protection.
Dr. Broun. Can we do that through interstate cooperation
instead of having some federal nexus here?
Dr. Summers. In fact we have the Susquehanna River Basin
Commission which I mentioned that has representatives from all
the states that share that watershed, and I believe that that
works extremely well. But we don't have that across the entire
set of watersheds that impact Maryland. So in Maryland, I think
that would work with the Environmental Protection Agency,
Region III and the Chesapeake Bay Restoration has been a good
example of how that federal work with the states can be very
effective and productive.
Dr. Broun. Anybody else, very quickly? Mrs. Jones? Go
ahead.
Mrs. Jones. I would say no, that we can, the State of
Texas, can certainly and has already developed minimum and they
are quite stringent minimum standards. And thank you,
Congressman, because I don't see anywhere in the Constitution
where the authority to do this was delegated to the Federal
Government. And I think that the states can regulate their own
energy patch just fine--we have also worked with the EPA, and I
think that Maryland, I look forward to helping to craft a
compact where they can regulate their energy resources, too. We
can share knowledge and certainly are just a phone call away.
Dr. Broun. Anybody else want to comment?
Mr. Fitch. I would say from my perspective, each state is
fully capable and has the necessary authority to properly
regulate oil and gas, all aspects, including hydraulic
fracturing. We do cooperate among the states. The Interstate
Oil and Gas Compact Commission is one very good vehicle for
that, and we would welcome Maryland's stronger involvement in
IOGCC, and we would be glad to help share some of our expertise
in that area.
I mentioned I am a member of the board of Stronger,
Incorporated. We review states on a voluntary basis for their
regulatory programs against a set of guidelines, and as I said,
we just completed this year review of four states' hydraulic
fracturing programs to, you know, give some assurance that they
meet minimum standards.
Dr. Broun. Anybody else want to comment? I thank you all
for the quick answers, and thank you for coming back on the
panel. But I want to say this. Our Federal Government has
gotten too large. We are spending too much money. We are
interfering with state business too much. We need to go back to
the original intent of the Constitution which means very
limited government. The Constitution only authorizes the
Federal Government to be involved in national defense, national
security and foreign affairs predominantly. There are a few
other things constitutionally that we have authority to do, and
it is not in our purview to interfere with what the states are
doing. There is a state DEP in every state of this country that
is engaged in trying to protect the citizens of that state, and
I applaud what you all are doing, and I encourage you to
continue to do so and thank you for your testimony. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Would the gentleman yield?
Dr. Broun. Certainly to you. I will always yield.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, while we were going through the
hearing here, I went out and had to get a hamburger. Now, what
I need to know is if we keep obstructing the development of
energy, and especially this new opportunity we have through
fracking, do you think the price of these hamburgers are going
to go up for ordinary people? Is that what it is all about? I
think it is. If we are going to be sucking wealth out of our
country and having to send it overseas, eventually we are going
to have to spend more money for what we get here.
So Mr. Chairman, I really took to heart what our colleague
from Michigan was talking about when he said he was talking
about the poor people who live in his area and how they are
severely impacted by various uses of energy. Let me just note.
We have more and more poor people and fewer and fewer
hamburgers for us to eat if we don't develop our own energy
resources. There is a direct relationship. Yes, no fracking, no
gas. No gas, no prosperity. No prosperity, no jobs, no good
life for the American people.
So thank you all for your testimony. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman for leading this effort.
Chairman Hall. Are you going to eat all that hamburger and
not even offer us a bite?
Mr. Rohrabacher. These are my carbs. It has something to do
with sunshine and gas----
Dr. Broun. All right. I will reclaim my time, Mr. Chairman,
and I yield it back.
Chairman Hall. I once again thank the panel and the Members
for their questions, and we have our second panel now. Dr.
Anastas, please take your seat at the table.
You folks are welcome to stay, and the seats are set aside
for you back there.
Before getting settled, I would like to recognize a couple
of people that I am honored to have in presence here. Mr.
Howard Zelkiv, Rock Wall and Dallas Area Chamber of Commerce
and Association of Realtors and have Mrs. Pat Bell who is a
leader in the field of education in Paris, Texas, in that area.
Glad to have both of you there. Thank you.
Dr. Anastas, are you ready to roll?
Mr. Anastas. Yes.
Chairman Hall. All right. A reminder to you that your
testimony is limited to five minutes after which Members will
have five minutes each to ask questions. I now recognize our
first and only witness for this panel, Dr. Paul Anastas,
Assistant Administrator for the EPA, Office of Research and
Development and science advisor to EPA, for five minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF DR. PAUL ANASTAS, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE
OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT, U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY

Dr. Anastas. Good morning, Chairman Hall, and Members of
the Committee. My name is Paul Anastas, and I am the Assistant
Administrator for the Office of Research and Development of the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
I want to say on a personal level how happy I am to be here
before this Committee. I have appeared before this Committee on
numerous occasions, and I believe you know, Mr. Chairman, that
they have always been useful and productive. And so I
appreciate the opportunity to be here today.
Let me begin by saying that natural gas is an abundant
source of domestic energy. However, as everyone can agree, we
must ensure that its extraction is done in a way that does not
contaminate the Nation's drinking water supplies.
Last year, in response to Congress and citizens across the
country, EPA began designing a scientifically rigorous study on
potential linkages between natural gas extraction through
hydraulic fracturing and drinking water contamination.
Consistent with advice provided by the Science Advisory Board
at the U.S. EPA, in June of 2010 the scope of EPA's proposed
research plan spans the full life cycle of water used in
hydraulic fracturing activities from its acquisition to
chemical mixing, fracturing and post-fracturing and its
ultimate treatment and disposal. This full life-cycle approach
is necessary to identifying and understanding all of the
factors that may impact the water quality of drinking water
supplies across the United States.
As we move ahead with the scientific process, we will
adhere to two basic principles. First, our work will be driven
by sound science. EPA has never and will never presuppose the
outcome of any research effort. As this study progresses, we
will rely only on sound scientific data and results to draw
conclusions. Additionally, the draft study plan includes EPA's
rigorous quality assurance requirements and upholds the highest
standard of scientific integrity, a principle that is central
to all of this agency's scientific work.
[The EPA Draft Plan can be accessed at EPA/600/D-11/001/
February2011/www.eps.gov/research.]
Let me also be very clear. The new pertinent science from
any and all scientific sources will be considered by EPA if it
is independent and peer-reviewed.
Second, it is my firm belief that when citizens voice their
concerns through their elected officials, it is the duty of
public servants to address them in an open and transparent way.
To this end, EPA is directly engaging stakeholders and
technical experts throughout the course of the design of this
study and the implementation of this study. For example, we
have held a series of webinars for state, federal and tribal
stakeholders which have drawn representatives from 21 states as
well as the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators,
the Association of State and Interstate Water Pollution Control
Administrators, the Groundwater Protection Council and the
Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission.
We also held webinars with representatives from industry
and non-governmental organizations to discuss public engagement
process, the research study scope, data sharing and other
issues of interest. In total, 64 individuals from NGOs and 176
individuals from natural gas production and service companies
and industry association have participated in these webinars.
In the summer of 2010, EPA also held four public
information sessions in Ft. Worth, Texas; Denver, Colorado;
Canonsburg, Pennsylvania; and Binghamton, New York. More than
3,500 individuals attended these sessions, provided more than
700 verbal comments and over 5,000 electronic and written
comments. In addition, between February and March of 2011, EPA
held a series of technical workshops with experts from industry
and academia to discuss chemical and analytical methods, well
construction and operations, fate and transport, and water
resources management. More than 160 experts participated in
these workshops, and all of these associated, meeting agendas,
presentations, and proceedings can be found on the EPA web
site.
As the fracturing study progresses and results become
available, we will continue to provide updates and invite
stakeholder input on technical issues of concern. Their
feedback is always welcome.
Mr. Chairman, this study is, first and foremost, about
obtaining the knowledge to protect the American people and
their environment. We are pursuing this work with the best
available science and the highest level of transparency. As is
our duty, we will conduct and present this study to the
American people in the same, unbiased scientifically rigorous
manner which we carry out all of our work.
I look forward to keeping this Committee updated on all of
our progress, and thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Anastas follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Paul Anastas, Assistant Administrator, Office
of Research and Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Good morning Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson, and other
members of the Committee. My name is Paul Anastas. I am the Assistant
Administrator for Research and Development (ORD). It is a pleasure to
be here with you this morning to discuss the EPA Office of Research and
Development's Research Plan to Study the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic
Fracturing on Drinking Water Resources.
In its FY2010 Appropriations Committee Conference Report, Congress
directed EPA to study the relationship between hydraulic fracturing and
drinking water. In response to this request, and interest by
stakeholders, EPA is undertaking a study to understand the potential
impacts of hydraulic fracturing on drinking water resources. As
Congress requested, the study will use the best available science and
independent sources of information. We will undertake the study using a
transparent, peer-reviewed process and will consult with stakeholders
throughout the study. Produced responsibly, natural gas has the
potential to reduce green house gas emissions, stabilize energy prices,
and provide greater certainty about the future energy reserves.
The study is designed to examine the conditions that may be
associated with the potential contamination of drinking water
resources, and to identify the factors that may lead to human exposure
and risks. The scope of the proposed research includes the full
lifespan of water in hydraulic fracturing, from acquisition of the
water, through the mixing of chemicals and actual fracturing, to the
post-fracturing stage, including the management of flowback and
produced water and its ultimate treatment and disposal, an approach
EPA's Science Advisory Board (SAB) agreed was appropriate in their June
2010 review.
EPA recognizes that there are important potential research areas
related to hydraulic fracturing other than those involving drinking
water resources, including effects on air quality, aquatic and
terrestrial ecosystem impacts, seismic risks, occupational risks, and
public safety concerns.
The SAB reviewed the draft plan on March 7-8, 2011. Consistent with
the operating procedures of the SAB, an opportunity was provided for
the public, including affected stakeholders, to provide comments for
the SAB to take into account during their review. The Agency will
consider all of the public comments, revise the study plan in response
to the SAB's report and begin full implementation of the plan. A first
report of research results is expected by the end of 2012. Certain
portions of the work will be longer-term projects that are not likely
to be finished at that time. An additional report of study findings
will be published in 2014 after these longer-term projects are
completed.
We are now in the final stages of evaluating and selecting
candidate field locations for retrospective and prospective case
studies. Retrospective case studies provide an opportunity to
investigate instances where concerns about drinking water have been
reported, and to determine whether and to what extent any impacts may
be associated with hydraulic fracturing. Prospective case studies will
allow us to observe modern hydraulic fracturing practices and gather
data uniquely available during this process, such as samples of
flowback and produced water.
In addition to case studies, our research will include analysis of
data from many sources, including industry and the states, along with
laboratory studies and modeling to assess a range of conditions under
which hydraulic fracturing takes place.

Stakeholder Input

Stakeholder input has played, and will continue to play, an
important role in the hydraulic fracturing study. We have implemented a
strategy that engages stakeholders and technical experts in dialogue
and provides opportunities for input on the study scope and case study
locations. We have held webinars with stakeholders, including
representatives from 21 states as well as the Association of State
Drinking Water Administrators, the Association of State and Interstate
Water Pollution Control Administrators, the Ground Water Protection
Council, and the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission. In
addition, we have held webinars with representatives from industry and
from non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to discuss the public
engagement process, the scope of the study, coordination of data
sharing, and other key issues. Overall, webinar participants have
included 176 individuals from various natural gas production and
service companies and industry associations, as well as 64 individuals
from NGOs.
EPA held public information meetings between July and September,
2010, in Fort Worth, Texas; Denver, Colorado; Canonsburg, Pennsylvania;
and Binghamton, New York. At these meetings, EPA presented information
on the Agency's reasons for studying hydraulic fracturing, an overview
of what the study might include, and how stakeholders could be
involved. Opportunities to present oral and written comments were
provided. Total attendance for all of the information public meetings
exceeded 3,500, and more than 700 oral comments were heard. EPA also
provided stakeholders with opportunities to submit electronic or
written comments on the hydraulic fracturing study and received over
5,000 comments.
In February and March 2011, EPA held a series of four technical
workshops with experts from industry, academia and others to discuss
chemical and analytical methods, well construction and operations, fate
and transport, and water resource management. More than 160 experts
from industry and academia participated in these workshops. The
information shared during these workshops will be very useful to EPA in
the conduct of the study. In the interest of transparency, the agendas,
presentations, and proceedings will be posted on EPA's web site.
As the research progresses and results become available, we will
engage stakeholders by providing updates and receiving input on
technical issues of concern.

Coordination with Other Federal Agencies

EPA has been actively consulting with several key federal agencies
regarding research related to hydraulic fracturing. We have met with
representatives from the Department of Energy (DOE), including DOE's
National Energy Technology Laboratory; the US Geological Survey; the US
Army Corps of Engineers; and other agencies to identify opportunities
for collaboration and leveraging of resources. Federal agencies have
also commented on the draft study plan through an interagency review
process.

Scientific Integrity

As noted in EPA's draft study plan, all EPA-funded research
projects, whether conducted by EPA scientists or extramural
cooperators, will comply with the most rigorous level of the Agency's
Quality Assurance (QA) requirements. This will include, for example,
technical system audits, audits of data quality, and data quality
assessments; performance evaluations of measurement systems; and QA
review of products. The scientific integrity of our research will be
further ensured through the peer review of our research results.

Conclusion

In conclusion, I want to assure the members of this committee and
others that this study will be conducted through a transparent, peer-
reviewed process in consultation with other Federal agencies as well as
appropriate State and interstate regulatory agencies.
I look forward to working with the Committee to address current and
emerging environmental problems that will help our Agency protect the
environment and human health. Thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today.

Chairman Hall. I thank you, sir, and I remind Members
again, Committee rules limit questioning to five minutes. At
this point I will open a round of questions by recognizing
myself for five minutes.
Dr. Anastas, you know that I don't agree with you about 90
percent of the time, don't you? You understand that? And you
are willing to come and testify here, and I thank you for that.
Dr. Anastas. I certainly am. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Hall. I find it interesting that the Department of
Energy has filed comments with EPA that were clearly critical
of the draft plan. You are aware of that, aren't you?
Dr. Anastas. I am.
Chairman Hall. Specifically DoE said EPA's scope will not
objectively characterize risk ``given that the retrospective
case study methodology will selectively focus on cases for
which there have been negative outcomes. There is concern that
the study may not adequately represent the overall risk
presented by hydraulic fracturing'' the comment says.
So Doctor, I guess I ask you, what is your response to
these comments from DoE?
Dr. Anastas. I think it is important to recognize what this
study is intended to do. This study is intended to understand
the factors that potentially could result in impact to drinking
water from hydraulic fracturing operations. When we are saying
that we want to understand the factors, that is, trying to
understand the factors that are the basis of whether or not a
risk exists. This study is not intended to be a risk
assessment. This study is not intended to assume that there is
a risk. This study is intended to understand whether or not the
factors are present that would result in a potential impact to
drinking water.
Perhaps I could explain even further.
Chairman Hall. All right.
Dr. Anastas. In order for there to be a risk----
Chairman Hall. You have not made me understand it yet but
go ahead.
Dr. Anastas. In order for there to be a risk, there needs
to be the elements of both hazard and exposure. Those are the
factors that we are seeking to understand. Are there hazards
that could impact the drinking water and is there exposure? The
results of those two elements are what would cause a risk, and
we are not presupposing the outcome of this study in order to
do a risk determination.
Chairman Hall. Do you agree or disagree with the DoE
comments? I can't tell.
Mr. Anastas. Let me be clear. The DoE comments are saying
that this study does not conduct a risk assessment. I am saying
that this study is not a risk assessment.
Chairman Hall. You disagree with them?
Dr. Anastas. Yes.
Chairman Hall. Okay. That is what I wanted to hear you say.
Your EPA research office is responsible, are they not, for
carrying out this study, your office?
Dr. Anastas. That is correct.
Chairman Hall. And it seems strange that all of the online
materials and information related to this study are located on
EPA's Office of Water website. Why is that? They are
responsible for water-related regulations.
Mr. Anastas. We want to make the information available and
easy to find. We can certainly have a mirror website say where
people could go to either, but I think the most important thing
is to make sure that the information is available to the
American people.
Chairman Hall. Who carries out the study? I would expect
this study to be carried out by scientists whose job it is to
focus on research, which are a research.
Dr. Anastas. That is correct. The study will be carried
out----
Chairman Hall. Not by people whose job it is to regulate,
and I don't really consider you regulators.
Dr. Anastas. That is correct. This study will be carried
out by scientists.
Chairman Hall. With that in mind, please describe the
division of labor between your office and the Office of Water.
I would like to know who makes these decisions.
Dr. Anastas. These decisions and this study is being
carried out by the Office of Research and Development.
Chairman Hall. Approximately how many staff within each
office will be dedicated to that effort?
Dr. Anastas. I will have to get back to you on the exact
number of staff because that is not a number that I have at my
fingertips, sir.
Chairman Hall. All right, sir. In question, two, of the
invitation letter which I have here, I ask you if you would
allow for public comment on the revised study plan so after the
Science Advisory Board provides comments and recommendations,
EPA is going to revise the study plan. At that time, will you
allow for public comment at that point, the revised plan?
Dr. Anastas. We are certainly going to have continued
engagement on the plan and will be responsive to the public
comments that were accepted by the Science Advisory Board.
Chairman Hall. You will have engagement. That is not what I
asked you. Will you allow for public comment?
Dr. Anastas. We will accept public comment in the meetings
that we have with stakeholders and the dialog and the updates
that we provide to stakeholders, certainly.
Chairman Hall. Okay. That is a yes.
Dr. Anastas. Public comment in the framework of a
Scientific Advisory Board meeting is a very formal mechanism.
What I am saying is that we certainly will accept comment in
the interactions that we have on the updates and the ongoing
updates, informing the American public of the progress.
Chairman Hall. Would that be formal public comment in the
Federal Register?
Dr. Anastas. No, there will not be a Federal Register.
Those will be direct interactions.
Chairman Hall. I am told my time is up. The Chair
recognizes Mr. Wu, Ranking Member Mr. Wu, from Oregon.
Mr. Wu. Yes, sir.
Chairman Hall. I zigged pretty good, didn't I? I almost
said you were from Washington. You are recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Wu. You did fantastic, sir. Thank you very much.
Appreciate it.
Chairman Hall. I am doing better.
Mr. Wu. Well, this Administration recognizes the need to
obtain energy from all sources, including natural gas, and it
has established the Secretary of Energy Advisory Board to also
establish a Subcommittee to examine more closely the set of
hydraulic fracturing issues.
First of all, is EPA supportive of this initiative and
secondly, how does EPA intend to put together its work and
recommendations with the work of that body?
Dr. Anastas. This study plan is being carried out by the
Environmental Protection Agency, but we recognize that other
agencies have important roles to play, important interests, and
certainly the Advisory Board put together by DoE to inform best
practices is something that we do support. And we always seek
to work very closely with our other agency partners across the
Federal Government.
Mr. Wu. Dr. Anastas, can you describe to me the process
that you have gone through and also the extent to which you
have sought stakeholder input from all sources?
Dr. Anastas. Yes, one of the things that was a hallmark of
putting together this study plan was in order to engage
technical experts from industry, from academia, certainly in
coordination with other governmental, other federal agencies.
We also wanted to make sure that we allowed for input from the
public. That is why these workshops that were held around the
country where we had thousands of people come in in order to
provide input and provide their perspectives on the study
design, that is why we went to the Science Advisory Board in
order to seek their input, both on the initial structure of the
study as well as the current review that is currently taking
place on this study. So we went through a very rigorous process
in order to seek out input from all quarters.
Mr. Wu. Okay. Very good. One final, more focused, narrowing
to one area, an investigation of the Commerce Committee found
that potentially millions of gallons of diesel fuel are used in
fracking wells. Does EPA know how much diesel is currently
being used, where it is being used and where it goes? And do
you think that those doing the fracking are doing what they
need to properly take care of this downstream from the actual
useful use of diesel?
Dr. Anastas. Thank you for asking that question. It is a
very important question of regulatory concern. I know that this
is one that the EPA is actively engaged in. As you know, I am
in the Office of Research and Development, so I will be happy
to get more information on that regulatory question back to
you, Congressman.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much, Dr. Anastas. Mr. Chairman, I
have no further questions at this point.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am
done with my cheeseburger, so I am ready. What we are talking
about here is not just a scientific study by the EPA. What most
of us are worried about is a centralization of power being
justified by unelected and unattached decision-makers in the
EPA and throughout the bureaucracy.
Again, in your testimony as in the testimony of one of the
witnesses before, you mentioned the word drinking water
numerous times.
Dr. Anastas. Correct.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Numerous times.
Dr. Anastas. Correct.
Mr. Rohrabacher. The other witness was unable to give us an
example of one. Maybe you have several examples of where the
drinking water has been compromised due to fracking.
Dr. Anastas. The way that we are able to answer questions
like that is by asking the tough question scientifically in
making these determinations.
The reason that we carry out these studies is to be able to
give you a reliable and certain answer. In the absence of these
studies, in the absence of these measurements and monitoring,
the confidence that anyone has in giving you an answer to that
question is compromised. And so we ask the scientific questions
in order to give solid answers, rather than----
Mr. Rohrabacher. You just rush forward without any examples
and you think that we have unlimited resources and we are just
going to go out there until every question is answered? Doesn't
there have to be some reason behind it, some malady, some group
of deaths or something? Aren't there enough things to study in
the United States where we can pinpoint that there is a threat
because there have been incidents where people have been hurt
without having to go to things that you can't even give us one
example of where there has been harm cased by human beings in
their drinking water due to fracking?
Dr. Anastas. I appreciate the question, but when the
American people, through their elected representatives in
Congress, direct the U.S. EPA to address concerns and to
undertake a scientific study and direct us to investigate if
there is any link between hydraulic fracturing operations and
drinking water, we take that charge very seriously.
Mr. Rohrabacher. The American people didn't mandate this.
You have got a bunch of bureaucrats and left-wingers from
universities who make their living trying to scare the American
people into thinking there are problems. At least you would
have some kind of evidence, something that has happened that
would indicate there is a major threat. How much is that study
going to cost?
Dr. Anastas. When the American people and when the Congress
directs us to undertake a study----
Chairman Hall. Just answer his question. How much does it
cost?
Dr. Anastas. In fiscal year 2010, we had $1.9 million
budgeted and fiscal year 2011, it was $4.3 million, in the
President's budget request.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. And how long will it take and how
much is it expected to cost?
Dr. Anastas. The initial results of the study are expected
by the end of 2012.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay, and how much is the end result going
to cost?
Dr. Anastas. The end result at the end of the entirety of
the study will be approximately $12 million.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. So you have focused in, you have
committed time of your scientists and $12 million of money
without having one example that indicates that we are at risk.
Dr. Anastas. The Environmental Protection Agency has
followed the direction of Congress to investigate----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, the answer is yes, okay? Fine. Thank
you. If you can't give us an example of where fracturing is
actually in some way compromised the drinking water, can you
give us an example of where the states that are regulating this
have failed in their responsibility to their people and thus
this centralizing of power in the Federal Government and yes,
non-elected officials in Washington would be justified?
Dr. Anastas. The study that we are undertaking is not a
regulatory study. This is not a----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay, so you don't have any examples where
the regulation of--yeah, it is not a study, but you as an
individual, you are a decision-maker. You are talking to the
decision-makers here. You should certainly know the history of
what is going on around the country and/or give us some
examples of where there is a threat in order to justify
committing a large amount of your personnel and $12 million
over a five-year period. And there are just no examples of
failure at the state level and no examples of even where there
has been a compromise of the drinking water.
Mr. Chairman, there is something motivating this going
forward in this area. What is motivating this? Aren't there
other areas that you have to choose from that, you know, people
are actually out there being threatened by chemicals? There are
a lot of chemical problems in urban America that you can focus
on. And by the way, they are very easy to prove. I mean, it is
very easy to prove that chemicals are a problem to our health
in Southern California, what we breathe in, okay? There is
instance of that. But yet you have committed yourself to
spending the money on something that we don't have any examples
of where it has actually affected anyone's health.
Dr. Anastas. The Environmental Protection Agency is taking
on, as you are well aware, a wide-range of issues to protect
human health and the environment, including some of the air-
quality issues. What this study, at the direction of Congress,
has undertaken is to determine if there are factors that could
cause potential harm to humans or the environment.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes, if there are----
Dr. Anastas. Specifically, our drinking water.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And there are probably thousands of other
things that we could say, what is there potential harm in,
mountain climbing? Is there a potential harm in manufacturing
baby clothing? But yet you have chosen----
Chairman Hall. Surfing.
Mr. Rohrabacher. One last note and that is our country is
being strangled. The reason why our people are living worse off
now than they were ten years ago, and people can't get good
jobs, is we are sending wealth out of our country, a trillion
dollars a year. Industry is being strangled. Our way of life is
being strangled because we are not being permitted the energy
we need to have prosperity in this country, and the frivolous
nature of just giving scientists, go out and see if you can
find something that will permit us to stop energy production,
because that is what this is all about, and I am happy to see
that Congressman Hall is having this hearing so we can express
that. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes Mrs. Woolsey of California for five minutes.
Ms. Woolsey. Pronounced Wool-sey, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Doctor, for being here. You are doing great. I think you are
aware and you knew before you even got here that good science
isn't always the basis of our decisions on the Science
Committee. I think that is weird, but it is true.
So you know, motivation, okay? The motivation for this
study is a bunch of citizens, scientists concerned about a
process that we don't know enough about in this country. So
maybe could you outline a little bit about what those concerns
were from your perspective that led the Congress to direct this
study, and why the 2004 report of little or no threat to water
supplies really wasn't enough.
Dr. Anastas. Okay. The 2004 report really did focus on coal
bed methane extraction. It was significantly different in terms
of the type of operations, the depths of the operations, the
nature of the drilling. And it was, rather than a field and
laboratory study, far more of a survey of the existing
knowledge, not as in depth as certainly what is being planned
with this focus study.
The nature of the concerns and the questions that are
raised both by people to the Congress and what they expressed
as well as in the workshops and meetings that the EPA conducted
over the months were questions whether or not there was
contamination of drinking water due to fracturing operations,
that contamination could take the form of methane in the
drinking water, could take the form of hydraulic fracturing
fluids in the water and those concerns are what have been
raised, and I think that is why we asked the questions in order
to answer those and assure the American public of the safety of
their drinking water while we pursue the extraction of domestic
energy resources.
Ms. Woolsey. Well, you probably already have your opinions,
but the science of the study is what is going to drive the
results in your report. It is not your opinion as a scientist
or the Committee's opinion?
Dr. Anastas. Absolutely, and I think that is an important
point to emphasize. It would be antithetical to a scientific
approach to presuppose, predetermine or in any way bias the
outcome of this study. In order to assure the American public
that the results of this study is credible, we need to ensure
that this maintains scientific integrity throughout all of the
conduct, the design and the conduct of this study.
Ms. Woolsey. So the American public, the American public,
you know, I mean, not the people sitting up here that still
don't have enough information to make these decisions without
good base study behind it, but the American public, they aren't
worried about this yet, but they will certainly be worried
about it if they start having traces of poisons and problems in
their drinking water. And is not this study to prevent
something from happening, then the American public will stand
up and roar and what is the matter with you idiots on the
Science Committee? You don't protect us. So isn't that what EPA
is about?
Dr. Anastas. I believe that certainly there is every
opportunity for this study to clarify and give knowledge and
insight about the operations so that the American people can be
confident that their drinking water is pure and uncontaminated,
and I think that it is studies like this that give the American
people that confidence.
Ms. Woolsey. Well, I thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back. The
gentleman from Maryland, Dr. Harris is recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much. Thank you, Dr. Anastas,
for coming to testify. I have got a question. I guess the
background is that back in the fiscal year 2010 budget I guess
there was some kind of language suggesting the EPA study, but
it left the scope of the study or I guess the need for an in-
depth study totally up to the EPA. Is that right, given the
language? I don't have the exact language in front of me.
Dr. Anastas. The report language did talk about the
connection between hydraulic fracturing operation and----
Mr. Harris. And drinking water. Correct. So the EPA could
have come back and just said, you know, we have investigated
and there has been no case ever of known contamination of
drinking water from hydraulic fracturing which has gone on for
years and years and years. I mean, that is one possible outcome
of the EPA evaluation. They could have done a retrospective
review of all the reported cases and said actually, it has
never been proven that any drinking water has been contaminated
by it. Is that----
Dr. Anastas. I believe to have that kind of unilateral
determination without tapping into the type of expertise we did
without review by the Science Advisory Board may have been
highly questioned.
Mr. Harris. Well, the Science Board could have done it that
way. And the reason is because, you know, in medicine, and I
have done medical research, I mean there is this thing called
the index case. It is usually what brings something to people's
attention. In the absence of an index case, it is a shotgun
approach for anything, and I will give you an example. I mean,
you know, I could say, you know, there is a group of people,
you know, very concerned about aspirin. I mean, my gosh, and
maybe I should write a letter to the EPA or maybe we should
stick in some budget language, the FDA ought to study aspirin.
And I would come back and say, let me tell you something. It
has been around for a long time, and sure, there are possible
potential--in fact, aspirin is a bad example because there are
kind of bad things that can happen with aspirin, but you know,
the lack of an index case is very puzzling to me. And it begs
the question, was the question framed in such a way that you
have to go after potential impacts or was the question framed
in such a way you could say, you know what we are going to do?
We are going to look for an index case, and in the absence of
an index case, we are going to say that we really should defer
the expenditure of $12 million, money we don't have, money we
have to borrow from the Chinese to fund this study.
So was that one possible outcome? I mean, the Science
Advisory Board could have said, you know, we are going to
search for an index case, but in the absence of an index case,
what are we looking for?
Dr. Anastas. It is an excellent question, Congressman. I
have to say that the reason that we ask the hardest questions
and seek this knowledge is to give the American people
confidence in the----
Mr. Harris. Okay. I hate to stop you there, but I only have
two more minutes. Wouldn't the American people have confidence
if the EPA came out and said, you know what? We have looked
into every reported potential case, and there is no case of
drinking water contamination because that is striking to me,
that one result of this hearing is that we have confirmed and
you are kind of confirming and you know, the head of the
Maryland Department of Environment who, in fact, you know, went
to the Maryland legislature to attempt to also promote a study
has confirmed no one knows of a case of documented drinking
water contamination. Is that an accurate summary? And wouldn't
the American people better be served by saying, you know what?
There is no known danger right now, but as soon as something
comes to our attention that could be a known danger, a known
risk where contamination has occurred, we are right on it? I
mean, this is kind of the way we look for it. You know, when we
have new drugs, we look for side effects and then we study why
those side effects could occur and minimize them. And we don't
just say, well, you know, we are not going to approve any new
drug because there could be potentially some side effects, even
though none has ever been reported. I mean, that is a very
clear way we handle medical research with regards to new
substances, and I will proffer this isn't a new substance. I
mean, fracturing has been around a while. It is a long, lengthy
question. But I guess to finalize, has there been a case as far
as you know and wouldn't the American people be served better
by in fact turning down the what I will refer to as hysteria?
And believe me, I have seen it in the medical field plenty of
times, hysteria that you know, knowledgeable, qualified people,
their best approach might be to say instead of writing
something about all the potential impacts, saying--you know,
because I looked here. I looked through the study, and I don't
see it emphasized that no case has ever been determined to have
occurred. Am I missing it or is it in here somewhere?
Dr. Anastas. What I believe you may be missing,
Congressman, is that when we see studies such as the one that
even recently came out of Duke University, that appearing in
the proceedings in the National Academy of Sciences, we need to
take those studies seriously. When we see such reputable groups
such as the University of Texas announcing today their
comprehensive review of hydraulic fracturing, the leader of
that group, Dr. Ray Orbach, who is tremendously respected, was
a tremendously respected Undersecretary of Energy in the Bush
Administration, to think that we could unilaterally declare
that there is no problem here and we are going to move on with
these kinds of lingering concerns, I think the American people
expect us to ask the tough questions and answer those tough
questions in a process that preserves scientific integrity.
Mr. Harris. I am going to yield back, Mr. Chairman. I would
just say, you know, once to emphasize again, there is no index
case here. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. Would you, before you yield back, yield to
me to ask one question of the gentleman?
Mr. Harris. I certainly would, Mr. Chairman. Always.
Chairman Hall. You mentioned the Duke study. I presume you
have read the Duke study?
Mr. Anastas. Yes, I have.
Chairman Hall. And you use that to substantiate some of the
things that you have said, do you not?
Dr. Anastas. I use that study to show that there are
concerns.
Chairman Hall. Well, did you really read the study?
Dr. Anastas. I read every word of that study.
Chairman Hall. Did you read where they said our results
show evidence for methane contamination for shallow drinking
water systems in at least three areas of the region and suggest
important environmental risk accompanying shale gas exploration
worldwide?
Dr. Anastas. Yes, I have.
Chairman Hall. Did you stop there?
Dr. Anastas. No, I did not, sir.
Chairman Hall. Did you read on page 4 where they said based
on our data, we found no evidence for contamination of the
shallow wells near active drilling sites from deep brines and/
or fracturing fluids? Did you read that on page 4? Do you have
page 4?
Dr. Anastas. I have read every word of the study, and I
have read that they----
Chairman Hall. Well, they are saying that what they said is
just absolutely not so, and now are you going to use that like
you have done before when you bolstered your testimony with
false science? Is that what you are sitting here doing?
Dr. Anastas. This is far from false science. What they have
concluded and what you have just read shows that what they have
determined is contamination of drinking water by methane and
that they found no evidence of fracturing fluid contamination.
This study that we are proposing and pursing is looking at both
of those questions.
Chairman Hall. Let me read further to, just a little on
down on page 4. ``In sum, the geochemical and isotopic features
for water we measured in the shallow wells from both active and
non-active areas are consistent with historical data and
inconsistent with contamination from mixed Marcellus shale
formation water or saline fracturing fluid.'' How are you going
to get around that?
Dr. Anastas. I am not going to get around it. I agree with
their findings. What they are saying is they have seen no
contamination from fracturing fluids. What they are saying is
that they have determined that the methane that is being seen
is not biogenic in nature but rather thermogenic in nature.
Chairman Hall. I recognize the gentleman from Michigan, Dr.
Benishek, for five minutes.
Mr. Benishek. Thank you, Doctor, for being here. Let me
just quote from the language, I believe from the appropriation
for your study, that they urge the agency to carry out a study
on the relationship between hydraulic fracturing and drinking
water using a credible approach that relies on the best
available science.
So as I understand it from this language that the Congress
asked you to carry out a study on the relationship between
fracking and drinking water. And I don't see how a study, which
specifically says that it is not going to address the risk,
complies with this order to study the relationship.
Dr. Anastas. Let me be clear. I apologize if I didn't make
it clear previously. In order to do a risk assessment, we need
to understand those relationships, whether or not there is a
hazard to people from contamination to the drinking water and
whether or not there is exposure and----
Mr. Benishek. No, any time there is contamination of
drinking water, there is a risk. But the relationship between
fracking and drinking water to me implies defining the risk,
and apparently you disagree.
Dr. Anastas. What I am saying is you can't do a risk
assessment, you can't do a risk analysis, a quantitative risk
analysis, without understanding the elements of hazard and
exposure. We have to first understand the elements of the
hazard and the exposure in order to do that kind of risk
analysis.
Mr. Benishek. I guess I just disagree with you because it
seems to me that, you know, with thousands upon thousands of
wells and that is the whole purpose of the study, is to
determine if there is a significant risk. I just don't get it.
The other question I have is relying on best available
science. So how many people on the Science Advisory Board have
direct experience doing hydraulic fracturing?
Dr. Anastas. You mean the panel that has been put together
specifically on this?
Mr. Benishek. Right.
Dr. Anastas. I would have to get the exact numbers, but we
certainly do have people who are experts in all of the
disciplines related to hydraulic fracturing.
Mr. Benishek. Does anybody have any direct fracking
experience on this Science Advisory Board?
Dr. Anastas. The short answer is yes, and I will be happy
to get those biographies to you, sir.
Mr. Benishek. All right. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back. The Chair
recognizes Dr. Broun.
Dr. Broun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I begin asking
this panel my questions, I want to express my extreme
displeasure at what appears to be a pattern of a lack of
respect and a complete disregard of the House of
Representatives Committee process and our Constitutional
authority to oversee the executive branch of government.
Regardless of which party is in control of the White House or
Congress, we as Members of Congress must be vigilant in our
oversight responsibilities.
Today's hearing includes two panels which is not the
preferred practice of our Committee but was necessitated by the
unprecedented recalcitrant behavior of the EPA in response to
the Committee's invitation to testify at this hearing. It is
also important to note that EPA has testified before this
Committee on a single panel with other witnesses before. Beyond
the convenience to Members and witnesses, especially to those
of us who serve on multiple Committees, a single panel provides
an opportunity for an open discussion and free flow of ideas
that this Committee has always encouraged.
However, it is not the inconvenience of having multiple
panels that alarms me the most. I am alarmed at the level of
arrogance, arrogance that this Administration continues to
demonstrate by presuming that they can actually dictate how a
House Committee may conduct its hearing and business. Today's
latest example is not the first instance of the Administration
going back on its stated goal in a cooperative fashion with the
112th Congress. Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee,
which I am Chairman, experienced this same behavior with our
first hearing when the TSA actually thought they could dictate
what issues and topics fall under this Committee's jurisdiction
and refused to testify. I see the same thing from the EPA, and
I am extremely disappointed in the behavior of this
Administration.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the Committee's indulgence in
letting me air my frustration and hope this situation can be
rectified and the Committee can continue its important duties.
Dr. Anastas. May I address your comment?
Dr. Broun. No, Doctor, I don't have but just a few minutes,
and I have got a question or two I want to ask you. Did you
write your testimony?
Dr. Anastas. I did.
Dr. Broun. Doctor, I am a physician. I am a scientist,
applied scientist, not a research scientist. I know very well
as a policy-maker that science cannot dictate policy. Policy
can be based on good science. Saying it another way, science
describes, it cannot prescribe.
In your testimony you made a statement that I think is
blatantly false. You stated that the EPA utilizes good science,
peer review science and takes into consideration opposing
views. I don't think that is factual, and the endangerment
finding is a good example because I believe in my heart that
EPA had a policy that they wanted to put in place that this
Administration wanted to follow and that they utilized one set
of scientific data to try to justify the policy dictated. And I
see the same thing with this frack policy that you guys are
trying to promote and trying to stop fracking. I believe this
Administration wants to stop oil and gas development in this
country, and I think they are utilizing EPA and what you are
doing in that process.
Now EPA published a study Ms. Woolsey asked you about in
2004, Evaluation of Impacts to Underground Sources of Drinking
Water by Hydraulic Fracturing of Coal Bed Methane Reservoirs.
Do you all stand by the conclusions that you all issued in the
report that it poses little or no threat to drinking water?
Dr. Anastas. Coal bed methane reservoirs are not the
subject of this study. So if you are asking whether or not that
study is relevant to the study that we are undertaking, the
answer would be no, only partially relevant because those are
at much different strata of the geologic formations and
different processes being used.
Dr. Broun. Well, given President Obama's executive order
memoranda, highlighting the importance of interagency
coordination regarding regulatory activity, please explain how
the EPA is syncing its study with those with the Department of
Energy and the Department of Interior? In general, how is EPA
implementing the executive order with reference to potential
fracking regulation?
Dr. Anastas. This study is not a regulatory study. This
study is a scientific study that we worked closely with our
partners at other agencies in informing the nature of this
study, but this study is not a study that is based on
regulations. This is not a regulatory action.
Dr. Broun. Well, we have no index study, as Dr. Harris was
just talking about. You are just going out and doing a study.
It seems to me that you are trying to stop the fracking
process, and I am extremely disappointed with EPA. I am
extremely disappointed with this Administration. And I think it
just needs to change. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back. Dr. Anastas, I
thank you for your testimony, and I thank the Members for their
questions.
At this time, Dr. Anastas, you are welcome to stay seated
at the table if you want to or you can take a seat there or you
can leave or do whatever you want to, but I am going to ask our
first panel of witnesses to join us again by retaking their
seats at the table for a chance to summarize our comments.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Chairman, as our new panel is being
seated, if I could just mention that I would like to thank Dr.
Anastas for coming forward today. This was a rough hearing, and
we were rough on you but we are trying to get to the truth, and
I appreciate the fact that in some of the questions, you know,
on almost all the questions, you were being straightforward
with us. And at times we had to cut you off because we have
limited time that we can ask, and I just wanted to express my
appreciation to your forthrightness today in answering these
questions.
Dr. Anastas. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Hall. We are not done, Dr. Anastas, he has to
leave. He is perfectly welcome to stay. We are going to ask for
a comment from each of these people, just a 1-minute comment
from you or 2-minute comment.
On the testimony you have heard, Dr. Anastas had a chance
to listen to your testimony, and you had a chance to listen to
his. So I think instead of having another round of questions,
that wouldn't be fair to the Democrats that are not here. This
will go for the record now. This will be in the record, and
Democrat and Republicans can read those records.
So I will start out when you get your things together
there, whatever you are getting ready to do. What is going on
at the table there? Is it something I am not supposed to see or
I couldn't stand to see? Now, you got Mrs. Jones blocked off.
All right. I thank you. That is the good staff we have, and I
appreciate them.
You have heard the testimony of the EPA witness. Do you
have comments on it?
Mrs. Jones. I do, Chairman, and I would like to say that in
fact I probably am the only person in this room who actually
attended one of the meetings across the country that the EPA
held in Ft. Worth, Texas, last year, and I want to tell you it
was the least scientific-based meeting I have ever attended. I
didn't have time to speak to it, and people were lined up. The
conversation really did not even address hydraulic fracturing.
It was a large crowd of anti-drilling activists who in fact
were trying to use every applied application technology in the
drilling industry as an excuse or to suspect it, disparage it.
I have never been in such an activist crowd that is so opposed
to drilling.
And there is a group in Texas who doesn't understand how
strong the oil and gas exploration and production and severance
taxes of it make this State. They are a very vocal minority I
might add, and that study, if it is to be based upon the
information gathered at the hearing that I was at will be
extremely flawed when it is finally done.
I would suggest to you that there are more studies here
than we can shake a stick at. In fact, it sounds to me like the
EPA has a $12 million solution to a problem that doesn't even
exist. I don't understand why my word, and my word is my bond,
and if I can save the taxpayers some dollars, I am here to do
that. And I am telling you, there has never been an indication
of groundwater contamination from hydraulic fracturing that I
know of in the State of Texas and nationally. And if that is
not good enough for somebody who is employed up here in
Washington, I don't know how we are ever going to get to the
truth if people will not start listening to people like me who
are out there in the field, in the trenches, elected by the
people to do the people's business. And it burns me up what I
am hearing about this scientific-based study when I was at a
hearing, a town hall meeting that was anything but scientific
based.
Chairman Hall. I thank you, and I might say this hearing is
not for the Congress particularly. It is probably for
generations, this generation that is being hurt by lack of
energy and the Administration's offense against energy and
against energy states and against other states that didn't vote
for him. I think something that Congress has an interest in and
I am interested in it. I am interested in my children and my
children's children because other than prayer, energy is
probably the most important word in the dictionary for those
youngsters that are 15 years old and up.
We will go on. You commented. Thank you for your comment.
We recognize Dr. Summers for his comment. Hold it as near to a
couple of minutes as you can.
Dr. Summers. Thank you, Chairman Hall. Well, I have heard a
lot of information today regarding the safety of these
practices from my colleagues. As I said in my testimony, we
have seen problems in the Marcellus shale in Pennsylvania. I
have learned that Mrs. Jones and her experience in Texas, which
is very extensive, indicated that one size doesn't fit all. I
want to make sure that we get the right size here in Maryland.
We have a very important group of watersheds that millions of
people depend upon for many purposes, and I think it is
absolutely critical that we get the best information on all the
various issues that I raised in my testimony. And we obviously
have the opportunity to gather that information, specifically
with respect to the EPA study. As I said, one of the big
concerns or issue that has been raised is the potential for
impacts on drinking water. I have been to public meetings in
Maryland where a lot of folks have raised a lot of concerns
about the drinking water impacts, probably very similar to what
was just described, and I want to make sure we have the best
scientific answers possible. And I believe that the EPA's study
is another piece of information that we need to pull that
information together.
Chairman Hall. And I believe you want all the information
you can get, and I think you would be one that would frown on
the EPA and on the testimony we just heard from the EPA when it
was said clearly that he supports the Duke study and he thinks
that upholds some of his testimony. When we just read to him
there where it said we found no evidence for contamination of
the shallow wells near active drilling sites from deep brines.
That is just about as clear as you can make it.
Mr. Fitch?
Mr. Fitch. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, we
have to acknowledge there is a Congressional directive there
for the EPA to conduct a study. However, the language in that
directive is quite general. It allows for quite a bit of
flexibility, and we would just reiterate that we believe the
design of the study is overly broad. There has been a lot of
totally unscientific information brought to bear on this, and
that does not warrant a scientific investigation of some of
those things, some of those allegations. We believe that the
study should focus on one area where there have been some
legitimate concerns, and that is the management of wastewater,
management of flow back water. Also I think this study should
engage on the issue of identification of the degree of risk and
not just whether there is some risk or not, because otherwise,
you lose perspective. And we see a great potential there for a
study to be misused if it doesn't address the degree of risk.
Chairman Hall. Thank you, sir. Dr. Cooper?
Dr. Cooper. Thank you. I think as a scientific study, what
we have mostly seen in all of the EPA activity to discuss this
publicly is it seems to be more political than scientific. And
that disturbs me a lot. I am not opposed to a study that we are
trying to address a question that we are trying to solve. I am
not sure that we have got that question on the table, and I am
really sorry that EPA today did not really engage with the rest
of us in a discussion about what might be done, what we really
need to think about, if anything. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. Dr. Economides. Did I pronounce it right
then?
Dr. Economides. You are improving.
Chairman Hall. All right.
Dr. Economides. It is great. Just two quick points. I, too,
have this vision that a more balanced EPA would have actually
blasted this Duke paper today. They will actually take it upon
themselves to critique it and tear it for what it is. This is
shabby science, Mr. Chairman, including the conclusions, by the
way. After they reached what you read, the conclusion is
letting us just outlaw hydraulic fracturing, essentially, after
they said they found no evidence of contamination.
Regarding the Scientific Advisory Board, I took it upon
myself to Google every Member on that Committee about three
weeks ago. There are three people that I would think have some
experience in hydraulic fracturing, and one is a lady professor
at the University of Missouri, D'Aleo. She and I wrote a book,
by the way, a few years ago. But she doesn't have direct
experience in hydraulic fracturing. There is a researcher from
Texas A&M who is a chemist. I don't think he has ever been on a
well site for hydraulic fracturing, and there is a
geophysicist, everybody else, they are experts in their field,
but I don't think any one of them has ever been on a well site
for hydraulic fracturing. So it really mystifies me how a
Scientific Advisory Board consisting of people like this, they
are, Congressman, on a wild goose chase, by the way, in my
view. That is all there is. It is a shortcut approach, and the
only obvious conclusion would be if they find something
negative, then they will condemn the entire industry. And that
is the danger.
Chairman Hall. All right. Gentlemen, and lady, we thank you
for your time, and I thank every one of you. I think this
hearing ought to clear up the hard, cold facts that the hearing
was set for, if the liberal press will print it properly.
With that, I will remain. I thank all the witnesses on both
panels for their valuable testimony, for Members for their
questions. And Members of the Committee may have an additional
question for any one of you, and we will ask you to respond to
those in writing. The record will remain open for two weeks for
additional comments from Members, and the witnesses are
excused. And this hearing is, thank goodness, adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:05 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Mrs. Elizabeth Ames Jones, Commissioner, Texas Railroad
Commission

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1. How would you compare the thoroughness of Texas regulations to
those of other States? How does your State's participation in the
STRONGER process (State Review of Oil and Natural Gas Environmental
Regulations) create better regulations? Are you aware of any States
that have emulated Texas' regulatory framework?
A1. Texas Regulations. Texas is typical of the oil and gas
producing states in taking a proactive approach to address large-scale
hydraulic fracturing as well as other issues associated with deep shale
gas development. The laws and rules in Texas effectively protect water
and other natural resources as well as public health and safety from
potential adverse effects of hydraulic fracturing. The Ground Water
Protection Council's State Oil and Gas Regulations Designed to Protect
Water Resources is a comprehensive state-by-state evaluation of state
oil and gas regulations. It concludes that state oil and gas
regulations are in general adequately designed to directly protect
water resources.
Texas, like most states with mature production, has a long history
of successful regulation of well drilling, completion, and production.
The practice of hydraulic fracturing has been developed over 60 years.
The Railroad Commission developed and oversees a comprehensive
regulatory framework encompassing all oil and gas activities. Under
this framework, the actual practice of hydraulic fracturing has never
been identified as a contributor to groundwater contamination. The
Texas regulatory framework emphasizes well construction with multiple
layers of protection for groundwater and thousands of inspections each
year to ensure compliance with regulations.
The Railroad Commission has authority to regulate pollution of any
type from oil and gas exploration and production activity whether it is
hydrocarbon, produced water or hydraulic fracturing fluid
contamination. The Commission has regulations regarding construction
requirements for wells to ensure that each well is protective of
natural resources, including groundwater. Railroad Commission
regulations specifically prohibit contamination of water resources.
There have been no contamination incidents resulting from hydraulic
fracturing in Texas.
State Review Process. A STRONGER review provides Significant
benefits to states by demonstrating the effectiveness of a state
regulatory program to the public and to the state legislatures that
fund the programs. The STRONGER state review process demonstrates in a
clear and public process that state programs are sound and effective.
The review process also identifies areas that could be improved.
The STRONGER guidelines are updated as necessary to address new
issues. STRONGER expanded its reviews in 2010 to address hydraulic
fracturing regulations in response to public concerns. The Commission
chaired the workgroup that developed the STRONGER guidelines for
hydraulic fracturing. This expansion resulted from increased interest
in the practice of hydraulic fracturing and from interest by the state
regulators to provide reviews of their fracturing regulations.
This month, the Commission initiated the process of rulemaking to
require disclosure of chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing.
The Commission frequently reviews its regulatory programs to
determine effectiveness, particularly in light of new technological or
geological developments. The STRONGER guidelines are helpful during
these internal reviews.
Texas was initially reviewed in 1993. There was a follow-up review
in 2002. Several program improvements were noted in the follow-up
report.
Following the initial review, the Railroad Commission began to
consider the compliance history of the operator when making permit
decisions. The Oil Field Cleanup Fund Advisory Committee was
established to provide advice to the Commission. A bonding program was
established to ensure closure of reclamation plants and commercial
disposal facilities and rules were updated to ensure proper plugging of
wells. The data management system was expanded and upgraded. A Field
Inspection Manual was developed, as was a Memorandum of Understanding
between the Commission and the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality to coordinate exploration and production waste management
activities.
Since the 2002 follow-up review, the Commission made additional
improvements, and has begun other improvements, to the Commission's
regulatory program. For example, the Commission is working with the
Department of State Health Services to develop a memorandum of
understanding relating to radiation issues.
Q2. Summarize Texas Railroad Commission (TRC) oversight authorities and
activities related to hydraulic fracturing, as well as TRC coordination
efforts with other State-level oversight bodies.
A2. The Railroad Commission's regulatory framework for oil and gas
activities, including the practice of hydraulic fracturing, effectively
protect surface and ground water. The, Texas framework emphasizes well
construction with multiple layers of protection for groundwater, and
inspectors conduct thousands of inspections to ensure compliance with
the Commission's regulations.
The Commission does not permit a well on which hydraulic fracturing
will be performed without certification that identifies the depth to
which groundwater must be protected by cement and steel casing.
Geologists and hydrologists evaluate the area well logs around any
proposed well to determine the required depth of the surface casing to
protect fresh water formations. An operator proposing to drill a well
must submit that determination before the Commission will consider
issuing a drilling permit.
In every new well, Commission regulations require that heavy steel
surface casing extend below the base of the deepest fresh water
formation and that the surface casing be cemented in place throughout
the annulus between the drill hole and the surface casing. As an
additional safeguard, Commission rules require that the surface casing
be pressure tested for leakage before re-commencing drilling.
Coordination with Other State-Level OverSight Bodies. The
Commission actively works with other states through participation in
the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission, the national Groundwater
Protection Council (GWPC), and STRONGER, Inco activities.
One example of such participation is the new hydraulic fracturing
chemical disclosure website FracFocus.org. Responding to the concerns
about the nature of chemicals used in fracturing, the Ground Water
Protection Council (GWPC) and the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact
Commission (lOGCC) initiated a national registry to display the
chemicals used in individual fracturing jobs, building off of well
completion reports. GWPC and IOGCC worked closely with producers,
service companies, and state regulatory bodies to develop a format that
will allow for the submission of well data. The Commission has been
heavily involved in this effort. Many of the active shale gas producers
already have begun to populate the website with well data. Numerous
regional and national oil and gas industry associations have endorsed
the project.
While initially directed at reviewing state drilling fluids and
produced water management regulations, STRONGER expanded its reviews in
2010 to address hydraulic fracturing regulations in response to public
concerns. The Commission chaired the workgroup that developed the
STRONGER guidelines for hydraulic fracturing. Since adding fracturing
to the review process, STRONGER has conducted reviews in Pennsylvania,
Ohio, Louisiana and Oklahoma. A STRONGER review provides significant
benefits to states by demonstrating the effectiveness of a state
regulatory program to the public and to the state legislatures that
fund the programs. By bringing experts from other state programs, it
can identify issues that need to be improved. The STRONGER state review
process demonstrates in a clear and public process that state programs
are sound and effective.
Texas also works with individual states on issues of shared
interest. In 2004, the Railroad Commission and the Louisiana Department
of Natural Resources entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
agreeing to provide written notice to each other when certain oil and
gas activities will occur near each side of the state line. By working
together as good neighbors and notifying one another of proposed
projects or subsurface injection operations within at least a one-mile
distance from the common border, the potential for problems affecting
the land and water supplies can be diminished.

Q3. How are complaints of water contamination usually handled? How
extensive is the investigatory process? Is this process mandated by
law, or has it evolved over time from experience? In your testimony,
you spoke about how the Railroad Commission conducted a thorough
research and legal investigation of the incident involving Range
Resources. However, EPA still stepped in and halted operations. Did
EPA's interference come after your investigation?
A3. A critical function of the Railroad Commission's Field
Operations section is to address complaints. These complaints are
received from both industry and the public. The Commission's process
for handling complaints of groundwater contamination has evolved over
time from experience.
Commission staff must contact the complaining party to schedule a
joint inspection within 24 hours of receipt of complaint. Response is
immediate in cases where there is imminent danger of pollution or
threat to the public. Field personnel gather information in order to:

a. Confirm that a contamination problem exists

b. Determine whether or not the cause is under the Commission's
jurisdiction.

c. Determine possible sources of contamination

d. Determine possible ways to eliminate the source of
contamination and initiate clean up if the problem is found to
be the result of activities under the Commission's
jurisdiction.

e. Determine the manner of completion, age, fluid level, pump-
off time, etc. of the water well, the problem with the water
(salty taste, odor, oil film, etc), when the problem was first
noticed, whether the water gets better or worse after pumping
the well for a while (could be an indication of aquifer
contamination versus wellbore contamination), whether the well
has a filtering system or water softener, whether the
complainant has a septic system.

Field personnel then collect samples from the affected water well
immediately and again after the pump has been allowed to run for
approximately 10 minutes. Samples are taken as near as possible to the
wellbore and before the water passes through any filters, water
heaters, softeners, settling tanks, or other vessels. Staff collects
samples from other water wells in the area for comparison and notes the
depth, completion and any other pertinent characteristics of these
water wells. Bacteriological samples are taken and forwarded to local
health department. Staff then collects samples of produced water from
oil and or gas wells within )I. mile of the subject water well.
Staff also inspects the surrounding area approximately 1/4-mile
from subject water well. Staff notes the location, status and current
condition of oil and or gas wells within the area and inspects disposal
or injection wells for operable observation valves and annular
pressures that may indicate a mechanical integrity problem, oil and gas
storage and treatment facilities, pits (current and abandoned),
flowlines, evidence of past leaks or spills, creeks or streams and any
other situation that may have contributed to the problem. Complainant
receives copies of all correspondence related to the complaint.
If water contamination is verified, the case is forwarded to the
Commission's Site Remediation division to address remediation. The case
also may be forwarded to the Commission's Office of General Counsel for
enforcement action if the source of the contamination is found to be a
result of violations of Commission rules, permits, or orders.
Range Resources Complaint. In 2010, the Commission received a
complaint involving natural gas in a 200-foot deep domestic water well
in Parker County located near two natural gas wells operated by Range
Resources. Throughout its investigation, Commission staff has shared
data cooperatively with EPA staff. After a hearing, the Commission
issued a final order finding that, based on the evidence, the Range
Resources wells did not contribute and are not contributing to
contamination of domestic water wells.
Range Resources cooperated with the Commission as part of the
investigation. On December 3, 2010, Range Resources agreed to take
additional actions including performing further testing. of its wells,
performing soil gas surveys, monitoring gas concentrations, and
offering a water supply to the residence. However, on December 7, 2010,
EPA asserted its authority under Section 1431 (a) of the Safe Drinking
Water Act (``SDWA ''), 42 U.S.C. Sec. 300i(a) and issued an emergency
endangerment order against Range Resource, related to the occurrence of
natural gas in the domestic water well in Parker County. EPA Region 6's
letter declared an imminent and substantial endangerment to a public
drinking water aquifer has occurred (or may occur) through methane
contamination which is directly related to oil and gas production
facilities under your operation.
EPA acted prematurely. Before EPA issued its order, Commission
staff advised EPA that a specific source of contamination was unknown
and still under investigation. Commission staff also advised EPA that
the Commission had secured voluntary cooperation from the operator,
including measures to assure safety in the affected household. All
parties agreed natural gas was present in the Lipsky and Hayley water
wells; however, the Commission advised EPA that evidence suggested that
the gas was present in the aquifer prior to Range's activities.
EPA acted incorrectly. It is fair to question whether or not the
presence of the gas in the water wells was an imminent and substantial
danger to human health because one water well owner had disconnected
his water well from the residence. Air monitoring of the residence
never indicated a threat of explosion. The other water well owner never
filed a complaint with the Commission.
Reportedly, he was aware of natural gas and was managing it with an
open holding tank that vented any gas before the water was used.
In addition, State and local authorities had been actively
investigating the matter since August, and had not determined whether
or not there was a connection between the Range activities and the gas
in the water wells. State authorities had secured commitments from
Range to expand the investigation. The Commission's investigation is
actively ongoing, and, at that time, Commission staff had made no
conclusions about possible sources of natural gas and hydrocarbons
found in the water well. Additionally, no pathways from a deep
hydrocarbon source to the water well had been identified. The
Commission advised EPA of the commitment from Range to expand the
investigation before EPA issued the emergency order.
EPA relied on incorrect science. Based on the evidence presented at
hearing, Commission examiners concluded, and the Railroad Commission
agreed, that gas in the water wells is from the Strawn Formation, which
is in direct communication with the Cretaceous aquifer in which the
water wells are completed. There was no evidence to indicate that
either natural gas production well was the source of the gas in the
water wells. The appropriate geochemical parameters for fingerprinting
to distinguish Strawn gas of Pennsylvania age from Barnett Shale gas of
Mississippian age, are nitrogen and carbon dioxide, not carbon. Gas
from Pennsylvanian age rock, including Strawn, has higher nitrogen
concentration and lower carbon dioxide concentration than Barnett Shale
gas. Gas found in the water wells does not match the nitrogen isotopic
fingerprint of Barnett Shale gas. Bradenhead gas samples from both
production wells did not match Barnett Shale gas, confirming that gas
is not migrating up the wellbores and that the Barnett Shale producing
interval in the wells is properly isolated. Three dimensional seismic
data indicates no evidence of faulting in the area of the water wells
and microseismic data available for more than 320 fracture stimulations
in Parker County indicated a maximum fracture height of approximately
400 feet, meaning that almost one mile of rock exists between the
highest fracture and the shallow groundwater aquifer.
The Commission continues to investigate the presence of gas in
water wells in the area to determine source and conduits and what, if
any, actions the Commission should take. If an investigation indicates
oil field activities are responsible, the Commission would require
assessment and cleanup, and evaluate what fines or penalties may be
assessed as necessary.

Q4. How useful is the current scope and breadth of the EPA study to
State regulators and risk managers? What would be needed in order to
make the study more worthwhile?
A4. The states, including Texas, have adequate programs and
authority for regulating hydraulic fracturing and a very good
understanding of the technology and its potential for impacts. However,
we recognize that there has been substantial public concern and much
controversy over the use of hydraulic fracturing. While we support the
study plan in principle, we hope that the study will be an objective
assessment that takes in account current state regulatory programs and
regional differences.
We appreciate EPA's pledge to work with the states, state
organizations, and other stakeholders in conducting the study. In
particular, the study should adhere to the directive of Congress that
the study use the best available science; rely on independent sources
of information; be a transparent, peer-reviewed process; and
incorporate consultation with stakeholders.
We do have some concern with the scope and timing of the study.
EPA's original scoping document proposed to study the ``Full Life
Cycle' of an oil and gas well. In other words, the scope included all
areas of oil and gas exploration and production activity, such as site
selection and development, as well as production, storage and
transportation, which are unrelated to hydraulic fracturing. EPA's
Science Advisory Board rightfully concluded that initial, short-term
research be directed to study sources and pathways of potential impacts
of hydraulic fracturing on water resources, especially potential
drinking water sources considering the Congressional request and a
desire by EPA to complete initial research products by the end of
calendar year 2012. We believe that the scope of the Draft Study,
however, remains broader than Congress may have intended.
EPA proposes to delve into areas beyond the reach of federal law.
EPA did limit the Draft Study to drinking water resources by replacing
the ``lifecycle'' approach with the concept of ``water lifecycle.''
However, the Draft Study includes a study of how water withdrawals
might impact water availability in the source area, and the water
quality of source waterbodies. Water availability and water withdrawal
has historically been the prerogative of the states and, we believe, is
beyond the reach of federal law.
EPA proposes to study areas beyond the specific practice of
hydraulic fracturing. In addition to proposing to study water
withdrawals, EPA proposes to study the potential impacts of spills,
containment, treatment, and disposal of wastewaters resulting from
hydraulic fracturing, as well as produced water from wells that have
been fractured. Contrary to what some believe, there are existing
controls on oil and gas activities in federal law and regulations,
including the Safe Drinking Water Act, Clean Water Act, Clean Air Act,
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, not to mention state laws and
regulations actively being enforced by state regulators.
EPA should refocus and narrow the scope of the study to that
directed by Congress -to practices directly associated with actual
hydraulic fracturing and drinking water resources. Expansion of the
study to other areas will only dilute EPA's ability to focus on the
actual practice of hydraulic fracturing.
In addition, we have encouraged EPA to include in any working
groups professional geoscientists and engineers with field experience
and to actively seek participation from experts from the state
regulatory agencies and base the study on sound science, valid data,
and accurate information from credible sources.

Q5. In the last few years, some companies have significantly increased
wastewater recycling to move toward 100 percent recycling with zero
discharge. What is the role of recycling and reuse of hydraulic
fracturing fluids?
A5. Wastewater in the northeast Marcellus Shale area has been
discharged under the Clean Water Act to publicly owned treatment works
(POTWs), thence to surface water because the geology is such that deep
well underground injection was not an option. Evidently, the POTWs were
not prepared to accept the volumes of wastewater generated in
association with shale gas and recycling is becoming the norm. In
Texas, wastewater from gas shale is generally injected into permitted
deep disposal wells. However, water availability may drive the push
towards more recycling in Texas.
Texas is understandably concerned about water resources,
particularly with the extraordinary drought conditions Texas currently
faces. The Railroad Commission encourages use or reuse of oil and gas
wastes for beneficial purposes and adopted recycling regulations in
2006 to ensure that the storage, handling, treatment, and recycling of
oil and gas wastes and recyclable product do not threaten or impair the
environment or public health and safety.
The Commission has issued one mobile recycling permit in the Bamett
Shale area, which authorizes treatment of hydraulic fracturing flowback
water using on-site distillation units. The process allows reuse of
approximately 80 percent of the returned fluids.
The Commission also has issued one Stationary Recycling Permit for
a facility located in Parker County in the Bamett Shale area. This
stationary facility uses the same technology.
The Commission has one pending permit application for a pilot
project in Webb County -in the Eagle Ford Shale area. The applicant
proposes to test a process for removal of extraneous materials (other
than salts) from hydraulic fracturing flowback water.

Q6. This past April there was an incident in Pennsylvania where there
was a blowout of a well that caused fracking fluid to spill.
a. As part of permitting hydraulic fracturing, what kind of
response planning are companies required to submit?
b. What other information do companies have to disclose to
regulators in the event of a blowout?
c. How does this differ from the information companies are required
to provide to regulators in order to obtain the permit in the first
place?
A6. The Railroad Commission requires that each permitted well,
including those that use hydraulic fracturing techniques, install a
blowout preventer or control head and other connections to keep the
well under control at all times as soon as surface casing is set.
In the event of a blowout, companies are required to disclose to
the Commission a full description of the event, including the volume of
crude oil or gas lost. The location of the well must be provided to the
Commission including county, survey, and property data, so that the
exact location can be readily located on the ground. The company must
specify what steps have been taken or are in progress to remedy the
situation.
A company must comply with Railroad Commission rules, including
Statewide Rule 13, which requires a blowout preventer and Statewide
Rule 20, which mandates reporting requirements in the event of a
blowout or other releases of oil and gas waste. In addition, Commission
regulations require construction of dikes or fire walls around all
permanent oil tanks or tank batteries that are deemed by state to be an
objectionable hazard.

Question submitted by Representative Chip Cravaack

Q1. In your prior experiences with EPA, how would you describe their
work as a regulatory partner? Do you see any areas where EPA could
improve their dealings with state agencies? Do you have any suggestions
for Congress on how we could encourage EPA to be a better partner with
state government?
A1. The Texas experience with EPA most recently has been one of
heavy-handed overreach. The following are just a few examples.
EPA asserts its authority under certain laws prematurely and. in
many cases. incorrectly. One example is EPA's assertion of its
authority under Section 1431 (a) of the Safe Drinking Water Act (``SDWA
''), 42 U.S.C. Sec. 300i(a), when it issued an emergency endangerment
order against Range Resource, related to the occurrence of natural gas
in the domestic water well in Parker County. EPA Region 6's letter
declared that an ``imminent and substantial endangerment to a public
drinking water aquifer has occurred (or may occur) through methane
contamination which is directly related to oil and gas production
facilities under your operation.'' EPA stated that it issued the order
because the methane could cause an explosion and that the state had
failed to act. In fact, the water wells had been disconnected from the
houses, eliminating the chance that the houses would explode, and the'
Railroad Commission had been efficiently and effectively investigating
the incident in concert with EPA since the initial complaint.
Another example of EPA overreach is EPA's Spill Prevention,
Control, and Countermeasures (SPCC) regulations. The SPCC rules adopted
by EPA, which recently became effective, do not allow the oil and gas
sector to use the SPCC rule's wastewater exemption for produced water,
although other sectors were allowed to use the exemption. Thus, the
SPCC regulations cover not only vessels storing oil, but also produced
water storage tanks that contain de minimis quantities of oil. EPA
singled out oil and gas water separation facilities for increased level
of regulation relative to other sectors using similar or nearly
identical technologies and treatment goals. The rule subjects hundreds
of thousands of produced water vessels to additional requirements that
are unnecessary given the incidental amounts of oil they contain and
the small environmental risks they represent.
EPA is using ``guidance documents'' to avoid rulemaking. In several
instances, EPA has adopted or amended guidance documents when
rulemaking would be more appropriate. The problem with adoption of
requirements as guidelines rather than rules, is that the guidelines
are not required to be as fully and formally vetted as rules.
One instance is EPA's current effort to draft a guidance document
for permitting of hydraulic fracturing that includes the use of diesel
fuel. Section 322 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 amended the Safe
Drinking Water Act (SDWA) by modifying the definition of ``underground
injection'' to exclude `` . . .. the underground injection of fluids or
propping agents (other than diesel fuels) pursuant to hydraulic
fracturing operations related to oil, gas, or geothermal production
activities.'' Rather than pursue rulemaking with the attendant formal
review and comment period, EPA has decided to draft guidance for
permitting hydraulic fracturing that includes the use of diesel fuel as
a Class II underground injection activity. The permitting program for
Class II injection wells was developed under the assumption that
injection would be continuous over a relatively long period of time,
and thus, includes requirements that are not appropriate for short-term
hydraulic fracturing activities.
In another instance is EPA's expansion of the definition of
``waters of the United States'' and ``navigable water'' under the Clean
Water Act. Most recently, EPA and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
released a draft proposed ``Clean Water Protection Guidance'' in April
of this year that describes their view of the Federal Government's
authority to regulate wetlands. If adopted, this guidance will
significantly expand federal Clean Water Act jurisdiction.

Questions submitted by Representative Paul Tonko

Q1. For the record, it is my understanding that the practice of
hydraulic fracturing includes fracturing technology combined with a
number of different technologies, some which have been developed in the
last 20 years, are being used to access shale gas. My question for the
panel is why do we continue to hear that these technologies have been
used to access shale gas for 60 years?
A1. The technology has developed over a 60-year period. The use of
hydraulic fracturing has changed dramatically since its introduction 60
years ago, and according to industry it is now used in about 90% of
operational wells today. Hydraulic fracturing is a process of injecting
a mixture of water, chemicals and particles underground to create
fractures through which gas can flow for collection. The difference in
the activity of 60 years ago and today is that larger volumes of water
are used in more technologically sound fracturing operations in
conjunction with horizontal drilling technology. Today's technology has
developed to a point that operators can determine the size, direction,
and efficiency of the fractures.

Q2. What is the industry doing to continue this technological evolution
to cleaner technologies?
A2. Industry and other stakeholders, including state regulators,
have been very active in efforts to develop and encourage cleaner
technologies, as well as technologies that have less impact. Just a few
examples follow:
Reduced ``Footprint.'' The ability of an operator to drill numerous
wells from one well pad has reduced the overall footprint of natural
gas exploration and extraction in the form of fewer access roads and
pipeline and production infrastructure. It also has resulted in less
truck traffic, which further results in reduced emissions, dust, noise,
erosion, wear and tear on roads, less disturbance to people and
wildlife, and the potential for vehicular injuries, spills and property
damage. Industry also has developed low-impact rigs, which adapt to the
environment with a minimum of disturbance.
Use of Coiled Tubing Drilling. Coiled tubing drilling is a high-
potential solution for reducing environmental impact while also
improving drilling efficiency and cost. Drilling with coiled tubing is
not applicable in all situations.
Use of Closed-Loop Drilling Mud Management. Many operators,
particularly in urban/suburban areas, are moving away from lined
reserve pits and are using closed-loop drilling mud management systems.
Chemical Substitution. The ``single biggest move'' the industry has
made to reduce the toxicity of its fluids, according to BJ Services, is
phasing out diesel fuel, a solvent that contains the potent carcinogen
benzene. Diesel fuel was once commonly used in hydraulic fracturing.
Today, many companies have replaced diesel fuel with much less toxic
mineral oil in most of their fracturing solutions. The shift began in
2003, after EPA pressed the nation's dominant hydraulic fracturing
companies to voluntarily eliminate diesel fuel from some of their
fluids. The Railroad Commission has encouraged this action.
Green Completions. Also becoming prevalent, particularly in urban/
suburban areas, is a process known as green completion. Green
completions capture gas produced during well completions and well
workovers following hydraulic fracturing. Generally, an operator will
use portable equipment to separate gas from the solids and liquids
produced during flowback of the well. The gas then can be delivered
into the sales pipeline. Green completions reduce emissions of methane,
volatile organic carbons, and hazardous air pollutants during well
cleanup and can eliminate or significantly reduce the need for flaring.
Some operators also are reducing their methane emissions by
replacing retrofit continuous-bleed pneumatic pilot valves on field
separators and controllers with low-bleed valves. Gas is bled off
continuously from separators using high bleed pilot valves. Replacing
or retrofitting high-bleed valves reduced emissions and has resulted in
the ability to capture and sell gas that previously escaped.
Recycling. The Railroad Commission encourages use or reuse of oil
and gas wastes for beneficial purposes and adopted recycling
regulations in 2006 to ensure that the storage, handling, treatment,
and recycling of oil and gas wastes and recyclable product do not
threaten or impair the environment or public health and safety.
The Commission has issued a mobile recycling permit in the Barnett
Shale area treats hydraulic fracturing flowback water using on-site
distillation units. The process allows reuse of approximately 80
percent of the returned fluids.
The Commission also has issued a stationary recycling permit for a
facility located in Parker County in the Barnett Shale area, which also
uses distillation.
The Commission has one pending permit application for a pilot
project in Webb County -in the Eagle Ford Shale area, in which the
applicant proposes to test a process for removal of extraneous
materials (other than salts) from hydraulic fracturing flowback water.
One company that received authority in 2006 from the Commission has
process over 12.7 million barrels of hydraulic fracturing fluid to
recover over 9.9 million barrels--or 77%--of reusable distilled water.
Ongoing Efforts. The Houston Advanced Research Center and Texas A&M
University, along with industry sponsors and other stakeholders,
including NGOs, government agencies, and others, operate the operate
the Environmentally Friendly Drilling Systems Program integrating
advanced technologies into systems that Significantly reduce the impact
of petroleum drilling and production in environmentally sensitive
areas. (See http://www.efdsystems.org/)
Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Robert M. Summers, Secretary, Maryland Department of
the Environment

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1. States regulate many aspects of oil and natural gas activities. How
robust is this regulation? How often are wells inspected? What are the
qualifications of the regulators?
A1. Maryland statutory law assigns the responsibility for
permitting oil and gas wells to the Maryland Department of the
Environment. The Department adopted implementing regulations that were
last revised in 1993. MDE's Minerals, Oil and Gas Division currently
has four professional employees, of whom three are geologists and one a
regulatory and compliance engineer, in addition to an administrative
specialist. There are currently about 10 gas production wells in
Maryland and a natural gas compressor station associated with about 85
gas storage wells. The production wells are scheduled for inspection
once a year. The compressor station is inspected annually and the
storage wells once every five years.

Q2. Do you believe states are incapable of effectively regulating
hydraulic fracturing without direction from EPA?
A2. At this time, Maryland lacks sufficient information to
effectively regulate hydraulic fracturing. As I said in my testimony,
guidance from EPA is needed and has been requested by Maryland. The
availability of recommendations regarding best practices, such as those
that the Department of Energy has said they will be providing in the
next 6 months, would be extremely helpful and would allow States like
Maryland to proceed more quickly to achieve our objective of ensuring
that any permits issued that would utilize hydraulic fracturing are
fully protective.

Q3. Have you reviewed Texas' regulations overseeing hydraulic
fracturing? Have you reviewed the regulations of other oil and gas
producing States? If so, what type of review have you performed?
A3. Staff at MDE has reviewed Texas' regulations and the
regulations, adopted and proposed, of other States and interstate
agencies such as the Susquehanna River Basin Commission. A variety of
different requirements have been put in place across the Country and
many states are currently making improvements to their regulatory
programs. We need to ensure that Maryland is using the most up-to-date
protective measures. During the course of the study mandated under
Governor O'Malley's Executive Order, in conjunction with an Advisory
Committee, the Department will examine these regulations, and the EPA
and DOE guidance being developed now, to establish permit requirements
for best practices that are sufficiently protective.

Q4. How useful is the current scope and breadth of the EPA study to
State regulators and risk managers? What would be needed in order to
make the study more worthwhile?
A4. EPA summarizes the study on their web page as follows: ``the
overall purpose of the study is to understand the relationship between
hydraulic fracturing and drinking water resources. The scope of the
proposed research includes the full lifespan of water in hydraulic
fracturing, from acquisition of the water, through the mixing of
chemicals and actual fracturing, to the post-fracturing stage,
including the management of flowback and produced water and its
ultimate treatment and disposal.'' The scope and breadth of the EPA
study plan will assure that State regulators get useful data on the
toxicity of chemicals used in or released by hydraulic fracturing and
the potential for impacts to drinking water resources. This is a topic
that would be of interest to all states, and we look forward to EPA's
summary. The study would be more worthwhile if it addressed additional
topics, such as re-fracturing, and impacts to air quality and
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems.

Q5. It seems many of the alleged environmental concerns associated with
fracking-such as wastewater discharge-are not actually associated with
the hydraulic fracking process and indeed exist at all oil and gas
production activities regardless of whether fracking occurs. Does EPA
properly distinguish between these categories in its study plan? How
can this distinction be improved?
A5. Hydraulic fracturing wastewater is different in volume and
characteristics from wastewater generated in conventional oil and gas
operations because of the additives used in the fracking fluid and the
potential release from the fracked shale of metals, organics and other
contaminants. The EPA study plan appropriately focuses on wastes
associated with hydraulic fracturing.

Question submitted by Representative Chip Cravaak

Q1. Many people are concerned about the waste water that is created as
part of the fracturing process. Can you please describe the current
technologies that are available to help recycle these fluids?
A1. The fracking flowback can contain not only the returning
fracking fluid with its additives, but also radioactivity, metals, and
organic chemicals that were in the target formation before fracking.
Different treatment may be needed for different contaminants. Maryland
is currently investigating the available treatment methodologies. This
is one of the key questions that Maryland will be evaluating as part of
its study over the next year.

Questions submitted by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson

Q1. Dr. Summers during the hearing Mr. Lujan asked all of the witnesses
if they would agree that the country needs a minimum standard for
hydraulic fracturing. You were not given a chance to answer this
question. Do you believe the country should adopt some kind of minimum
best practices or standards? If yes, why?
A1. Yes. Federal minimum best practices for hydraulic fracturing
would be very helpful to Maryland as it refines its own regulatory
program. Such practices would also ensure that upstream States are
requiring appropriate practices to protect Maryland's rivers and
streams from the potential adverse impacts of hydraulic fracturing that
occurs in those States. Similarly, federal standards for wastewater
treatment of fracking flowback would ensure that treatment levels are
sufficiently protective prior to issuance of discharge permits
regardless of which state has issued the permit.

Q2. After reviewing much of the EPA study plan, I recognize that there
is a considerable amount of evaluation that is conducted to determine
if a site can be safely leased for drilling. Analyses related to the
use of chemicals, drinking water evaluations, and geological and
surface evaluations all take considerable time and funds.

How are States able to conduct these evaluations?

How much do States depend on the industry for these
kinds of evaluations?
A2. Information about geology and drinking water resources are
generally available on a regional scale. Maryland has geologists and
engineers on staff who are able to review and interpret this
information as part of the permitting process, however, for site-
specific information, Maryland must rely heavily on information
provided by the applicant for a drilling permit. Maryland law and
regulations require applicants to perform an Environmental Assessment
that provides the information needed to evaluate the application.
Maryland is currently updating these requirements to ensure that
appropriate evaluations are conducted for all future applicants.
As for the chemicals, MDE requires the disclosure of all the
chemicals used on-site. We rely heavily on Material Safety Data Sheets
and published studies to evaluate the toxicity of the chemicals. The
fate and transport of these chemicals is seldom known with any degree
of detail or certainty and Maryland intends to require site-specific
water quality monitoring of surface and groundwater to ensure that best
management practices are protective of water quality. In addition, the
fracking fluid can react with the target formation, producing different
chemicals in the wastewater that must be evaluated and properly
treated. Maryland is depending on accurate information from the
applicants and would benefit greatly from additional federal guidance
and oversight to assist in the evaluations.

Question submitted by Representative Ben Lujan

Q1. Dr. Summers, in your testimony during the hearing you discuss the
need for the Federal Government to provide guidance and technical
support to the States on what steps need to be taken to ensure the
safety and environmental performance of fracking. Can you elaborate on
how a federal-state partnership could promote natural gas production
and ensure the health of our public?
A1. Because of its national scope, EPA receives information about
operations in all the States that are experiencing hydraulic fracturing
of deep deposits. The EPA is in a better position than any individual
State to collect, analyze, and make available information on best
practices across the country. To cite one example, the EPA has
knowledge about best practices for reducing the escape of methane gas
to the atmosphere during drilling and hydrofracking. Sharing this
information would allow States to avoid ``reinventing the wheel.'' As
another example, EPA Region III, which includes several Marcellus Shale
states, has provided useful guidance on the treatment and disposal of
fracking wastewater.

Questions submitted by Representative Paul Tonko

Q1. For the record, it is my understanding that the practice of
hydraulic fracturing includes fracturing technology combined with a
number of different technologies, some which have been developed in the
last 20 years, are being used to access shale gas. My question for the
panel is why do we continue to hear that these technologies have been
used to access shale gas for 60 years?
A1. Hydraulic fracturing has been known and used for a significant
period of time. Applying the technology to deep, horizontally-drilled
wells is relatively new. It has only been used in the Eastern United
States for a few years. The industry continues to innovate and add new
technology and chemicals. We have observed that Pennsylvania has found
it necessary to continually update its requirements and regulations
over the past few years to address issues that have arisen due to the
rapid development of Marcellus Shale gas wells. Many citizens are quite
concerned about the impacts they have observed and the potential for
additional cumulative impacts as many more wells and associated
gathering lines and other infrastructure are developed. Maryland has
not received the volume of applications that Pennsylvania has, however,
in reviewing its experience and some of the ongoing problems
encountered, it is clear to us that the technology is evolving and will
continue to evolve. States need the assistance and expertise of the
federal agencies to ensure that we are requiring the best available
practices so that our citizens' health and safety are protected and we
are not left with a legacy of environmental contamination and
degradation of our natural resources.

Q2. What is the industry doing to continue this technological evolution
to cleaner technologies?
A2. Many companies are working to develop cleaner, safer practices
and it was Maryland's hope that those industries would support
legislation that was introduced in the Maryland legislature this past
session to help Maryland ensure that the best practices were being
employed in the development of the Marcellus Shale in our State.
Unfortunately, the industry in Maryland did not support that
legislation because they believed that it placed requirements that
would prevent us from moving forward with production of gas as quickly
as they would have liked.
Many different practices and regulatory standards are being
required in the various States whose programs we have reviewed. It is
extremely difficult and time consuming for staff from a single State to
ensure that industry is using the best practices and is taking
advantage of available technological advances. This is complicated by
the fact that not all the technological innovations result in cleaner
operations; some are used to tap previously unreachable or
unrecoverable gas and may have additional unanticipated environmental
impacts that must be evaluated. Maryland will take the time needed to
ensure that any permits we issue are fully protective. With Governor
O'Malley's Executive Order, we are establishing an advisory committee
and we are encouraging industry representatives to participate and
assist us in appropriately addressing the issues so that Maryland's
permits are reasonable and fully protective.
Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Mr. Harold Fitch, Michigan State Geologist; Director,
Office of Geological Survey, Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality; and Board Member, Ground Water
Protection Council

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1a. FracFocus is a voluntary website that discloses the additives used
in fracking fluids. Some people have advocated that this disclosure
should be mandatory.
a Is this necessary, or are the voluntary measures enough?
A1a. Circumstances vary among states, and the issue should be left
to each state to address. Michigan has implemented mandatory disclosure
of Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs) for high-volume hydraulic
fracturing operations in response to public interest. We are posting
the MSDSs on our website. To address the question in a regional or
national context, the voluntary disclosure under FracFocus provides
adequate information to characterize hydraulic fracturing fluids in
general.

b. How does the information disclosed on this website compare with the
information companiesprovide to State regulators?
A1b. The information on the FracFocus website closely parallels
that for Michigan.

Q2. States regulate many aspects of oil and natural gas activities. How
robust is this regulation? How often are wells inspected? What are the
qualifications of the regulators?
A2. Michigan has a comprehensive and thorough system for regulation
of all aspects of oil and gas wells and associated pipelines and
facilities, from initial siting to closure and restoration. Wells are
inspected once every two to four days during drilling, completion
(including hydraulic fracturing), and plugging; and several times
annually during production. While states vary somewhat in this respect,
I believe Michigan is fairly typical. Michigan inspectors are degreed
geologists and have significant on-the-job training before qualifying
for independent field inspection activities.

Q3. How useful is the current scope and breadth of the EPA study to
State regulators and risk managers? What would be needed in order to
make the study more worthwhile?
A3. The EPA plans for the study are quite broad. Michigan does not
object to a broad study; we believe that the results will confirm what
the states already know to be the case. However, we are concerned that
the breadth of the study means the results will not be available in a
timely manner. We are also concerned that the study does not
incorporate risk assessment. While the study may point out a few risks
to the environment, it is important to weigh the degree of risk, not
just the possibility of a problem (which may be very remote).

Q4. At what depths do we find functional groundwater wells? At what
depths is hydraulic fracturing taking place? What is the potential
relationship between these wells and hydraulic fracturing activities
both on the surface and below ground? How does this vary across local
geology?
A4. The depth of water supply wells varies greatly from state to
state and within each state. In Michigan, it ranges from tens of feet
to hundreds of feet. Likewise, the depth and characteristics of
hydraulic fracturing varies greatly-more reasons for state-based
regulation. In Michigan the vertical separation between the deepest
fresh groundwater and the zones that are hydraulically fractured ranges
from 200 feet to thousands of feet. The separation distance is smallest
at shallow depths. In shallow wells the volume of hydraulic fracturing
fluid is small and fractures propagate horizontally; as a result, the
fractures do not extend upward into the fresh water aquifer. In deeper
wells, the great isolation distance and nature of intervening
formations prevents propagation of fractures into fresh water zones.

Q5. In the last few years, some companies have significantly increased
wastewater recycling to move toward 100 percent recycling with zero
discharge. What is the role of recycling and reuse of hydraulic
fracturing fluids?
A5. The states encourage recycling and reuse of hydraulic
fracturing water. It may not be practical in some cases due to
unfavorable characteristics of the flow back or produced water.

Q6. Could you differentiate flowback and produced water, and any other
water used during the hydraulic fracturing process? How does the
composition of the flowback and produced water vary as a function of
management practices and local geology?
A6. In some cases flow back, produced water, and drilling fluids
can be distinguished by their chemical signatures. In general, water
recovered from a well may be a mixture of all three. The recovery of
hydraulic fracturing water tends to be high at first then decline over
time; it may take an extended period to recover the hydraulic
fracturing fluid, and some portion will likely remain in the producing
formation indefinitely. The recovery of flowback water depends on the
nature of the target formation and the hydraulic fracturing pressures
and volumes.

Q7. What existing treatment technologies are currently being used to
treat hydraulic fracturing wastewater?
A7. There are proprietary equipment and processes for treating
hydraulic fracturing wastewater on-site. In some states the wastewater
has been transported to public wastewater treatment plants. In Michigan
all hydraulic fracturing wastewater must be recycled or disposed of in
deep disposal wells.

a. How do the form and potential impacts of wastewater treatment and
disposal vary across the country and across geological formations where
hydraulic fracturing is practiced?
A7a. Appropriate treatment and disposal techniques vary depending
primarily on dissolved salt content. In Michigan the dissolved salt
content is typically relatively high, so treatment and discharge or
reuse for other purposes is generally not practical.

b. What states regulate hydraulic fracturing under the Underground
Injection Control program of the Safe Drinking Water Act?
A7b. To my knowledge only Alabama regulates hydraulic fracturing
under the Underground Injection Control program. The Alabama
regulations were necessitated by a federal court ruling in a lawsuit
brought by an environmental interest group. The regulations are limited
and apply only to hydraulic fracturing of shallow coal beds.

Questions submitted by Representative Paul Tonko

Q1. For the record, it is my understanding that the practice of
hydraulic fracturing includes fracturing technology combined with a
number of different technologies, some which have been developed in the
last 20 years, are being used to access shale gas. My question for the
panel is why do we continue to hear that these technologies have been
used to access shale gas for 60 years?
A1. The primary other technology that may be used in conjunction
with hydraulic fracturing is horizontal drilling, which has been used
commercially since the 1980s.

Q2. What is the industry doing to continue this technological evolution
to cleaner technologies?
A2. The service companies that carry out hydraulic fracturing
operations are developingnew "greener" chemical additives as well as
ways to reduce the volume of water needed.

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Cal Cooper, Manager, Worldwide Environmental
Technologies, Greenhouse Gas, and Hydraulic Fracturing, Apache
Corporation

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1. FracFocus is a voluntary website that discloses the additives used
in fracking fluids. Some people have advocated that this disclosure
should be mandatory.
a.Is this necessary, or are the voluntary measures enough?
A1a. Apache encourages States to require mandatory reporting of the
additives used in frac fluids to the FracFocus website. In Texas this
was recently enabled by a legislative bill, but generally State
Regulators have the power to require disclosure by Rule without new
legislation. In Louisiana rules have been proposed by LOC that would
require disclosure like FracFocus to a public website.
Apache does not see the need for a Federal mandate.

b. How does the information disclosed on this website compare with the
information companies provide to State regulators?
A1b. The FracFocus site consolidates essential information; it
allows for geographical searching of well locations and also provides
separate technical and statutory explanations that are generally not
part of state records. FracFocus is designed to be user friendly and
current. It is substantially more efficient than freedom of information
records release. Furthermore the website minimizes the costs to state
government agencies of making this information available to the public.
The final well reports filed by operators with state regulators contain
proscribed technical information including copies of well logs. This
includes mostly standard details not directly related to HF
completions, but also includes information about the completions
including pressures and injected volumes. Only a few states require
disclosure of additive composition. All reported information is
eventually available to the public but the information is not designed
to be user friendly or understood by non-specialists. Some States make
public, and allow commercial entities to reproduce, publish and sell
well logs and well reports, usually one year after completion.

Q2. In your written, testimony you note that the success of any
scientific evaluation hinges, in large part, on the clarity and focus
involved in the prioritization of testing.

a.Could you please articulate the specific flaws in the EPA Draft
Plan's prioritization?
A2a. The essential flaw is that EPA categorically avoids any
meaningful prioritization whatsoever in a scientific sense. Referring
to the Draft Plan, page 4 under section: 2.3 Research Prioritization
the text suggests that the (only) priority is to study hydraulic
fracturing in shale formations based on stakeholder input. That would
be the public outcry perceived from EPA public hearings, as opposed to
any scientific reasoning evident in the EPA plan. The white-wash goes
on to boldly claim that'' EPA used a risk-based prioritization approach
to identify research that addresses the most significant risks.'' but
the Draft Plan offers absolutely no information on how this was done,
or what criteria was included a technical risk matrix. It does not rank
any particular scientific question more worthy of investigation than
another. It does not even pretend to focus on any areas considered as
the greatest risk to water resources. Instead it refers to itself as a
``comprehensive study.'' The unfocused, unrisked ``comprehensive'' EPA
plan covers almost every imaginable base will easily cost 100's of
millions of dollars and take probably a decade or more to complete.
In his testimony before this committee Mr. Anastas flatly
contradicts the written words in the EPA Draft Plan and declares that
`` This study is intended to understand the factors that potentially
could result in impact to drinking water from HF. the factors that are
the basis of whether or not a risk exists . . .This study is not
intended to be a risk assessment.'' He goes on to recognize that ``for
there to be a risk there needs to be the elements of both hazard and
exposure.'' Clearly in the study plan the focus in on identifying
hazards of every imaginable type without any indication that they will
quantify exposure. Risk analysis (see below) is not contemplated.
For it to be a scientific study, it must start by asking questions
like a scientist, test concepts, and start where you expect to get the
most impact based on analysis. The current approach appears to invent
problems in order to fund everyone who wants funding. It also gives the
EPA total flexibility to do whatever it wants with the funding it gets,
effectively neutering any oversight guidance. Is this what Congress
intends?

b. What specific areas of existing knowledge have been ignored or
under-represented?
A2b. The biggest omission is the whole area of quantitative risk
analysis (different from relative scientific risk). HF is a moderately
complex industrial process with considerable variation in its
application. The process and its applications lend themselves to an
analysis of the risk of occurrence that other regulatory agencies now
demand. Without understanding a risk of occurrence or a risk of
magnitude of a potential problem, the EPA cannot legitimately propose
or promulgate science based rules for HF.
Generally there is a complete aversion to addressing concentrations
of concern for chemicals and any acknowledgement about the impact that
expected dilution will have on concentration effect. In other words,
all ``bad chemicals'' and ``feared constituents'' have equal standing.
There is little or no proposed investigation linking pathways for
contamination and how these change with time.
In spite of its broad scope, the study almost fails to address
subsurface context, which is essential to test many scientific ideas.
Sometimes one wonders if EPA intends to appreciate Darcy's law and the
difficulty of circulating fluids across 1000's of m of rock (or not).

c. What impact might this have on the effectiveness of the study as
whole, and subsequently on its impact on improving the safety and risk
management of hydraulic fracturing operations?
A2c. All of the responses in part ``b'' above will result in a
significantly less effective study and handicap any interpretation that
hopes to positively improve safety and risk management.

Q3. In your testimony you state that it would be helpful for EPA to
collaborate with industry to identify and prioritize the chemical
additives of greatest concern, based on regionally ``specific
information for different shale gas formations, analysis of their true
presence in produced waters, and the actual risks to the public.

a. In your opinion, has the EPA made a significant effort to accomplish
this goal--either in this specific study or in separate endeavors?
A3a. Following my testimony before this committee, Mr. Anastas
suggested to me that EPA might like to explore such an opportunity. One
month later, no one from EPA has suggested any follow-up. I remain
hopeful that this only reflects other pressing priorities.
As Mr. Anastas explained to me, EPA lawyers limit his ability to
communicate, even to a Congressional committee. So before this
committee, EPA uses legal posturing to inhibit and frame scientific
discussion. Industry sees this and concludes that EPA seems more
mindful of positioning for consent decree negotiations than seeking
scientific truth. I believe that many in industry would welcome an
honestly brokered joint scientific effort to address the effective
mitigation of risks associated with HF chemicals.
In the past week, Mr. Anastas publicly announced that EPA has
released toxicology studies on some 500 chemicals. So applying the
concept to HF chemicals would align with current EPA technical
strengths.
b. Is this collaborative activity necessary to developing alternative
additives?
A3b. It is not absolutely necessarily in the sense that industry is
migrating in that direction on its own, albeit not with the clarity of
purpose and confidence that a positive engagement from the EPA would
provide. It scares me a bit that EPA might be afraid to engage because
they are constrained by technical capacity to definitively impact the
outcome in a scientific sense. In other words, in a scientific sense we
may be all charting new ground, and EPA may not have the bench strength
required to provide guidance.

c. Is collaboration fundamental to developing the best practices to
protect the environment and the public, while ensuring the success and
safety of unlocking vital energy resources through hydraulic
fracturing?
A3c. Collaboration between industry, state regulators and EPA will
be the most effective and credible way to develop the best practices
for environmental protection. In many cases industry can develop and
validate best practices for operations without any external input,
however there are unusual distinctions in competencies in the case of
chemicals and public protection. The industry is not an authority on
the relative chemical risk to public health and bioaccumulation. EPA,
with the support of other national institutes should be better equipped
to provide scientifically sound input if it chooses to engage
constructively instead of in an adversarial way. EPA needs to remember
that science is not law and is not tested using legal constructs.

Q4.  It seems many of the alleged environmental concerns associated
with fracking--such as wastewater discharge--are not actually
associated with the hydraulic fracking process and indeed exist at all
oil and gas production, activities regardless of whether fracking
occurs. Does EPA properly distinguish between these categories in-its
study plan? How can this distinction be improved?
A4. Dealing with produced water discharge is an essential part of
oil and gas production everywhere. All states have regulations
regarding water standards for discharge, and most oil and gas producing
states prefer for produced water to be re-injected unless it meets
specific high quality standards by treatment. So to frame the concerns
properly, EPA must identify where waste water disposal is an issue, and
why, and then put the scientific information in context as opposed to
making sweeping generalizations about exceptional cases.
EPA in its study proposal tends to emphasize disposal concerns that
are particular to the Appalachian basin and the Marcellus due to the
fact that subsurface disposal of water is not currently a viable
option, especially in Pennsylvania. Straight re-injection is the safest
technique. When re-injection is not possible, most industry operators
consider it a best practice to clean-up and re-use produced waters in
subsequent frac jobs effectively re-injecting it instead of disposing
it on the surface. In the draft plan, EPA seems to ignore this option
or exaggerate the risk of frac fluid re-injection without any
scientific support. Pennsylvania recently asked operators to
voluntarily recycle frac fluids in subsequent frac jobs.
EPA would benefit from recognition that fracing in an important
technique in nearly every hydrocarbon producing basin and that the New
York Times is not a good source for explanation of industry practice in
a general sense.

Questions submitted by Representative Chip Cravaack

Q1. Hydraulic fracturing has been in use since the 1950s and according
your testimony, over 1 million wells in the United States have been
fracked. However, there have been very few incidents and according to
Mrs. Jones, there are states' such as Texas that currently effectively
regulate the practice. How we put the risks of hydraulic fracturing
into perspective, when there are so many economic and societal
benefits?
A1. HF like any significant industrial process is not without risk,
and it is almost inevitable that some unfortunate accidents will occur.
Acknowledging and managing risk is the only path forward. This also
means separating hyperbole and false accusations from the facts.
I'm writing this on an airplane thinking that there are many risks
associated with flying, but it seems many people readily accept those
risks, and statistics show that driving is a greater risk. We as a
nation need dependable, low cost clean energy delivered to our
doorsteps and the opportunity to build our economy and create jobs
cannot be ignored. We must learn to manage risk, and we certainly have
the intellectual capacity and the organizational ability to manage risk
effectively if we accept the challenge.

Q2.  Many people are concerned about the waste water that is created as
part of the fracturing process. Can you please describe the current
technologies that are available to help recycle these fluids?
A2. Recycling waste water benefits from both low tech and high tech
applications. It normally starts with some pretty simple gravitational
separation process, and sometimes agents are added to precipitate
suspended solids or neutralize pH. Pressure and temperature changes are
leveraged to remove dissolved gasses especially natural gas. Some
companies use advanced filtration or membrane separation techniques,
and others use what are ``flash'' water distillation techniques. Much
technical development is focused on high volume, high-energy efficient
purification techniques at affordable costs.
As described in responses to Mr. Hall above, re-injection of frac
fluids and produced water or ``recycling'' partially treated fluids in
subsequent frac jobs seems like a very viable, low tech solution, where
it is practical and possible.

Questions submitted by Representative Honorable Paul Tonko

Q1. For the record, it is my understanding that the practice of
hydraulic fracturing includes fracturing technology combined with a
number of different technologies, some which have been developed in the
last 20 years, are being used to access shale gas. My question for the
panel is why do we continue to hear that these technologies have been
used to access shale gas for 60 years?
A1. Industry first developed hydraulic fracturing techniques for
hydrocarbon reservoirs in the late 1940's and the techniques have been
constantly improving since then. The first HF applications in shales
began in the early 1980's and gained momentum in the 1990's, and have
consistently become both more effective and more economic every year.
Certainly there has been considerable technological innovation.
Aviation enthusiasts attribute the first flight to the Wright brothers,
but modern aviation has come a long way since then. Extending the
analogy to hydraulic fracturing of shales, the 1990's ended with a DC-
3. Today we are doing jumbo jets and testing the Dreamliner for
commercialization. Most people are a lot more comfortable with the
safety record and performance of jumbo jets than the earlier models.

Q2. What is the industry doing to continue this technological evolution
to cleaner technologies?
There is a lot of focus on alternative chemicals, clean-up and
recycling water, and especially looking performance associated with
using saline brine water instead of fresh water and re-injecting it
into saline aquifers.
Some other promising areas include concentration of facilities onto
single pads with longer offset horizontal wells to reduce surface
footprint, the substitution of dry chemicals instead of liquid
chemicals for delivery, and switching engines to use natural gas power
instead of diesel that will reduce GHG emissions by 25%. The oil and
gas industry has a long history of innovation and much intellectual
energy is directed toward improving the process and minimizing the
environmental impact of hydraulic fracturing.

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Michael Economides, Professor of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering, University of Houston

Questions submitted by Representative Ralph Hall

Q1. How useful is the current scope and breadth of the EPA study to
State regulators and risk managers? What would be needed in order to
make the study more worthwhile?
A1. I think the EPA study is flawed on its premise in the first
place. It is a blind attempt to castigate fracturing in a thinly
disguised anti-natural gas attempt. Certain environmental groups have
tried to link this widespread oil and gas well completion technique
with a variety of ills, the most insidious of them all that drinking
water aquifers might be contaminated. Others include spreading
radioactivity and, of course, attacking the very rationale for doing it
in the first place. Shale gas, the target of the recently enormous
enhancement in industry activity may not be what is cracked out to be.
Last year more than 35,000 wells were drilled in the United States
and 120,000 hydraulic fracturing treatments were executed, more than
three stages per well on average. Not one case of drinking water
contamination was reported. Case closed one would think. The refrain is
even more impressionable: Sixty years of fracturing, covering more than
1.2 million wells and the only ``news story''--in the latest NYT piece
is one from 1984 in West Virginia? Case closed again, one would
reasonably think even further.

Q2. In your written testimony you note that EPA expects to draw
conclusions in its final report from a single year of research. You
also mention that in most funded projects you rarely see any that can
even get started in a year's time.
a. In your opinion, what circumstances, influences or objectives lead
the EPA to use only one year of research to inform their overall
findings?
b. How does this time frame tangibly impact the value and applicabilty
of the EPA study? What flaws, misrepresentations, or information gaps
might be present as a result of such a time frame?
A2a and b. This is an amusing situation. On the one hand I think
the whole study is an exercise in futility. If what they will do is
just study 4 ``suspect wells'' then this may be sufficient time but
this is precisely the problem that I see from a biased approach. One
year is a very short period of time for any substantive research and
evaluation of the literally hundreds to thousands of jobs that one
should study to reach conclusions that are not biased. In my view in
such case there will be an almost foregone verdict: The EPA quest is a
non-issue. Fracturing is clearly safe.

Q3. In your testimony you note that the EPA studyspecifically excludes
the State agencies' experiences in hydraulic fracturing oversight and
research from the Study plan.
a. In your opinion what is the implication of this omission, what
direction does it indicate for the EPA's focus and intended impact of
the Study plan?
b. What lessons could have been learned or what valuable information
could have been included with an incorporation of the State agencies'
experiences into the EPA Study plan?
A3a and b. The States such as the state of Texas and Pennsylvania
have had a lengthy and substantive experience for the regulation and
smooth operation of hydraulic fracturing. EPA oversight would mean only
an additional layer of bureaucracy without any benefit to the
environment but certainly a yet another obstacle for the industry,
based on a totally unproven premise and innuendo.

Q4. The movie Gasland dramatically depicts scenes of alleged water
contamination caused by hydraulic fracking.The movie was nominated for
an Oscar, yet much of the substance and detail of the movie appears to
have been discredited as false and misleading. What are some examples
of the most common misconceptions or misleading information about
hydraulic fracturing that are advanced in the media and by anti-energy
activists?
A4. (This from my work with Peter Glover, published in my Energy
Tribune.) Gasland treads the same fear-inducing path of Al Gore's
Oscar-winning An Inconvenient Truth. It presents a simplistically stark
contrast between the pristine wilderness (where our intrepid self-
proclaimed hippie film-maker lives) and the dark mutilated moonscape
(where `evil' Big Gas is slowly poisoning natural water resources). As
with Gore's power-point `epic'--later ripped apart in the factual
stakes by a British high court judge--Gasland loses credibility from
the start, as Debunking Gasland, a rebuttal report from Energy in
Depth, on behalf of the nation's gas and oil producers, revealed last
summer.
This review will follow an outline similar to Debunking Gasland
which falls into a handful of key areas: mis-statements on the law,
mis-representation of the rules, mis-characterization of the process
and ``flat-out making stuff up'', including the recycling of
discredited claims.
Within seconds of the film opening we glimpse (just glimpse) a shot
of George W's `evil' sidekick and former Halliburton CEO and Chairman--
and thus an `energy shill'--Dick Cheney. This movie technique sets us
up for what's to come, when Fox informs us: ``What I didn't know was
that in 2005 the energy bill pushed through Congress by Dick Cheney
exempts the oil and natural gas industries from the Clean Water Act,
the Clean Air Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA), the Superfund
Law, and about a dozen other environmental and democratic
regulations.'' Frightening. Or it would be, if the alleged
``Halliburton Loophole'' (in fact created by a cross-party alliance
including the vote of one Barack Obama) were actually true. As an
Energy in Depth factsheet points out, the oil and gas industry is
regulated under every single one of these laws; in the case of the
SDWA, being aggressively regulated at state level. But hey, this is
Hollywood, right? ``Print the legend'' and all that...?
Gasland goes on to cite the passing of the 2005 energy bill as
declaring a ``wild west'' open season for domestic gas drilling, not
least in Fox's home state, Pennsylvania, on the Marcellus Shale. Fox
fails to mention, however, that hydraulic fracturing has a 60 year
history after Halliburton pioneered the process in 1949. Nor does he
mention that the fracking process has been used in over 1.2 million
treatments in 90 percent of all US gas (and many oil) extraction wells,
conventional and unconventional, without a single documented instance
of the process leading to the pollution of a water aquifer. Undaunted
by facts, Fox goes on to assert that the law ``authorizes oil and gas
drillers to inject hazardous materials, unchecked, directly into or
adjacent to underground water supplies.'' As Debunking Gasland states,
``if such an outrageous thing were actually true, one assumes it
wouldn't have taken five years and a purveyor of the avant-garde to
bring it to light''.
An hour in and Fox states: ``the only reason we know about fracking
chemicals is because of the work of Theo Colborn...by chasing down
trucks...'' Naughty, Josh. Even Fox's home state of Pennsylvania
requires that, ``Drilling companies must disclose the name of all
chemicals to be stored and used at a drilling site...'' In fact, the
safety sheets for all chemicals used in fracking are a matter of public
record, though the actual mix may remain a proprietary issue.
By now, the movie's hype is in full flow: ``in order to frack ...
you need some fracking fluid--a mix of over 596 chemicals''. To
underline the point the figure appears full screen. Now the
unsuspecting could only conclude that Big Gas is indeed pouring massive
cocktails of chemicals into the ground. In reality, over 99.5 percent
of the fracking fluid is water and sand. The rest are largely
components used around the house, including gums and emulsifiers. As
the US Department of Energy/Ground Water Protection Council (GWPC)
report states: ``Although the hydraulic fracturing industry may have a
number of compounds that can be used in a hydraulic fracturing fluid,
any single fracturing job would only use a few of the available
additives'' (italics mine).
The film-maker goes on to make a raft of assertions not based in
fact. At one point he claims that the ``Pinedale Anticline and Jonah
gas fields [of Wyoming] are directly in the path of the thousand year
old migration corridor of pronghorn antelope, mule deer and sage
grouse.'' As Debunking Gasland's investigations revealed, however, only
three species of pronghorn antelope are on the endangered list, and
none are anywhere near Pinedale Anticline. Equally, so large are the
numbers of Wyoming's mule deer that the state now has an official mule
deer hunting season.
An EPA investigation into water contamination ``due to hydraulic
fracturing in Alabama'' in 2004 elicits ``no recollection'' at all from
the Alabama State Oil and Gas Board official responsible for oversight
of fracking in the state at the time. An allegation that shortly after
Fox interviewed a Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
official, the department ``suffered the worst budget cuts in its
history, amounting to over 700 staff either being fired or having
reduced hours'' is shown to be blatantly untrue when a DEP press
release is adduced revealing the DEP actually begun hiring ``68 new
personnel'' in January 2010 specifically ``to protect Pennsylvania's
residents and environment from the impact of increased natural gas
exploration across the state''.
Next up, Fox presents us with a local resident from Dunkard Creek,
Washington, Pa., who runs us through the unpleasant story of a 35-mile
stretch of Creek full of dead fish in 2009. While Fox lays the blame at
the feet of local natural gas development, nobody seems to have
informed him that a pre-Gasland EPA report concluded the water
pollution was attributable to a build up of toxic ``algal bloom'' the
result of discharges from coal mines. Even the local newspaper chipped
in to describe this Gasland gaffe as a ``glaring error''

Can You Light Your Water on Fire?

Finally, and most iconic of all, there's the much-vaunted and
disturbing image of flammable running water from faucets. Gasland's
publicity posters and DVD cover asks: ``Can You Light Your Water on
Fire?'' Well yes, apparently many can--but sadly for Gasland, for
reasons au naturelle. Fox highlights the instance of a flammable faucet
in Fort Lupton, Colorado pinning the blame on gas development. The
Colorado Oil and Gas Conservation Commission however disagree,
maintaining, ``Dissolved methane in well water appears to be biogenic
[natural occurring] in origin'' and they found ``no indications of oil
and gas related impacts to the water well.''
And it's not just the various EPA departments, including Fox's own,
whose studies have found hydraulic fracking to be a safe process. In
September 2010, STRONGER (State review of Oil and Natural Gas
Environmental Regulations), an independent panel of national
environmental, industry and EPA experts, not only pronounced
Pennsylvania's fracking process ``safe in respect'' to shale gas
development, it went on to claim the state's regulation process
``merits special recognition''.
While some contaminated groundwater has been found in the proximity
of fracked wells and where wells have not been properly completed, it
is hard to detract from the success of an industry and procedure that
offers an enormous boost to the economy, provides real jobs, and keeps
domestic gas prices low, creates real jobs and drives the economy.
These are aspects of public service provision that seem entirely alien
to some backwoods-living, self-proclaimed, finger-picking hippies,
however.
Fox once told New York's Time Out, ``Art is more important than
politics. Politics is people lying to you and simplifying everything:
art is about contradictions''. By Fox's own subjective understanding,
being entirely bereft of ``contradictions'' (or nuance), Gasland
qualifies as `politics'.
Made by `Docurama Films' the logo on the DVD states: ``Everything
else is pure fiction''. Removing the ``else'' and changing to ``pure
Hollywood'' would be more on the money.

Q5. It seems many of the alleged environmental concerns associated with
fracking--such as wastewater discharge--are not actually associated
with the hydraulic fracking process and indeed exist at all oil and gas
production activities regardless of whether fracking occurs. Does EPA
properly distinguish between these categories in its study plan?
A5. The anti-fracking crusaders, have never bothered to distinguish
or explain, that leaking from the very rare, badly cemented or cased
well, even if the well was fractured (almost all are) does not make
fracking the culprit. There is no physics to support connectivity
between the induced fracture, done thousands of feet underground, that
would contaminate drinking water aquifers, found at a few hundred feet
depth. An occasional ``scientist'' may be enlisted to offer a fanciful
connecting theory whose possibility is just south of being hit by
lightning. Communicating through the well itself, undesirable as it may
be, has nothing to do with fracking.

Question submitted by Representative Chip Cravaak

Q1. Hydraulic fracturing has been in use since the 1950s and according
to Dr. Cooper's testimony, over 1 million wells in the United States
have been fracked. However, there have been very full incidents and
according to Mrs. Jones, there are states such as Texas that currently
effectively regulate the practice. How do we put the risks of hydraulic
fracturing into perspective, when there are so many economic and
societal benefits?
A1. Mr. Cravaack. This is a self-explanatory issue in my view. Much
of the opposition is a made up issue. Please see my answers above to
Mr. Hall's questions.

Question submitted by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson

Q1. Dr. Economides, during the hearing you were asked by Ms. Wilson (D-
FL) to discuss how natural gas wells are monitored, You stated that the
industry is ``computer monitored in everything we do.'' Please describe
in detail what kinds of technologies are used to monitor gas wells,
what properties are monitored at each well, and how these technologies
could be improved through additional research. Additionally, please
discuss what best practices could be shared with other states for
monitoring gas wells.
A1. The industry monitors wells with electronic devices, measuring
rates, fraction of water, gas, pressure and other variables. Often
large, SCADA based systems monitor production and any irregularities,
trigger alarms or cautions. The degree of sophistication ranges from
manual recording (becoming rare) to satellite transmission to
centralized control and monitoring centers. These systems are
constantly improved and it is an active area of research by both the
production and service indsutries.

Questions submitted by Representative Paul Tonko

Q1. For the record, it is my understanding that the practice of
hydraulic fracturing includes fracturiing technology combined with a
number of different technologies, some which have been developed in the
last 20 years, are being used to access shale gas. My question for the
panel is why do we continue to hear that these technologies have been
used to access shale gas for 60 years?
A1. Some shale gas has been produced for 60 years but the process
has accelerated in the last ten and at a far faster pace the last five
years. Fracturing of all other types of reservoirs (oil, tight gas,
coal-bed methane) has been going on for 60 years.

Q2. What is the industry doing to coontinue this technological
evolution to cleaner technologies?
A2. I am not sure I understand this question. Do you mean to energy
other than natural gas? You would be hard-pressed to find anything
cleaner than natural gas.
Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Paul Anastas, Administrator, Office of Research and
Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

Appendix I

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Report Submitted by Dr. Michael J. Economides, Professor of Chemical
and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Houston


