- FEDERALLY FUNDED RESEARCH: EXAMINING PUBLIC ACCESS AND SCHOLARLY PUBLICATION INTERESTS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FEDERALLY FUNDED RESEARCH:
EXAMINING PUBLIC ACCESS AND
SCHOLARLY PUBLICATION INTERESTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
AND OVERSIGHT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, MARCH 29, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-74

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

73-607 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              PAUL D. TONKO, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Tennessee                        VACANCY
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight

HON. PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         PAUL D. TONKO, New York
Wisconsin                        ZOE LOFGREN, California
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             JERRY McNERNEY, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
RALPH M. HALL, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Thursday, March 29, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Paul C. Broun, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................    18
Written Statement............................................    19

Statement by Representative Paul Tonko, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    20
Written Statement............................................    21

Witnesses:

Mr. H. Frederick Dylla, Executive Director and Chief Executive
Officer, American Institute of Physics
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    26

Mr. Elliot Maxwell, Project Director for the Digital Connections
Council, Committee on Economic Development
Oral Statement...............................................    33
Written Statement............................................    36

Dr. Crispin Taylor, Executive Director, American Society of Plant
Biologists
Oral Statement...............................................    44
Written Statement............................................    47

Mr. Stuart Shieber, Director, Office for Scholarly
Communications, Harvard University
Oral Statement...............................................    54
Written Statement............................................    57

Mr. Scott Plutchak, Director, Lister Hill Library at University
of Alabama at Birmingham
Oral Statement...............................................    68
Written Statement............................................    70

Discussion
...............................................................    76

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. H. Frederick Dylla, Executive Director and Chief Executive
Officer, American Institute of Physics.........................    92

Mr. Elliot Maxwell, Project Director for the Digital Connections
Council, Committee on Economic Development.....................   103

Dr. Crispin Taylor, Executive Director, American Society of Plant
Biologists.....................................................   108

Mr. Stuart Shieber, Director, Office for Scholarly
Communications, Harvard University.............................   120

Mr. Scott Plutchak, Director, Lister Hill Library at University
of Alabama at Birmingham.......................................   129

Appendix II:

Letter submitted by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Member,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..   138

Response to Federal Register Notice Request for Information
submitted by Dr. H. Frederick Dylla............................   142

Response to Federal Register Notice Request for Information
submitted by Dr. Crispin Taylor................................   166

ALPSP Response to OSTP Request for Information...................   179

FEDERALLY FUNDED RESEARCH:
EXAMINING PUBLIC ACCESS AND
SCHOLARLY PUBLICATION INTERESTS

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 29, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:35 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Paul Broun
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Broun. The Subcommittee on Investigations and
Oversight will now come to order.
Good morning, everyone. Welcome to today's hearing titled,
``Federally Funded Research: Examining Public Access and
Scholarly Publication Interests.'' You will find in front of
you packets containing our witness panel's written testimony,
their biographies, and Truth-in-Testimony disclosures. I now
recognize myself for five minutes for an opening statement.
The formal review and communication of research finding
dates back several centuries. Over this time, it has certainly
served society very well. Scholars can argue over whether the
existing structure, including peer review, is sufficient or if
more can be done to ensure quality; but one thing is certain--
society has greatly benefited from it.
This structure and process, however, is organic and ever-
changing. As we progress through the digital age, expectations
of access to scientific findings are increasing, specifically
research funded by taxpayers. Just as the Internet has
challenged entrenched interests in other mediums such as news
and music, so too has it affected scholarly publishing. The
academic community and scholarly publishing interests must be
flexible enough to adapt to our ever-changing times.
Society's expectations of transparency are clearly
increasing. Couple this trend with the fact that taxpayers
rightfully expect access to research that they have funded, and
you quickly realize that we all must work together to ensure
that the various interests involved are treated fairly, and
that ultimately, science and research are not harmed.
This is no small matter. There are more than 25,000 peer-
reviewed journals produced by over 2,000 publishers. These
journals publish more than 1.5 million articles a year and earn
revenues between $8 and $10 billion from their subscribers.
This revenue funds over 100,000 jobs worldwide and 30,000 jobs
in the United States alone.
I have a lot of questions about how we should meet the
challenges of expanding access to research without compromising
the quality of the product or the rights of those involved in
the process.
The National Institute of Health public access policy
provides a good opportunity for Congress to review the
effectiveness of increased transparency on certain fields of
research, as well as its impact on publishers. We must be
mindful, however, that what works or does not work for NIH and
biomedical research may not be appropriate for other agencies
and scientific fields. Is there a one-size-fits-all policy that
can cover the entire Federal Government, or do specific
agencies and disciplines require different approaches? What
does the taxpayer have a right to access--the manuscript that
is produced by the researcher or the final product that is
peer-reviewed? How does copyright law affect each of these? How
long after release of a paper should the public have access?
Immediately? Six months? A year? Does this challenge--does this
change depending on the discipline or the agency? Should all
information and data associated with the research be made
public? Is this reasonable or even possible? Should limitations
be placed on access to prevent misuse? How should that be
decided or who should decide it? I can go on and on with
question after question.
I am also curious about how public access has impacted the
quality of the research. Has increased access impacted the
number of citations and references, and is this even a valuable
metric to determine effectiveness? Has greater access spurred
additional inquiries or novel research? Has the public access
affected innovation and commercialization? How do varying
funding models for peer-review impact how researchers and
agencies fund research? Are journals capable of adapting to
meet new challenges presented by the digital age, transparency
demands, and competitor models?
As you can see I have lots of questions and I still could
on, but one thing is absolutely crystal clear. Any effort to
fundamentally change the way in which federal research is
reviewed, vetted, transmitted, and communicated should benefit
from the Science, Space, and Technology Committee's input. We
have been involved in investigating issues surrounding public
access for a number of years and are uniquely qualified to
evaluate the impacts on research, as well as on federal
agencies.
Representative Gordon, the former full Committee Chairman,
brought together a number of stakeholders in 2009 in order to
find a common ground, and in 2010, the ``Scholarly Publishing
Roundtable'' issued a report containing several
recommendations. We also tasked the Office of Science and
Technology Policy to address the issue in the America COMPETES
Reauthorization Act of 2010 and expect their results very soon.
Today's hearing is an extension of this longstanding
engagement.
I look forward to working with all of the interested
parties, and I want to thank our all of our witnesses for
appearing here today.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Broun follows:]
Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Chairman Paul Broun
The formal review and communication of research findings dates back
several centuries. Over this time, it has certainly served society
well. Scholars can argue over whether the existing structure, including
peer review, is sufficient or if more can be done to ensure quality,
but one thing is certain, society has greatly benefited from it.
This structure and process, however, is organic and ever changing.
As we progress through the digital age, expectations of access to
scientific findings are increasing, specifically research funded by
taxpayers. Just as the Internet has challenged entrenched interests in
other mediums such as news and music, so too has it affected scholarly
publishing. The academic community and scholarly publishing interests
must be flexible enough to adapt to our ever-changing times.
Society's expectations of transparency are clearly increasing.
Couple this trend with the fact that taxpayers rightfully expect access
to research they have funded, and you quickly realize that we all must
work together to ensure that the various interests involved are treated
fairly, and that ultimately science and research are not harmed.
This is no small matter. There are more than 25,000 peer-reviewed
journals, produced by over 2,000 publishers. These journals publish
more than 1.5 million articles a year, and earn revenues between $8 and
$10 billion dollars from their subscribers. This revenue funds over
100,000 jobs worldwide--30,000 in the U.S. alone.
I have a lot of questions about how we should meet the challenges
of expanding access to research without compromising the quality of the
product, or the rights of those involved in the process. The National
Institute of Health (NIH) public access policy provides a good
opportunity for Congress to review the effectiveness of increased
transparency on certain fields of research, as well as its impact on
publishers. We must be mindful, however, that what works or does not
work for NIH and biomedical research, may not be appropriate for other
agencies and scientific fields. Is there a one-size-fits-all policy
that can cover the entire federal government, or do specific agencies
and disciplines require different approaches? What does the taxpayer
have a right to access--the manuscript that is produced by the
researcher, or the final product that is peer reviewed? How does
copyright law affect each of these? How long after release of a paper
should the public have access? Immediately? Six months? A year? Does
this change depending on the discipline or the agency? Should all
information and data associated with that research be made public? Is
this reasonable or even possible? Should limitations be placed on
access to prevent misuse? How should that be decided, and who should
decide it?
I'm also curious about how public access has impacted the quality
of research. Has increased access impacted the number of citations and
references, and is this even a valuable metric to determine
effectiveness? Has greater access spurred additional inquiries or novel
research? How has public access affected innovation and
commercialization? How do varying funding models for peer-review impact
how researchers and agencies fund research? Are journals capable of
adapting to meet new challenges presented by the digital age,
transparency demands, and competitor models?
As you can see I have a lot of questions, but I think one thing is
clear. Any effort to fundamentally change the way in which federal
research is reviewed, vetted, transmitted, and communicated should
benefit from the Science, Space, and Technology Committee's input. We
have been involved in investigating issues surrounding public access
for a number of years, and are uniquely qualified to evaluate the
impacts on research and federal agencies. Rep. Gordon, the former
Committee Chairman, brought together a number of stakeholders in 2009
in order to find common ground, and in 2010 the ``Scholarly Publishing
Roundtable'' issued a report containing several recommendations. We
also tasked the Office of Science and Technology Policy to address this
issue in the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of 2010 and expect
their results soon. Today's hearing is an extension of this
longstanding engagement.
I look forward to working with all of the interested parties, and
want to thank our witnesses for appearing today.

Chairman Broun. I now recognize my good friend, the Ranking
Member from New York, Mr. Tonko, for his opening statement.
Mr. Tonko, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I want to thank all of our witnesses for coming today
to testify before our subcommittee. And further, let me thank
you in advance for your patience. The schedule is going to be a
little awkward today.
In 2010, this committee adopted language that set the stage
for enhancing public access to federally funded research. Since
that time, two legislative proposals have emerged and have
received the scientific community's attention. At this point, I
believe the language this committee included in the
reauthorization of the America COMPETES Act remains the best
path forward.
We have two competing public interests that play in the
open access discussion. On the one hand, the taxpayers who
provide support for research through grants provided by federal
science agencies have an interest in having the research they
fund deliver maximum public benefit. On the other hand, the
public is not only interested in quantity; they want quality.
The scientific publishing enterprise, working with the
research community, academia, and the government traditionally
has had an important role in ensuring that quality through the
management of the peer-review process. We are on the cusp of an
information revolution. We hear about the impacts of this
revolution on print media every day. Digital technologies are
making it easier to produce, distribute, search, access, and
archive information. Scholars are embracing open-access
journals for their articles and we have seen a series of
schools follow the Harvard faculty's model in establishing
publicly accessible faculty archives of their publications.
More journals are looking to move to a business model based
on author charges to remain viable with the move to open
access. The NIH's policy of making final submitted copies of
manuscripts that result from NIH-funded research available on
PubMed within 12 months of publication. Is also driving change
amongst publishers. The National Science Foundation and the
Department of Energy, significant funders in all nonmedical
fields of science are both working on pilot programs that
embrace an open access policy. With all of these changes
underway, it is hard to see how traditional publishers will be
able to survive without significantly rethinking their business
model. This appears to be true for both the for-profit and not-
for-profit publishers.
So what is the proper role for the government in this
evolutionary process? Clearly, we need to ensure that vital
public interests in the United States research enterprise are
indeed served. Any new system that emerges needs to facilitate
data sharing and interoperability across fields and archives.
In addition, it must provide for the long-term stewardship of
the scientific record. We need to consider the implications for
federal grants of moving to new publishing business models,
including author-paid publication.
Currently, federal grants help to support journal
subscriptions through indirect costs on grants. Can we rely on
the current policy path coupled to changing technology,
emerging competition, and social norms among scholars to drive
us steadily toward broader access to research results? It is
too soon to tell. The landscape is dynamic and federal agencies
have not yet completed their policy reviews and revisions.
We are still waiting for the report we requested from OSTP.
If we proceed to a legislative approach, we may end by creating
more problems than we indeed solved. An abrupt end to the
current system could drive some publishers out of existence. It
could result in the loss of established journals and weaken
professional scientific societies. These outcomes would be
counterproductive to the goal of having high-quality research
widely published and disseminated. How we produce, share, and
preserve knowledge is on the edge of the greatest change in
four centuries. There are many new opportunities for
improvement and this is indeed an exciting time. Transitions
are always unsettling but they offer a period for constructive
experimentation.
I believe we should take the time to hear from all
interested parties, encourage the federal science agencies to
move their efforts forward and refrain at this time from
prejudging the best outcome through prescriptive legislation.
We want to see the strongest possible system for sharing and
preserving knowledge emerge from this transition period, and I
look forward to hearing the perspectives and the concerns of
our witnesses today and as this process moves forward.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]
Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Ranking Member Paual D. Tonko
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for coming today to testify
before the Subcommittee.
In 2010, this Committee adopted language that set the stage for
enhancing public access to Federally-funded research. Since that time,
two legislative proposals have emerged and have received the scientific
communities' attention.
At this point, I believe the language this Committee included in
the reauthorization of the American Competes Act remains the best path
forward.
We have two competing public interests at play in the open access
discussion.
On the one hand, the taxpayers who provide support for research
through grants provided by Federal science agencies have an interest in
having the research they fund deliver maximum public benefit.
On the other hand, the public is not only interested in quantity.
They want quality. The scientific publishing enterprise--working with
the research community, academia, and the government traditionally has
had an important role in ensuring that quality-through the management
of the peer review process.
We are on the cusp of an information revolution. We hear about the
impacts of this revolution on print media every day. Digital
technologies are making it easier to produce, distribute, search,
access, and archive information.
Scholars are embracing open access journals for their articles, and
we have seen a series of schools follow Harvard faculty in establishing
publically-accessible faculty archives of their publications.
More journals are looking to move to a business model based on
author charges to remain viable with the move to open access. NIH's
policy of making final submitted copies of manuscripts that result from
NIH-funded research available on PubMed within 12 months of publication
is also driving change among publishers.
The National Science Foundation and the Department of Energy--
significant funders in all non-medical fields of science-are both
working on pilot programs that embrace an open access policy.
With all these changes underway, it is hard to see how traditional
publishers will be able to survive without significantly re-thinking
their business model. This appears to be true for both for-profit and
not-for-profit publishers.
So, what is the proper role for the government in this evolutionary
process? Clearly, we need to ensure that the vital public interests in
the U.S. research enterprise are served.
Any new system that emerges needs to facilitate data sharing and
interoperability across fields and archives. In addition, it must
provide for the long-term stewardship of the scientific record.
We need to consider the implications for federal grants of moving
to new publishing business models including author-paid publication.
Currently, federal grants help to support journal subscriptions through
indirect costs on grants.
Can we rely on the current policy path, coupled to changing
technology, emerging competition, and social norms among scholars to
drive us steadily toward broader access to research results?
It is too soon to tell. The landscape is dynamic and Federal
agencies have not yet completed their policy reviews and revisions. We
are still waiting for the report we requested from OSTP.
If we proceed to a legislative approach, we may end by creating
more problems than we solve. An abrupt end to the current system could
drive some publishers out of existence. It could result in the loss of
established journals and weaken professional scientific societies.
These outcomes would be counterproductive to the goal of having high
quality research widely published and disseminated.
How we produce, share, and preserve knowledge is on the edge of the
greatest change in four centuries. There are many new opportunities for
improvement and this is an exciting time. Transitions are always
unsettling, but they offer a period for constructive experimentation.
I believe we should take the time to hear from all interested
parties, encourage the Federal science agencies to move their efforts
forward, and refrain at this time from prejudging the best outcome
through prescriptive legislation.
We want to see the strongest possible system for sharing and
preserving knowledge emerge from this transition period. I look forward
to hearing the perspectives and concerns of our witnesses today and as
this process moves forward.

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Tonko.
If there are any other Members who wish to submit
additional opening statements, your statements will be added to
the record at this point.
Chairman Broun. At this time, I would like to introduce our
panel of witnesses--Dr. H. Frederick Dylla, the Executive
Director and CEO of the American Institute of Physics; Mr.
Elliot Maxwell, Project Director for the Digital Connections
Council on the Committee on Economic Development. Boy, that is
a mouthful. Dr. Crispin Taylor, the Executive Director of the
American Society of Plant Biologists; Mr. Stuart Shieber, the
Director of the Office for Scholarly Communication at Harvard
University; and Mr. Scott Plutchak, the Director of Lister Hill
Library at the University of Alabama in Birmingham.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each, after which the members of the committee
will be--will have five minutes each to ask questions. Your
written testimony will be included in the record of the
hearing.
It is the practice of this Subcommittee on Investigations
and Oversight to receive testimony under oath. Do any of you
have an objection to taking an oath? Okay. I see everybody's
head shake side-to-side indicating ``no.'' So let the record
reflect that all witnesses are willing to take oath.
You may be represented by counsel. Do any of you have
counsel here today? Also everyone indicated that they do not
have counsel, so let the record reflect as such.
If all of you would now please stand and raise your right
hand. Do you solemnly swear or affirm and tell the whole truth
and nothing but the truth, so help you, God?
Thank you. You may be seated.
Let the record reflect that all the witnesses participating
have taken the oath.
Now, I recognize our first witness, Dr. Dylla.

STATEMENT OF H. FREDERICK DYLLA,

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND

CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,

AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF PHYSICS

Dr. Dylla. Chairman Broun, Ranking Member Tonko, and
members of the committee, good morning. I am Fred Dylla, the
Executive Director and CEO of the American Institute of
Physics. AIP is a not-for-profit publisher of scholarly
research and an umbrella organization of over ten scientific
societies that includes over 135,000 scientists. Before taking
on this job five years ago, I was a practicing physicist, so I
am keenly aware that innovation and discovery depend on access
to research.
Today's hearing is addressing the essential question of the
appropriate role of government in facilitating public access to
taxpayer-funded research. Recently, there has been intense
debate over public access, which is the ability for anyone to
readily access scholarly research. All parties in this debate
agree that enhanced public access is a good thing, is good for
the economy; it is good for science.
My main message to you today is that the current system of
scholarly communications is working. More journals are reaching
more readers in more usable formats than ever before.
Stakeholders have been able to make significant strides toward
increasing access even while recognizing there are no quick
fixes where one size fits all models.
As the public demand for free electronic information grows,
however, the debate on how to pursue public access has
intensified. Financial concerns lie at the heart of this issue.
The argument is if the taxpayers fund the research, shouldn't
the public have access to it? And the answer is of course. But
in the world of scholarly publishing, freely available does not
necessarily mean free of cost. It takes significant investments
for publishers to give value to that research and communicate
it in a meaningful way.
For AIP this amounts to about $2,000 per article, which
includes the rigorous peer-review process that we manage, the
editing, the production, permanently archiving, and much more.
All the parties agree that these components add essential value
and enable scientific progress. This committee has weighed in
on this issue and your solution is working. Last year,
legislation was enacted, Section 103 of the COMPETES Act, that
calls for all stakeholders, including publishers, to work
together to increase public access to scholarly publications,
grantee reports and associated data.
Since that time, important collaborations have formed and
we have made significant progress. Partnerships with the
National Science Foundation and the Department of Energy have
produced pilot programs that link grantee reports to
publications, support data mining across agency and publisher
platforms, and provide new tools and methodology for
identifying publicly funded work. Publishers have the expertise
to drive these projects, saving the funding agencies money.
Innovative publication technology, efficient business
practices, and connectivity to the international publishing
community enable the government to show results quickly,
increasing taxpayer access to publicly funded work.
Due to the complex and nuanced nature of this issue,
proposals that significantly distort the current system of
scholarly communications could even be harmful. Recently, the
two most touted models--one-size-fits-all and mandated open
access--divert the progress that has been made over the past
few years and could even jeopardize the ultimate goal of
enhanced public access.
How are these proposals harmful? First, a single business
model that mandates free public access does not take into
account the rich diversity in both the science and scientific
publishing. A successful approach in one scientific discipline
may unfairly hinder another. This could jeopardize many sectors
of the $3 billion-a-year component of the U.S. publishing
industry, which employs 30,000 people in this country. But
secondly, a blanket approach that imposes open access in all
journals would significantly impede our approach and other
publishers' abilities to ensure quality and the value of
published scholarly research.
Fortunately, the current system is working. The natural
pressures of the marketplace continue to foster innovative
products and dissemination methods. Within the scholarly
publishing realm, new publishers, new journals, new business
models are continually emerging signaling a healthy,
competitive marketplace. These innovations date back to our
Nation's birth with Ben Franklin--a scientist, a publisher, an
entrepreneur who exemplifies our country's tradition of
scholarly publishing and free enterprise. Today, the government
has given us the tools to continue this tradition so we can
pursue innovation and foster scientific discovery.
Within the current framework, I am confident that public
access to all the results of scientific research will continue
to flourish and grow.
Thank you. I am honored to be among such a distinguished
committee and panel of witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dylla follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Dr. Dylla.
Mr. Maxwell, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. ELLIOT E. MAXWELL,

PROJECT DIRECTOR, DIGITAL CONNECTIONS COUNCIL,

COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Maxwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Tonko,
Members of the Subcommittee. First, let me express my
appreciation for the opportunity to testify today. My testimony
today is based on a report, ``The Future of Taxpayer Funded
Research: Who Will Control Access to the Results?'' which I
wrote under the auspices of the Committee for Economic
Development with generous support from the Ewing Marion
Kauffman Foundation. That report addresses the cost and
benefits of the public access policies of the National
Institutes of Health, as well as proposals to overturn or
extend that policy. I would ask that a copy of the report be
inserted into the record.
Chairman Broun. Certainly. Thank you. So ordered.
[Visit http://www.emaxwell.net/linked/DCCReport--Final--
Feb2012.pdf to view the report.]
Mr. Maxwell. For the last several years, I have served as
Project Director of CED's Digital Connections Council, and
during this time, the Council has made several reports on how
greater openness is enabled by the Internet and by the
digitization of information. This kind of openness is in fact
exemplified by the NIH public access policy. It makes it
possible and it benefits from the availability of the articles
that are made available.
The policy has been in effect for nearly four years, but
there are disagreements about its effect. Supporters have
argued that it increased public access, substantial positive
impacts on the progress of science, innovation, and economic
growth and should be extended. Opponents are primarily, but not
entirely, publishers of proprietary journals. And I want to
make sure that people understand that there are publishers that
are not proprietary but are open-access publishers. And so when
people talk about publishers as if they were a single body, it
is not an accurate way of depicting what the situation is.
Primarily, publishers of proprietary journals have argued
that increased public access will or have damaged the
subscription-supported publishing business and will undercut
peer review and may force journals to close or reduce the
number of outlets. CED initiated this report because we wanted
to try to get what the facts were, what the effects were, and
rather than speculate about these things, to look at what is on
the record after four years. And we think we have a kind of
disinterested view of this because we are not in favor of one
or another kind of dissemination. But the central question of
the report was, how does the NIH policy and proposals to extend
it or to overturn it affect the production and dissemination of
high-quality science research. That seems to be the single most
important thing to remember, that it is about the progress of
science, innovation, and economic growth. It is not about the
effect on any particular mode of dissemination. And so we
wanted to look at it from that standpoint.
Now, we were concerned about the effects on different ways
of disseminating research because only to the extent that they
affect the production and dissemination of high-quality
research. And quality, as Mr.--as the Chairman and Ranking
Member have indicated, is an important issue but it is not
necessarily equated with proprietary publishing. It is related
to peer review and the different means of assuring quality. And
we want to underline that.
It is worth noting, as Fred has said, that all the parties
agree about the importance of access. Proprietary publishers
make a point in their arguments about their efforts to increase
access to groups that are underserved. I would suggest that the
question in some ways needs to be flipped around. What all
parties also agree is that the NIH policy for public access has
increased access. There is no dispute about that. So the
question you face, I think, is to say we have a means and we
know how to use it of increasing access. The issue now should
be what do we need to do to limit that as opposed to how do we
extend what we have now in the scholarly publishing journal to
other federal agencies? Because we have both the means and the
knowledge of how to increase access and we should start there
and back off from that as opposed to saying how do we tweak
what we have in those areas beyond the NIH?
So it is not, I think, a matter of dispute about the value
of access or a matter of dispute about the success of NIH. It
is really only about, I think, the details of how it might be
worked out in other areas. But we start with the presumption of
access as opposed to the presumption that the publishers
control access. And because we have a time of an extraordinary
pressure on our budgets, we need to be thinking about how to
get the most from the very large scientific investment by
taxpayers in support of research.
What we have found in looking at the literature was that
increased public access accelerates progress in science by
speeding up and broadening diffusion of knowledge, providing
better access to more people--because as more people have
access, more people can do something with it--increases the
range and quality and variation of experiments that lead to
better solutions. The more people have access, the different
perspectives they bring more likely to have solutions than to
narrow that. We have found that it has important benefits to
authors because their work is more available and it increases
the efficiency of the research enterprise because you can see
what is being done and you can get as much as you can without
making taxpayers pay twice for the research both in terms of
the grants and in terms of subscriptions.
We have looked at all of the evidence that we have about
the impact on the scholarly publishing community and we found
no evidence that public access as provided by the NIH policy
has harmed the subscription journals. We found no persuasive
evidence that increased public access threatens the ability to
peer review. We found no persuasive evidence of a significant
reduction in traditional publishing. We found only a small
effect on the rate of growth of profits on the proprietary
publishers, and that was in the midst of the largest recession
we have had in years and years and years. None of even the----
Chairman Broun. Mr. Maxwell, if you would go ahead. You are
a little over time now and we are----
Mr. Maxwell. I am sorry.
Chairman Broun. --pressed for our time because we are going
to have votes very quickly and I just want to try to get
through as much of this testimony. So if you would summarize
very quickly, I would appreciate it.
Mr. Maxwell. Absolutely. I think that we should recognize
the very large benefits that exist and start from the premise
of increasing access, and then, if necessary, dial that back.
And we should think of the experience that people have had in
the NIH and related biomedical world and start to move down to
a shorter embargo, recognizing that there may be differences
amongst the various disciplines.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Maxwell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Maxwell.
Dr. Taylor, you are recognized for five minutes. And please
if you could keep it within five minutes. Your whole written
testimony will be part of the record. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF DR. CRISPIN TAYLOR,

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,

AMERICAN SOCIETY OF PLANT BIOLOGISTS

Dr. Taylor. Thank you very much, Chairman Broun, Ranking
Member Tonko, and members of the subcommittee. I am very
grateful for the opportunity to come testify today. My name is
Crispin Taylor and my title is Executive Director of the
American Society of Plant Biologists, a 5,000-member
professional society that is based just up the road in
Rockville, Maryland. I am also a former Chair of the North
American chapter of an organization called the Association of
Learned and Professional Society Publishers, which goes by the
acronym ALPSP. ALPSP is a global trade association whose
membership primarily comprises university presses and
professional society publishers. Most of ALPSP's organizational
members, including the one I direct, publish one or at most a
handful of journals. These journals tend to be among the most
highly regarded in their respective disciplines.
It is these two top-ranked journals called ``Plant
Physiology'' and ``The Plant Cell,'' are integrally involved in
developing, validating, communicating, disseminating, and
ultimately advancing fundamental knowledge about plant biology.
This is what the journals and indeed the society are all about.
To publish these two journals, the society expends millions of
dollars annually on peer review, editorial management,
production, printing, shipping, and hosting the online version
of the journals on a fully digital, highly reliable platform.
In your invitation, you asked me about the degree to which
each of these journals are dependent upon subscriptions. More
than half of the Society's $6 million in annual operating
revenues derives from subscription payments from some 2,000
institutions worldwide. Despite our strenuous efforts and the
fact that we price our two-journal package extremely
competitively, we are already finding it increasingly
challenging to maintain this customer base.
Your invitation also asked me how scholarly societies might
be affected by public access policies promulgated by the
government. Well, frankly, that depends on the policies. For
example, the policy that mandates a one-size-fits-all embargo
period, especially one as short as 6 months, is in my opinion
likely to have profoundly negative impacts, especially for
smaller professional societies like ASPB. This is not only an
assertion. We know from the usage data for ``Plant Physiology''
that more than half of the article downloads and thus arguably
half of the value of the journal to the subscriber take place
after the first 6 months. Moreover, librarians have told us in
informal conversations that they would be inclined to cancel
their subscriptions and wait for release of content at 6 months
if that is what it came to.
And that is just ASPB. ALPSP's members publish journals
across a wide range of scholarly disciplines, including math,
the social sciences, and humanities. For journals in these and
other areas of scholarship, half-lives for article downloads
are typically longer than one year, and so I would expect the
impacts of even a 12-month mandated embargo to be even more
detrimental in those fields.
Although my concerns regarding the adverse impact of
mandated embargos are serious, I expect it may take a while for
this scenario to play out in the form of failed journals or
shuttered Societies. I have two more pressing worries regarding
mandated embargos. First, the subscription revenues shrink. The
capacity for smaller publishers like ASPB to innovate will be
closed off. We will be unable to further improve the utility
and impact of our journals, and we will not have time to launch
and monetize new products and services like the mobile app on
my cell phone through which I can access content for ``Plant
Phys'' and ``Plant Cell.'' Both new services will allow us to
diversify our revenue streams and move away from the current
business model.
Second, if those mandates come with an obligation to
deposit articles in a centrally operated government repository
such as the PubMed Central one we have heard about, then for
many journals, downloads from those repositories will cut into
usage by our own journal websites, further lowering the value
of our journals to the subscribers.
So much for policies and regulations that would be harmful.
As my testimony indicates, I do think that governments have a
legitimate interest in scholarly communication, but I think
that interest would be most effectively expressed by
encouraging continued innovation rather than stifling it. As we
have heard, this approach is already articulated in Section 103
of the COMPETES Act, which envisions collaborative and
cooperative engagement of all stakeholders.
Among other things, helpful policies will encourage the
continued development and adoption of industry-wide standards,
building off the early implementation by almost the entire
scholarly communication ecosystem is something called the
Digital Object Identifier, or DOI, as a form of Social Security
number if you like for journal articles and other pieces of
information online. Such standards allow for evermore robust
and useful interoperability of otherwise disparate information.
To avoid the distribution of incomplete or imperfect
versions of articles, policies and practices should also aim
toward providing access to the definitive version of an
article, the so-called version of record. It is this version
typically available on a publisher website that is actively
stewarded and preserved for posterity and to which any
corrections or amendments are immediately linked.
In concluding, you asked me whether there is common ground
to be found. Despite the differences of opinion and
perspectives you have already heard and that we will doubtless
explore in greater detail in the coming couple of hours, my
answer is a resounding yes. The process begun by the scholarly
publishing roundtable was brought together by publishers,
librarians, and university leaders is already playing out via
the America COMPETES Act and the establishment of collaborative
public-private projects and partnerships demonstrating that we
will make much more progress together as a community of
stakeholders than we would in isolation.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Taylor follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Dr. Taylor. You were just dead-
on. Those buzzes that you just heard indicates that we have a
vote on the Floor. If the two of you can be very quick and get
through exactly five minutes each, we can get through both of
you all and we will recess and come back. So I would like to
try to do that if you all could please hold your comments to
five minutes or if you could cut it 30 seconds or so short. I
don't want to shortchange anybody, Mr. Maxwell, or anybody but
Mr. Shieber, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. STUART M. SHIEBER,

DIRECTOR, OFFICE FOR SCHOLARLY COMMUNICATIONS,

HARVARD UNIVERSITY

Mr. Shieber. Okay. Thank you, Chairman Broun, Ranking
Member Tonko, members of the committee. My name is Stuart
Shieber. I am a Computer Science Professor at Harvard
University. As a faculty member, I led the development of
Harvard's Open Access Policies, and since 2008, I have also
served as the Faculty Director of Harvard's Office for
Scholarly Communication. I want to thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you today.
Harvard's longstanding research policy calls for the idea
that we as--calls for the ideas that we as faculty and
researchers produce to receive ``the widest possible
dissemination.'' At one time, this was achieved by distributing
scholarly articles in the form of printed issues of journals
sent to the research libraries of the world for reading by
their patrons and paid for by subscription fees. But internet-
era technologies hold the promise of transforming this system,
distributing and using knowledge in ways not previously
imaginable. Ideally, this would lead to a universality of
access to research results known as open access, truly
achieving the widest possible dissemination of our research.
The benefits of open access are many. It eliminates
barriers to reading scholarly literature and broadens access
beyond just those who, like myself, are privileged to be within
the orbit of a major research library. It expands access to
those at the full range of schools, businesses large and small,
and the general public. Open access makes practical the novel
reuse of the literature through computer analysis of the entire
corpus of research results. Economists have shown that broader
public access to federally funded research would have positive
impacts on the U.S. economy totaling billions of dollars,
covering its cost many times over. But perhaps most
importantly, open access to research is an intrinsic public
good. As Thomas Jefferson wrote, ``the most important bill in
our whole code is that for the diffusion of knowledge among the
people.''
Unfortunately, this promise is not currently being realized
because of systemic problems in scholarly publishing. Libraries
have observed with alarm a long-term dramatic hyperinflation in
subscription costs of journals which have increased at a steady
rate of about seven percent per year. Other symptoms of
dysfunction include huge price disparities among journals of
similar quality and extraordinary profit margins. Even at
Harvard, which holds the largest academic library in the world,
we have had to curtail serial spending through a painful series
of journal cancellations.
In 2008, the faculty of arts and sciences, my own faculty,
enacted by unanimous vote an open-access policy. Faculty
decided to grant a license to the university to openly
distribute our scholarly articles and commit to providing
copies of our manuscript articles for distribution through our
online repository. This policy allows faculty to retain
sufficient rights to provide open supplemental access to our
scholarly articles. Since then, similar policies have been
voted by faculty bodies across Harvard, as well as institutions
as diverse as MIT, University of Kansas, Stanford, Princeton,
Bucknell, Columbia, Oberlin, Duke, and many others. Because of
the Harvard policies, we now provide online access to over
7,000 articles, representing 4,000 Harvard-affiliated authors.
These articles have been downloaded almost three-quarters of a
million times to people on every continent in the world,
including, surprisingly, Antarctica.
This approach to the access problem is also seen in the
extraordinarily successful public access policy of the National
Institutes of Health. Today, NIH provides free online access to
2.4 million articles downloaded a million times per day by half
a million individual users. These users come from universities,
research labs, companies, and the general public showing the
broad scope of the latent demand for these materials. The NIH
model could be replicated at other funded agencies as
envisioned in the recently reintroduced bipartisan Federal
Research Public Access Act.
The standard objection to this kind of policy is that
supplemental open access could harm the publishing industry,
but as Mr. Maxwell's report for the CED concluded, after four
years of the NIH policy and institutional policies like
Harvard's, ``there is no persuasive evidence that increased
access threatens the sustainability of traditional
subscription-supported journals or their ability to fund
rigorous peer review.''
In addition, the author gains value from publication of an
article in a journal. Vetting, copyediting, typesetting, and
most importantly, imprimatur of the journal, value that authors
and their institutions and funders should be, would be, and are
willing to pay for. Thus, in a hypothetical world of harm to
subscriptions, journals can switch to a different revenue model
charging a one-time publication fee to cover the costs of
publishing the article. I state this as though the publication
fee revenue model is itself hypothetical, but it is not. Peer-
reviewed open-access journals already exist in the thousands,
many using the publication fee revenue model, which by now is a
proven mechanism used by commercial and nonprofit publishers
alike, including even the most established journal publishers.
I opened my statement by quoting a mission of academics
such as myself to provide the widest possible dissemination--
open access--to the ideas and knowledge resulting from our
research. Government, too, has an interest in the widest
possible dissemination of government-funded research--to
maximize the return on the taxpayers' enormous investment in
that research, to bring economic benefits that far exceed the
costs, to provide transparency, to inform the public. Providing
open access to the publicly funded research literature,
fulfilling Jefferson's call for diffusion of knowledge, will
benefit researchers, taxpayers, and every person who gains from
new technologies, new medicines, new jobs, and new solutions to
longstanding problems of every kind.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shieber follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Shieber.
Mr. Plutchak, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. SCOTT PLUTCHAK,

DIRECTOR, LISTER HILL LIBRARY,

UNIVERSITY OF ALABAMA AT BIRMINGHAM

Mr. Plutchak. Mr. Chairman, members of the subcommittee,
thank you very much for the opportunity to speak to you today.
My name is Scott Plutchak, and I am the Director of the Lister
Hill Library in the Health Sciences at the University of
Alabama at Birmingham.
For over a decade, much of my professional activity has
taken place at the intersection of librarianship and
publishing. Despite how dependent these two communities are on
each other, it is striking how little real conversation and
collaboration has taken place. One of the unfortunately results
of this is that the debates over access to the peer-reviewed
literature have been unnecessarily contentious and have
diverted energy and attention from what could have been and
should have been a careful examination of facts and
opportunities.
Open-access advocates are lobbying hard for passage of
FRPAA, the Federal Research Public Access Act, but I am afraid
they are being shortsighted. The true value of the peer-
reviewed literature comes from context when it is connected to
the work that comes before it and that provides a foundation
for what can be built upon it. Because FRPAA focuses so much on
access to individual copies of articles, it falls far short of
what could be and what needs to be achieved. I agree that the
peer-reviewed reports of federally funded research should be
made freely available. In the digital world, we certainly ought
to be able to make that happen, but it must be done within a
context that maximizes the value of those articles. Mere access
isn't enough.
The report from the Scholarly Publishing Roundtable lays
out the issues that need to be balanced--first, a focus on
providing access to the version of record. Like the NIH policy
on which it is based, FRPAA settles for access to the author's
final manuscript version. In most cases, to meet a current
need, that may be sufficient, but a robust system of scientific
communication that is expected to persist over time requires
access to the version that some entity is going to keep track
of, ensuring that corrections are appropriately made, that
retractions are handled when necessary, and that context is
preserved.
Second--interoperability standards. Data mining of research
reports can combine results to provide accurate summaries
across a broad range of experiments. When these meta-analyses
are performed by humans, they can be extremely beneficial but
they are very expensive and they take a lot of time. In order
to facilitate this data mining, we need to emphasize a
standardized structure for research reports.
Third--a focus on digital preservation. Although there are
several promising approaches underway, these are all still in
the experimental stages. A recent study reported that only 15
to 20 percent of the e-journal content in two major research
libraries was currently being preserved. Any set of policies
designed to provide access to the results of funded research
must take into account methods for maintaining access for
decades and even centuries.
Finally, a recognition that different disciplines have
different practices and needs. One of the most contentious
areas in the public access debates has to do with the length of
the embargo. It became clear to us on the Roundtable as we
investigated the differences among disciplines that 6 months
may be longer than necessary in some disciplines and too short
to be practical in others. While policy development across
funding agencies must be carefully coordinated, some
flexibility must be allowed and even encouraged so that
agencies can develop policies that are acutely attuned to the
needs of their disciplinary communities.
Librarians, researchers, educators, and publishers are all
committed to achieving the widest possible distribution of the
results of scholarly research. The challenge is to do that in
ways that balance these elements. My experience with the
Roundtable, my other work with the librarian and publishing
communities over the years leaves me convinced that we will be
more effective in developing those solutions when researchers,
educators, publishers, librarians, and the public work together
than if we continue on a path that sets us at odds with each
other.
Across the publishing industry in both commercial and not-
for-profit sectors, experiments in open-access publishing are
proliferating. It should be clear to any objective observer
that most publishers are in no way opposed to open access. They
are quite sensibly seeking to develop business models that keep
their organizations healthy while maximizing access to what
they publish.
As authorized by the America COMPETES Act, the White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy is currently reviewing
the results from its latest request for information. Their
approach to these questions suggest that they are attempting to
achieve the kind of balance recommended in the report. Anything
that the Congress can do to encourage policy development along
those lines will be welcome. Anything that impedes or
interferes with that work such as the passage of FRPAA-type
legislation will paradoxically make the goal of a truly robust
open-access infrastructure for scientific communication even
more difficult to achieve.
Developing federal policies that will maximize the public's
investment in research and provide incentives for the
development of a robust scholarly communication system is
complicated and achieving the appropriate balance of interests
may not be as emotionally satisfying as advocating the
simplicity of something like FRPAA but the American public
deserves to have us do this right.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Plutchak follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Plutchak. The Chairman will
now take a unanimous consent request.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would ask unanimous
consent to insert in the record a letter I have received on
this subject from 52 Nobel Prize winners in favor of open
access.
Chairman Broun. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
[The information appears in Appendix II.]
Chairman Broun. The--we will recess this hearing. We have
to go vote. We will be back--bring this back into order 10
minutes after the beginning of the last vote.
[Recess.]
Chairman Broun. I call the Committee back to order.
I thank the panel for your testimony, appreciate you all
getting through it and I apologize for rushing all of you. But
we are going to have five series of vote today so it is going
to be--hopefully, we can get through at least one round of
questions before the next vote series but we will see.
So if you would please, Members as well as respondents to
the questions, please try to make them as quick as possible so
we can get through as many questions as we possibly can. And I
will remind you that each member has only five minutes.
And at this point, I will open the round of questions by
recognizing myself for five minutes.
A question to all of you: is there one-size-fits-all policy
that can cover the entire Federal Government or do specific
agencies and disciplines require different approaches? I know
Mr. Shieber has already--I think it was Mr. Shieber or Mr.
Plutchak already dealt with that so let me hear from others and
we will hear from all you all real quick. One size fits all, is
that appropriate? Dr. Dylla?
Dr. Dylla. Chairman Broun, in an answer--simple answer, no.
If you look at all the scholarship, it is a very diverse array
of activities. And if you look at one of the things we have
focused on in our testimony and your comments, it is this open-
access model where the author pays the full costs of a
publisher providing its added value. That works very well for a
well funded field that has lots of federal funding. I think it
appears to work well for medicine. It probably works well for
some disciplines like physics and chemistry, parts of it. But
for mathematics and social sciences there is very little grant
structure out there. It would be very difficult for that
particular one size to fit all.
Chairman Broun. Mr. Maxwell?
Mr. Maxwell. There is one aspect of one-size-fits-all that
I think in fact is true across the fields and that is that
increased public access has substantial public benefit. And
that is why I would like to stress the notion of starting with
that and if necessary tweaking that. As to Fred's comment,
the--what you see in the publishing world are lots of different
models and the models have been changing. We are seeing lots of
proprietary journals having--becoming hybrids, having some part
of open access. You see a remarkable growth of open-access
journals, 7,500 over the last decade.
If the--if we start with the notion of increasing public
access and that that is a benefit and then if you want to
ratchet back and say this might not work in this particular
environment, one way of doing it--and we didn't study this in
the report but one way of thinking about it is to say we will
have a 6-month embargo across all federal funding but we will
wait for a year and each of the departments can have a
proceeding in that year that would say with respect to our
granting, here is what would be the optimum solution. Here is
what fits us. But without a kind of pressure from legislation,
this can go on and on and on when the benefits that we lose
every day from reduced public access are meaningful. They are
meaningful for the progress of science, they are meaningful for
innovation, they are meaningful for the benefits for the
society.
Chairman Broun. Dr. Taylor?
Dr. Taylor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With all due respect,
I might question the premise of the question. I don't think
mandates are required at all. So whether a one-size-fits-all
mandate is okay or not is perhaps not the right question. So,
for example, as to these journals made freely available by our
choice 12 months after publication, we have decided in our
little niche in our business structure that this is an okay way
to provide public access to the literature that we publish. We
have done that on our own without anybody telling us to do
that. And that is true for many other publishers in a number of
disciplines.
Chairman Broun. Anybody else? Mr. Shieber?
Mr. Shieber. I was just going to mention in terms--one of
the main areas in which people object to a one-size-fits-all
solution is in the area of the length of embargos. And it may
well be that different fields would like different embargo
lengths, but the issue is not that. The issue is what is the
embargo length that allows the maximum access while maintaining
viability of the publishing system overall? As far as we know,
there is no evidence that--certainly NIH embargo length of 12
months is problematic and of all biomedical funders, NIH seems
to be an outlier in their embargo length, most requiring a 6-
month embargo. So I think the burden of proof would be on
finding evidence that a longer embargo would be needed rather
than starting with a long embargo and shortening.
Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Shieber.
Mr. Plutchak, you want to----
Mr. Plutchak. I think I have answered that in my testimony.
Chairman Broun. Okay. I thought you did.
And my time is expired. I now recognize Mr. Tonko for five
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Plutchak rightly said that the question we ought to be
asking is how do we take advantage of digital technologies to
develop a robust and innovative scientific communication
infrastructure that would then fully take advantage of the
potential of our 21st century digital technologies. Much of the
innovation in publishing and access is happening organically as
we move further into the digital age. Some of this was pushed a
little faster by the 2008 NIH policy and then the 2010 COMPETES
language, but all of these efforts and the tone of the debate
have come a long way since FRPAA was first introduced in 2006.
So let me ask each of our panelists the following: are
there downsides to giving markets and technology time to work
their magic, especially in the light of the immense amount of
activity already going on and the COMPETES-driven agency
efforts? Mr. Plutchak, maybe we will start with you, please?
Mr. Plutchak. Yeah, there is a downside in the sense that I
think Mr. Maxwell has addressed, the benefits of making things
open quickly, but I always look at these things as a need to
balance upsides and downsides. Everything has downsides. And my
concern is that by focusing so much on the upside of making
openness achievable quickly, we don't pay enough attention to
the factors of interoperability, of preservation, the other
things that are managed that have to be balanced. And I think
overall, those--the downside of potential delay is worth taking
that time to make sure that we are developing policies that are
really effective for the long-term.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Shieber?
Mr. Shieber. Yes, I am definitely a proponent of letting
markets work their magic and for that reason I think it
behooves us to make sure that the scholarly communication
mechanism that we have is based on a well functioning market.
Unfortunately, the reader-side payment, the subscription
revenue model has economic properties that lead to market
dysfunction and they are very clearly displayed. One nice thing
about the writer-side or author-side payment model, publication
fee revenue model, is that it doesn't have those same market
dysfunctions. So ideally, we would be moving in the direction
of open-access journals based on author-side fees.
And to say a word about why that is, from the point of view
of a reader, two journals are complements of each other. You
would like both. You want access to both. In fact, access to
one provides motivation to get access to the other because they
cite each other. From the point of view of a writer, two
journals are substitutes and therefore compete with each other.
So you have a competitive market on the writer side, a
monopolistic market on the reader side. So we should be moving
towards the writer side in general, that is in the direction of
open-access journals.
Mr. Tonko. Okay. Thank you. Dr. Taylor?
Dr. Taylor. Thank you, Ranking Member Tonko. I think that,
as Scott said, there are downsides to everything and I would
agree with his assessment that in this instance the downside to
letting the organic growth with some impaling inputs proceed is
the right way forward. I think there is also an important
distinction between access for the public and access for
scholarships. So we can measure access. And as Mr. Maxwell
said, the NIH policy is allowing a lot more people to access
the content that is available through PubMed Central. But the
evidence that I am aware of that scholars are using that
content anymore than they were already using journal content
available through other means is just not there in terms of
citations to the articles that are made available. So I don't
think that is not much in the way of downside and I think we
should wait.
Mr. Tonko. Okay, thank you. And Mr. Maxwell?
Mr. Maxwell. Yes, thanks for the opportunity. Just three
points--one is there are very good economic indicators and
research showing that access does in fact lead to more people
reading them, more diverse forms of experimentation, more
innovation. And from the MIT economists who do this study, the
answer is clear not only in terms of other people's citations
but faster commercialization of the research.
The second point is that I do believe in markets, and the
change in the markets as a result of the NIH policy have meant
a growth of companies that are taking the PubMed Central
information and turning it into useful products that were not
available before for scholars, not for the general public. So
it goes beyond not only benefits to the general public but the
benefits of the scholars.
The third part is if you start from the premise as I do
that the taxpayer funded this research and we want to get as
much return from this research as we can, I would say you make
this available by legislation and you let markets work as they
are working now and as people are changing their models to
adjust for that. But they--it is--the debate is not about
this--the health or wellness of the proprietary publishing
industry; it is about how to get the dissemination of
government-funded research out to as many people so we can get
as much innovation and as much commercialization as we can do
it.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And Dr. Dylla I will get to you in
the next round.
Chairman Broun. The gentleman's time has expired. I am
sorry about that, Mr. Tonko.
Ms. Lofgren, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I
think this is an important hearing.
I was mentioning that I was--I am a member of the Judiciary
Committee and Intellectual Property Subcommittee and we have
had a review of this subject there from the copyright point of
view, and essentially really this is a copyright exception if
you want to get down to what we are talking about. And
copyrights are a one-size-fits-all. I mean right now you get
the life of the author plus 70 years and you lock it down and
there it is. And the question is do we want to make an
exception for federally funded research in the interest of
science.
And full disclosure, I am a cosponsor of the Federal
Research Public Access Act because I think if you take--if you
really dig down into it, you have to reach the conclusion that
that is going to serve us better.
You know, when we have disruptive technologies, incumbents
who have done--I am not critical; I mean they have played an
important role but the world changes and it is difficult to
change. And I think about there is for-profits that are making,
you know--one company that does the outsourcing of journal
production for smaller societies earned $3.3 billion last year.
I mean that is something they don't want to give up. I
understand that. The small societies, this is an important
source of revenue for them, I mean, because they are paid fees
and it is important I think to America that those societies
persist. So the question is how can that happen if this model
changes, which inevitably it will?
And finally, I guess it is to the peer-review process and
how can we make sure that there is value added in the
publication? And I guess that is the question I have for the
witnesses. It is worth pointing out that the bill that Mr.
Doyle has introduced permits peer review journals to have some
exceptions and the like while allowing the author to not be
constrained as is often the case when an author gives up their
rights to the publisher.
And the question is as the NIH has moved forward in this
area is I haven't seen any evidence that there has been an
adverse impact. And I am wondering if anybody can cite data to
me that delineates the adverse impact from the policy.
Dr. Taylor. Thank you. I will start there in the middle of
your questioning, Representative Lofgren, when you mentioned
that small professional societies are vital to the fabric of
the country and scholarship here. As a Director of one of those
societies, I couldn't agree more.
As to how to help ASPB and other smaller societies----
Ms. Lofgren. Actually, the question I had was about data
damaged from the NIH policy. Do you have any data on that?
Dr. Taylor. The only data I have--and it would not
necessarily imply damage--but is--has to do with the usage of
our journal articles over time, so the fact that most of the
usage is happening after the first six months.
Ms. Lofgren. I don't have a lot of--Mr. Maxwell, maybe you
have data.
Mr. Maxwell. Well, the only data that we found in the
public record were assertions by the publishers that there was
damage and a citation of a study that took place before the
policy went into effect that said librarians might cancel. We
looked very hard for the evidence and we asked people about it.
What I might suggest is that the people--that you look at the
financial analysts who looked at this science and technology
publishing sector and those folks say, one, that the publishers
come to them and say this is not a real big deal for us. And
they say that their rate of profit growth after the recession
is likely to come back up to six and seven percent as opposed
to the four percent profit growth during the recession. We
don't see economic damage and we don't see the publishers
telling the analysts who advise investors that this is a
problem.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, Elsevier had a 37 percent profit margin.
Mr. Maxwell. They are higher in general than most
businesses because they have per article a monopoly. If you
want this article, you have to get it from Elsevier unless you
are willing to wait for 6 months or 12 months or whatever. And
people who need it, in particular the private sector people who
would build on this don't want to wait.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I just--my time is just about up but I
would note I haven't heard anybody cite data, and since this is
the Science Committee, we are data-driven. But the loss cannot
be calculated because it is what didn't get invented; it is
what didn't get discovered because of the lack of information.
That can never be calculated.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Broun. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren.
We will go to our second round of questions now, and
Chairman recognizes himself for five minutes.
Mr. Dylla's testimony notes the projects at DOE and NSF
related to public access. Would everyone please comment on
projects such as these, whether they are a model for other
agencies to follow and whether they provide any guidance on how
Congress should address public access? The whole panel, we will
start out with Mr.--Dr. Dylla. Go ahead, sir.
Dr. Dylla. The previous question addressed the proper role
of government in the marketplace and what has been put in place
with the collaborations dictated by the--Section 103 of the
COMPETES Act I feel is working out very nicely with two
agencies that I have spent 35 years working with--the
Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation.
I give you one cogent example of about a half-dozen pilot
projects that we have been working on since the COMPETES Act
was passed. A very simple question that one of you might ask a
program manager from the National Science Foundation or the
Department of Energy is, please, Mr. Program Manager, can you
tell me how many scholarly publications resulted from your
funding last year? And that is a very difficult thing to answer
because it turns out an author puts that required information
that the underlying research was funded by one of those
agencies in an arbitrary place in the journal. It might be in
the acknowledgement; it might be in a footnote. It is buried.
So for the agency to dig out that information by itself
requires quite a bit of data mining.
A consortium of publishers called CrossRef, which includes
many libraries and research institutions, has a funded project
now that includes those two funding agencies that allow any of
the 11 funding agencies to identify the articles that result
from their funding with the Social Security number that my
colleague, Crispin Taylor, mentioned, the Digital Object
Identifier number. So a random member of the public could come
to the NSF website and find the author, the institution, and
the title of the articles by year, and when they see that DOI
number, they would be linked to the version of record on the
publisher's site. And if they don't happen to have a
subscription, there are 40 publishers within our consortium
that are--have been piloting for the last year a modest cost
article rental model. We have been doing it for about a year
and a half at the American Institute of Physics. Eight million
people a year come to our website. They are mainly researchers.
Three thousand people came which we assume were random members
of the public to take advantage of this service.
But that is just one example of the partnerships and pilot
projects that have been put in place as a result of the
COMPETES Act.
Chairman Broun. Mr. Shieber?
Mr. Shieber. Yes. I wanted to use Dr. Dylla's example, talk
a little bit about that. He talked about a project to allow
funders to figure out what--how many papers were being
acknowledged as a project I think with NSF now. And first of
all, of course, this is not a project to increase access to the
articles but it does provide useful information. But it also
gives us the opportunity to look at a phenomenon I think is
important, which is how openness often trumps other kinds of
functionalities.
For the open-access literature, of course, you can imagine
automatic computer analysis of the open articles to data mine
for exactly this information. In fact, a computer science
colleague of mine at Penn State has actually implemented such a
system only available for the open-access literature that
automatically data mines the acknowledgements of articles and
anybody can search--you can search for an NSF grant number and
see all the articles that at least that are openly available
for which the data mining is possible that acknowledge the
funder. So these kind of projects are wonderful and necessary
to the extent that they allow this kind of functionality for
the closed literature, but of course, they would be redundant
if the literature were just open in the first place.
Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Shieber. My time is about
expired. And by the way, if any of you all--we are going to
give you some written questions and any of the questions that
you are asked if anybody wants to weigh in and give us an
answer, we would appreciate that.
I now recognize Mr. Tonko for five minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Dylla, why don't we go back to the earlier question
that unfortunately you didn't have a chance to answer? And that
was about the downsides to giving markets and technology time
to work their magic. Do you cite any downsides?
Dr. Dylla. Post the Scholarly Publishing Roundtable and
many of its recommendations showing up in the Section 103 of
COMPETES, I think most of the downsides have been minimized
because you have all cohorts working together, government as
the funder of scientific research, the scientists and
librarians and publishers working together on these issues as
the COMPETES Act proposed. So as you mentioned in your opening
statement, Representative Tonko, this has only been in place
for about a year and we should let this play out and it is
playing out. It won't solve all the problems as quickly as
everyone wants those problems solved, but I think it is playing
out very nicely.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And a question to perhaps you and Dr. Taylor, grant awards
are peer-reviewed before the research is done, and when the
research is finished the only peer review the results receive
is at the stage of submission for publication. And with our two
Ph.D. scientists on the panel, I wonder if you can explain why
peer review is important to the progress of science, and how
emerging publishing trends may be changing that peer-review
process? And by the way, any of you can respond to this but I
thought perhaps our two scientists might want to. Dr. Taylor?
Dr. Taylor. Thank you very much, Ranking Member Tonko.
So I think peer review is important for a whole bunch of
different reasons at the level of journal publication. Most
importantly, the function of peer review is to assess the
validity of the conclusions that the author of the article is
drawing from his or her research work. So I think that is the
fundamental level. And that toggle is really important because
without that stamp of validity, it is impossible to accept the
statements as valid and true.
The more subtle parts of peer review have to do with things
like novelty and impact, which are--novelty is not--is easy to
quantify but impact is perhaps a little bit qualitative. And
this has to do with author choice and their assessment of the
novelty and impact of their journal articles in terms of where
in the hierarchy of journals they choose to submit their work
in the first place. So in addition to providing a basic level
of this is good work, this is sound work, peer review is also
sort of a ranking system in terms of the community--the
scientific community's assessment of the impact of our work.
Mr. Tonko. And with any of the publishing trends, is there
anything that may change that peer review?
Dr. Taylor. That is a good question. It is already
changing. A very prominent publication called PLoS ONE that is
relatively new has a form of peer review that focuses on the
first part of what I said--this is sound work--but is less
interested in the second part--this is particularly impactful
or novel work. And it is a model that is working very well for
PLoS ONE and that a number of other publishers are attempting
to replicate.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Dr. Dylla?
Dr. Dylla. I think everyone on the witness stand here would
agree that the most fundamental value that the publishing
enterprise brings to science is this peer-review process. And
it is often said, well, publishers don't pay the peer
reviewers. As an academic, we do this--we feel this is the most
important part of our service to the Academy. We write
articles, we expect them to be reviewed by our peers, we become
peer reviewers for our colleagues.
But I will give you an example from the American Institute
of Physics. We publish 15,000 physics articles every year in
five journals. We have to manage the peer-review process for
about 50,000 reviewers. That involves paying about 130 Ph.D.
scientists all over the world. We pay down their academic time
so they can help us manage this. So this is not a cost-free
process. Often, when the argument goes to let's just put it up
the web and have it crowd-sourced, I remind you the difference
between a restaurant you--a restaurant review you might get
from one of these crowd-sourced reviews and one that you get
from Michelin when an expert spends five different visits. It
is not quite the perfect analogy but it works somewhat.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Broun. The gentleman's time is expired. Thank you,
Mr. Tonko.
Now, I recognize Ms. Lofgren for five minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you very much. You know, as I am
listening here, you know, I am thinking that really the
journals have--they served a function as gatekeepers, and I
don't mean that necessarily in a negative sense. I mean there
is a pro and con. You know, some say there is good research
that never got out because of it and others, you know, you kept
out flimflam and there is probably truth in both assertions.
But it is a model that I think ultimately is unsustainable in
the current environment. I mean you have got--the scientists
are not paid anything. The peer reviewers are not paid
anything. And I grant you that I am sure it does cost to manage
a large number of the peer reviewers, so I am not discounting
that and I see that as an identified need to address, because
whether Mr. Doyle's bill passes or not, the current model is
going to fall apart. Because there is no reason why a for-
profit company should make $3 billion when the scientists
aren't paid and the peer reviewers aren't paid and there is a
possibility to structure this in a completely different way.
And so the question I have is whether or not Congress does
something or whether we just let this morph. It is going to
change. And how do we identify and protect the things that are
valuable to protect, which is the need for peer review--that is
not going to be a barrier to publication but certainly of value
to the scientific community--and a further need which is to
support the scientific societies, especially the smaller ones
that get some revenue from the current system and will not be
able to do that. When the Internet and connectivity blows them
away, how do we preserve those good societies that give value?
And instead of--you know, I have seen this over in the
Judiciary Committee where content holders cling to old business
models and it is ultimately a failing effort, and it would be
smart to think about how do we preserve the good things? So if
people have comments on that.
Mr. Plutchak. It is a great question and I think it really
is the critical question. A couple of points to make. In regard
to the cost issue and publishers, it is important to recognize
that Elsevier, although they get all of our attention--and
certainly as a librarian I share the frustration of my
colleagues--they only control about 20 percent of the journal
publishing. Most publishers don't come anywhere near these 37
percent profit margins. And as much as I would like to see a
system in which we do not have a single company having that
kind of control at those sorts of margins, I think we have to
recognize that most publishers don't come close to that.
Look at the Public Library of Science, which is considered
to be--their flagship journals are absolutely as high-quality
as any. They charge around a little less than $3,000 a piece to
publish an article. They recognize that there is that cost. So
we have to be a little bit careful about that argument about
how much--what is done for free and what is not. But then I
think moving forward towards how we pull this together, I don't
think it is a question of do we legislate something now or do
we just let it go? I think we have to work through the process
that brings these stakeholders together.
Ms. Lofgren. Or not. I mean the Federal Government has paid
for this research and we have an interest and the taxpayers
have an interest in getting that information out as swiftly as
possible if there is no damage done.
Mr. Maxwell, you were looking eager to add in.
Mr. Maxwell. Well, the only thing I would probably differ
with my colleague on the panel about the profitability of the
sector. It is not only Elsevier that has had higher-than-normal
returns of capital but a number of publishers. In fact, the
largest publishers have had a higher return of capital and a
long-term ability to raise their subscription rates over the
last 30 years.

I do think that Dr. Taylor's point which he made earlier
about the success of the PLoS model, which is one in which the
author pays and which there is already a kind of working peer-
review system for--that produces the quality that he had
mentioned means that you have the kind of market innovation
that you are seeking. There are ways of doing this, of ensuring
quality consistent with open access and we should be
encouraging that.
I don't think that we should believe that change will occur
as quickly as I think it should absent the presence of
legislation and----
Ms. Lofgren. If I may, my time is running out. I agree
which is why I am a cosponsor of the bill, but I think even if
the bill does not pass, this model is dead. It is just a
question of how long the patient is going to be on life
support.
I yield back.
Chairman Broun. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren.
We will go to our third and final round of questions so I
will yield myself five minutes.
To the panel, PubMed Central blocks mass downloading for a
variety of reasons, one of which is general piracy from
countries such as China. How serious is this issue and are
there examples of mass downloading attempts at other online
journals and archives?
Second question, should limitations be placed on access to
prevent misuse? How should that be decided and who should
decide it? And thirdly, should research funded by U.S.
taxpayers be made publicly available to non-U.S. taxpayers?
Could this even be prevented? The panel? Dr. Taylor?
Dr. Taylor. I think I can say a few words about the first
and the third question. It is very hard for us to assess
whether and if it is happening the extent of damage from mass
downloading from sites like PubMed Central because we get very
little usage data from PubMed Central. We don't know who
specifically is using our content on the PubMed Central site,
so we can't speak to downloads--mass downloads; we can't even
assess whether it is library users who would be potential
subscribers for the Society that are using the content. So I
can't answer that question.
In terms of making publicly--making content produced
following research funded by the U.S. taxpayer available
universally, you know, for a society like ASPB, that is okay.
And one of the problems that I have with bills like FRPAA is
they are focused only on the content that is produced from
research funded by the U.S. taxpayer. As a professional society
with members around the world publishing papers from authors
around the world, if we want to disseminate that content, we
want to disseminate it to everyone, not only with a narrow
focus on the United States or on research funded by the U.S.
taxpayer.
Chairman Broun. Dr. Dylla?
Dr. Dylla. Let me address the download problem. Let me
start by saying the scholarly publishing industry is an
industry that embraced the Internet in its early days. We are
not a Johnny-come-lately to this Internet storm. Our journals
at the American Institute of Physics and our sister societies
went on--started going online in 1994, about two years after
the web was invented by a group of physicists I remind you. And
what happened----
Chairman Broun. Not by Al Gore?
Dr. Dylla. No, it was not. When we made the print-to-online
transition, if you take a typical university in the area here
like the University of Maryland, research university--our
offices are on their campus--we, in the print days, probably
had 10 subscriptions coming into the campus, the main library
and sister libraries, we went online. There were suddenly all
40,000 people who had a Maryland.edu address could get that
content. And to address inappropriate use we would have circuit
breakers on how many downloads at a particular email address.
And if you suddenly saw 10,000 downloads, that was somebody
that was doing no good.
And so the industry as itself--and I am a member of the
Executive Committee of two of our trade associations for
scholarly publishers that include a broad representation of
nonprofits and profits--we carefully monitor this but it is--
you can only pick and choose an occasional flagrant. And they--
it is like piracy in other types of intellectual property.
Chairman Broun. Okay. Mr. Shieber?
Mr. Shieber. Yeah, I did want to question perhaps a
presumption in part of your question which is that mass
downloading is somehow inherently bad. There are, of course,
good reasons to allow mass downloading where rights to do so
are available. And I think the prohibitions against PubMed
Central mass downloading have to do with the fact that they
don't have the rights to allow mass downloading, arbitrary use
of the data. They just have rights to allow researchers to
download individual articles. For the subset that they do have
rights, the so-called open access subset of PubMed Central,
they do allow mass downloading. And in fact, Harvard
participates in that and downloads those articles en masse.
So--and the various uses that can be made including text mining
of that data. So to the extent that there were broad rights to
allow that more generally, mass downloading would be a useful
thing to be able to do.
Chairman Broun. Well, we are just trying to prevent folks
who are up to no good from mass downloading and make it harder
to be able to do so that is questioned.
My time has expired. I now recognize Mr. Tonko for five
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This public policy area is a bit new to me so I am trying
to get a better understanding of the interpretation of the NIH
policy. Perhaps across the panel if you could address the
adopting of NIH as a policy by agencies, all agencies. Is that
a good thing? Is it a functional policy or is there
modification that would have to be made? I just would like to
hear your thoughts about imposing that or adopting it at all
agencies. Sure, Dr. Dylla.
Dr. Dylla. Going back to the discussion on the floor
already about one size doesn't fit all, there are fields where
the 6-month proposed embargo I feel would be very
inappropriate, even for the fields that the American Institute
of Physics represents. The journals that we publish for the
physics community and one of our sister sites, the American
Physical Society, has equal number of journals. If you look at
how those are distributed just here in the United States, 40
percent of our subscription income comes from small colleges
and universities that are not research universities.
So if we were to go to a different business model where
that content would have to be given away in 6 months, I remind
you what the unit of time that a librarian works with. It is
one subscription year. At these small colleges and
universities, it is the librarian who has intense budget
pressures might say, well, we don't want to have those
subscriptions anymore. And I think we would be looking at a
sizeable disruption of our source of income, which is used to
promote physics for the general welfare. We do a lot of
outreach in media and student education activities with those
funds. We would find it very disruptive to put our entire
business model into that one type.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Maxwell, we will go across the table here.
Mr. Maxwell. As I said earlier, I think that the thing that
is common across every field is that there would be benefits to
the public if materials were made available. And we should
start there because that is the undisputable fact across the
panel. More access means more research means more
commercialization and quicker commercialization and more
economic growth. If there is to be a differentiation--because
the NIH policy is I think by most lights a very great success--
if we take that as a model and say perhaps that the agency
could have a policy process that says within a year you decide
whether for your community this works, that at least would be
able to move this process and get the benefits more quickly
available. And then let people try to see whether there is
something unique about that. But it is this lost innovation
that bothers me when--which would be if we kind of dribble out
the policy while people protect their margins.
Mr. Tonko. All right, thank you. Dr. Taylor?
Dr. Taylor. Thank you, Ranking Member Tonko.
I would like to just remind everybody that the NIH policy
came into effect as a few sentences in an appropriations bill,
arguably without due consideration in a committee like this
one. That being said, I think there are two parts to the
policy. One is the imposition of an embargo period. The second
is a requirement that articles be deposited in a centrally
operated, government-run archive. I think, you know, we have
talked about embargos but with regard to the second aspect of
this, in this day and age such an archive is simply not
necessary. The information is there available on the Internet
and discoverable and usable without having to have it in one
place. So in that sense, the NIH is in my opinion wasting money
on PMC.
Increasingly, PMC is duplicating. It is looking an awful
lot like our platforms, our publishing platforms and it is
becoming increasingly competitive with the publishers directly,
which I think is a problem, too.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. We have about a minute left so if I
could have Mr. Shieber and Mr. Plutchak split that time, I
would love to hear your comment.
Mr. Shieber. I won't repeat other comments that have been
made but I will make one mention about the issue of whether
there should be a central repository or some other mechanism.
To the extent that the mechanism in whatever bill that one
imagines doesn't mandate a central repository, that is fine so
long as the articles can then be mined and mirrored in
government-run repositories and more broadly than that. But
if--but I would avoid a prohibition against doing the kind of--
making the kind of uses that do allow for preservation and
government repositories and the like.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Mr. Plutchak?
Mr. Plutchak. Just very quickly, the two basic limitations
that I see with extending the NIH policy we have alluded to
this central repository which I think is unnecessary and a lack
of focus on the version of record. I think that needs to be
stressed in any policy.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Chairman Broun. The gentleman's time is expired.
I now recognize Ms. Lofgren for five minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Yes, I am wondering if you could tell me on
behalf of the American society for the plants and the physics
institute, what percentage of the revenue for your institute,
for your society comes from publishing and the publishing--this
whole business?
Dr. Taylor. Thank you very much for the question,
Representative Lofgren. For ASPB it is roughly 80 percent of
our revenues come from publishing.
Ms. Lofgren. Okay. How about physics?
Dr. Dylla. It is more than 90 percent. We don't have
members; we just have Member Societies so a typical scientific
society will have income from member dues and from running
meetings. All of our income virtually comes from publishing.
Ms. Lofgren. Okay. So that is, I mean, a major challenge in
terms of if we want to preserve a multiplicity of societies as
this model changes, whether quickly through legislation or
naturally because of the disruptive technologies, we have got
to come up with some strategies to support these scientific
societies that are workable. And I would hope--this is not the
subject of this hearing, but I think it would be a good subject
for a hearing. How are we going to be able to do that?
I would like to--let me just ask a question--and I see Mr.
Maxwell and Dr. Taylor want to address the first subject, but
Dr. Taylor said something I thought was very interesting, which
is the exemption being proposed is limited to taxpayer funded
and why that would be. And one of the options that we have is
to remove copyright protection from publishers who do not
compensate--and have the copyright ownership remain only with
the author him or herself. And that would be true worldwide
because anything published in the United States, no matter who
the ethnicity or origin of the author, is subject to copyright
law within the United States. I am wondering--that would be
even more disruptive than Mr. Doyle's bill but would that
actually serve--Mr. Maxwell, you are nodding. I don't know if
that is what Dr. Taylor had in mind but that is the logical
extension of his comments. How would that work at a Harvard?
How would that work, Mr. Maxwell?
Mr. Maxwell. Well, I think that would throw all the cards
up in the air. I am not advocating that and the report didn't
advocate that. What I did want to--the point that I did want to
make about the societies is that the revenue streams that are
generated by--for the societies through the publishing isn't
necessarily going to go away. The PLoS model is that the author
pays. And so there is a revenue stream that keeps coming. It is
not saying you are deprived ultimately of the revenue; you are
deprived of a particular business model, which is a
subscription-based business model. And more and more of the
subscription-based models are becoming hybrids in which they
are partially author-paid.
Ms. Lofgren. If I may, I question whether that can survive
as a model either. I mean we are moving from--away from a
scarcity-based system, and why would an author pay a gatekeeper
when you can develop through universities or others completely
other systems that meet the scientific requirements just as
well?
Dr. Taylor. Because the scholarly publishers are providing
the services of peer review, which we talked about earlier and
ranking, which are--the peer review is fundamentally important
for the reasons we have discussed. The ranking allows other
scholars to assess that particular piece of research in the
context of the larger body.
Ms. Lofgren. Mr. Shieber?
Mr. Shieber. Yeah, Representative Lofgren, I think you are
exactly right on focusing on where the scarcity is and you are
right that the technology changes that balance and the scarcity
of access is now completely artificial. But there is still--as
Dr. Taylor says, there is still an item of scarcity and that is
the effort that goes into--that is involved in the peer-review
process that ends up being uncompensated, but the management of
the peer-review process is compensated to the publishers, the
copyediting, typesetting, and imprimatur of the journal. All of
those kinds of things are.
Now, those are all costs--real costs and important--provide
important services. They scale with the number of submissions
and articles, not with the amount of access. And that is why a
revenue model that also is based on that side of the equation
makes a lot of sense, in addition to the fact that it is not
based on a monopolistic product----
Ms. Lofgren. Um-hum.
Mr. Shieber. --and the fact that it doesn't embed a moral
hazard and all kinds of other economic advantages. So I don't--
I am not sure I agree with your claim about the
unsustainability of the whole system. I think----
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I always like to throw disruptive
statements out there in Christensen form. But I think your
comment is a very thoughtful one and actually delineates the
very useful role played by the societies and the journals, and
the potential way for that to be sustained economically.
Mr. Shieber. Can I mention one other thing? It highlights
potentially extraordinarily important role for government,
which is to--just as government funding agencies and
universities have been subsidizing on the reader side by buying
subscriptions, government funding agencies and universities
should be willing to subsidize on the writer side for these
kind of author-side payment models to put them at a level
playing field. In fact, Harvard has done just that in
cooperation with a small set of other universities by
committing to paying reasonable open-access publication fees.
Ms. Lofgren. I see my time has expired. I would just like
to say, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that you have held this
hearing because although the Judiciary Committee with
jurisdiction over copyright has looked at this, there is no way
that we would ever have gotten into this discussion which is
how to organize the funding of science so that this is
preserved. So that is very helpful. Thank you very much.
Chairman Broun. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren. In fact, I have a
very strong opinion about property rights, including
intellectual property. And I thank you and all the members for
their questions.
And I thank all of you all, the Members of the panel, for
you all's valuable testimony. If you don't know southern, y'all
means all of you all. But Members may have additional
questions, and actually, I would like to submit some of our
oral questions to all of you all so that if you want to add
something if somebody did not have a chance to speak, I would
appreciate you all's expeditious answer in writing to those
questions. Members can submit questions for written answer. The
record will remain open for two weeks for additional comments
from Members. The witnesses are excused and the hearing is now
adjourned. Thank you all.
[Whereupon, at 11:26 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. H. Frederick Dylla

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. Elliot Maxwell

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Crispin Taylor

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. Stuart Shieber

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. Scott Plutchak

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Zoe Lofgren

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Response to Federal Register Notice Request for Information submitted
by Dr. H. Frederick Dylla

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Response to Federal Register Notice Request for Information submitted
by Dr. Crispin Taylor

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

ALPSP Response to OSTP Request for Information

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


