- FOSTERING QUALITY SCIENCE AT EPA: THE NEED FOR COMMON SENSE REFORM

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FOSTERING QUALITY SCIENCE AT EPA:
THE NEED FOR COMMON SENSE REFORM

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
ENVIRONMENT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-52

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

72-166PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
Tennessee                        FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Energy and Environment

HON. ANDY HARRIS, Maryland, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               ZOE LOFGREN, California
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

November 17, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Andy Harris, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    11
Written Statement............................................    12

Statement by Representative Paul Tonko, Subcommittee on Energy
and Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
U.S. House of Representatives..................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15

Witnesses:

DR. Paul Anastas, Assistant Administrator, Office Of Research And
Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    19

Mr. Arthur Elkins, Jr., Inspector General, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency
Oral Statement...............................................    22
Written Statement............................................    24

Mr. David Trimble, Director, Natural Resources And Environment,
U.S. Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    30
Written Statement............................................    33

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

DR. Paul Anastas, Assistant Administrator, Office Of Research And
Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency..............    58

Mr. Arthur Elkins, Jr., Inspector General, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency..............................................    74

Mr. David Trimble, Director, Natural Resources And Environment,
U.S. Government Accountability Office..........................    82

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Submitted Statement for the Record by Mr. M. Granger Morgan,
Head, Department of Engineering and Public Policy University
and Lord Chair Professor of Engineering, Carnegie Mellon
University.....................................................    87

FOSTERING QUALITY SCIENCE AT EPA:
THE NEED FOR COMMON SENSE REFORM

----------

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:52 p.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy
Harris [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. The Subcommittee on Energy and Environment
will come to order. Good afternoon. Welcome to today's hearing
entitled, ``Fostering Quality Science at EPA: The Need for
Common Sense Reform.'' In front of you are packets containing
the written testimony, biographies, and truth in testimony
disclosures for today's witness panel.
I now recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement.
First of all, I want to thank you for your patience as we
went through our first series of votes, and I want to welcome
everyone to this afternoon's hearing on ``Fostering Quality
Science at EPA.'' I would like to note my appreciation at the
outset to Dr. Anastas for moving his schedule around in order
to be with us today, but you know, I was a little disappointed
that we didn't get your testimony until late last night, so I
haven't had the chance to review it, but I look forward to
hearing it in person. I trust that you will make sure to try to
meet the committee deadlines, a little more leeway time there,
in the future.
In the last 9 months this committee has held seven
different hearings on issues related to EPA science and
process. In each of these hearings we have questioned the
processes by which the agency ensures the development and
dissemination of quality science and raised concerns about EPA
moving forward on specific regulations before the science is
available to inform those decisions. In today's hearing we are
discussing the overall science enterprise and its function
within EPA.
Research and development at EPA have been authorized by a
number of environmental laws, but the Environmental Research
Development and Demonstration Authorization Act or ERDDA is the
only statute dedicated solely to science activities in the
agency. This law, first enacted in 1976, was reauthorized
annually through fiscal year 1981, providing authorization
levels to address different environmental issues.
Additionally, ERDDA established the Office of Research and
Development, required five-year R&D plans, and created EPA
Science Advisory Board. However, despite numerous efforts in
both the House and Senate, no reauthorization has occurred in
30 years.
EPA is a unique agency in that it performs the functions of
the scientists, the policymaker, the regulator, and the
enforcer. Since it has been 40 years since the creation of the
agency and 30 years since science activities were last
authorized, it is both appropriate and necessary for Congress
to evaluate the effectiveness of the EPA in fulfilling all of
those roles.
In the current economic climate and given the EPA's breadth
of jurisdiction over the economy, the agency must be vigilant
in ensuring that it only promulgates regulations that are
necessary and appropriate to protect public health and welfare.
Quality science is an essential requirement in creating these
regulations, yet time and again EPA's scientific justification
for many of its rules and regulations have been questioned
based on concerns with data quality, peer review, lack of
transparency, and other process problems.
It has gotten to the point where the perception is that EPA
may have a pension for pursuing outcome-based science in order
to validate its regulatory agenda. This has led to a crisis of
confidence that undermines the ability of the public to trust
what EPA says, an untenable situation for an agency with
sweeping authority over the Nation's economic activity.
So what can be done to fix this dilemma? Is it a question
of greater oversight, or are there fundamental changes within
the organization of EPA that are needed to address these
problems? There have been reports, evaluations, and studies
over the years that have identified the specific problems
within the EPA science enterprise.
Consequently, these reports have contained recommendations
to the agency on how to alleviate these problems.
Unfortunately, many of these recommendations have not been
followed and all too often Congress has been absent from these
reform efforts.
As this committee undertakes the process to reauthorize
ERDDA, I invite any interested stakeholders to provide
recommendations and suggestions. Similarly, I welcome the
suggestions of my colleagues across the aisle and hope that
they will view this as an opportunity to collaborate on much-
needed reforms.
Science activities at EPA comprise only a fraction of the
agency's overall budget, but their importance and impact on
jobs in the economy are enormous. Good regulations must be
based on good science, and good science requires transparency,
quality data, and confirmation of processes and results through
peer review.
In other words, it requires an adherence to the scientific
method and longstanding principles governing the incorporation
and use of scientific and technical information to regulatory
decision making.
Again, I want to thank the witnesses for appearing before
the Subcommittee today. Again, I apologize for the delay, and I
look forward to a constructive discussion.
I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harris follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Andy Harris
I want to welcome everyone to this afternoon's hearing on Fostering
Quality Science at EPA: The Need for Common Sense Reform. I would like
to note my appreciation at the outset to Dr. Anastas for moving his
schedule around in order to be with us today, however, I am
disappointed that you did not get your testimony to us until 6:00 pm
last night. I trust that you make sure to meet Committee deadlines in
the future.
In the last nine months, this Committee has held seven different
hearings on issues related to EPA science and process. In each of these
hearings, we have questioned the processes by which the Agency ensures
the development and dissemination of quality science and raised
concerns about EPA moving forward on specific regulations before the
science is available to inform those decisions. In today's hearing, we
are discussing the overall science enterprise and its function within
EPA.
Research and development in EPA have been authorized by a number of
environmental laws, but the Environmental Research, Development and
Demonstration Authorization Act, or ERDDAA (ERDDA) is the only statute
dedicated solely to science activities in the agency. This law, first
enacted in 1976, was reauthorized annually through fiscal year 1981
providing authorization levels to address different environmental
issues. Additionally, ERDDAA established the Office of Research and
Development, required 5-year R&D plans and created EPA's Science
Advisory Board. However, despite numerous efforts in both the House and
Senate, no reauthorization has occurred in 30 years.
EPA is a unique agency in that it performs the functions of the
scientist, the policy maker, the regulator, and the enforcer. Since it
has been forty years since the creation of the agency, and thirty years
since science activities were last authorized, it is appropriate and
necessary for Congress to evaluate the effectiveness of the EPA in
fulfilling all these roles.
In the current economic climate and given the EPA's breadth of
jurisdiction over the economy, the Agency must be vigilant ensuring
that it only promulgates regulations that are necessary and appropriate
to protect public health and welfare. Quality science is an essential
requirement in creating these regulations. Yet time and again, EPA's
scientific justification for many of its rules and regulations have
been questioned based on concerns with data quality, peer review, lack
of transparency and other process problems. It has gotten to the point
where the perception is that EPA has a penchant for pursuing outcome-
based science in order to validate its regulatory agenda. This has led
to a crisis of confidence that undermines the ability of the public to
trust anything EPA says, an untenable situation for an Agency with
sweeping authority over the nation's economic activity.
So what can be done to fix this dilemma? Is it a question of
greater oversight? Or are there fundamental changes within the
organization of EPA that are needed to address these problems? There
have been reports, evaluations, and studies over the years that have
identified the specific problems within the EPA science enterprise.
Consequently, these reports have contained recommendations to the
Agency on how to alleviate these problems. Unfortunately, many of these
recommendations have not been followed, and all too often Congress has
been absent from these reform efforts.
As this Committee undertakes the process to reauthorize ERDDAA, I
invite any interested stakeholders to provide recommendations and
suggestions. Similarly, I welcome the suggestions of my colleagues
across the aisle and hope that they will view this as an opportunity to
collaborate on much needed reforms.
Science activities at EPA comprise only a fraction of the agency's
overall budget, but their importance and impact on jobs and the economy
are enormous. Good regulations must be based on good science, and good
science requires transparency, quality data, and confirmation of
processes and results through peer review. In other words, it requires
an adherence to the scientific method and longstanding principles
governing the incorporation and use of scientific and technical
information to regulatory decision-making.
I want to thanks the witnesses for appearing before the
Subcommittee today and I look forward to a constructive discussion.

Chairman Harris. I now want to recognize Mr. Tonko for five
minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Ranking Member Miller
wanted to be here at the start of this hearing but had a
scheduling conflict and will join us later. I want to thank
Chairman Harris for holding a hearing to examine the ability of
EPA's research enterprise to meet the agency's mission to
protect public health and the environment.
Scientific research, knowledge, and technical information
are fundamental to EPA's mission and inform its standard
setting, regulatory, compliance, and enforcement functions. The
agency's scientific performance is particularly important as
complex environmental issues emerge and evolve, and it is
science, not partisan politics, which should guide their
resolution.
Unfortunately, controversy continues to surround many of
the agency's areas of responsibility. Let me be clear. There
may be some legitimate concerns related to EPA's research
enterprise, but EPA is not the demonic agency that our
Republican majority has made it out to be this Congress. This
hearing is the beginning of a real opportunity to become
informed about structural and substantive concerns related to
EPA's research activities. I hope that my Republican
counterparts are really interested in reform that will lead to
better research to enhance public health and protect our
environment.
I do not believe anyone would disagree that we should
always adhere to best practices, transparency, and indeed,
integrity in all of our work. That is why in 2008, the Ranking
Member of this Subcommittee, Mr. Miller, requested that GAO
take a look at the independent evaluations that have been done
over the past 20 years and that identified problems with EPA's
35 laboratories' operations and management.
In an atmosphere of constrained budgets it is imperative
that with EPA's increasing need to understand complex
environmental problems, they are positioned to formulate sound
environmental protection policies. These independent
evaluations have called for improved planning, coordination,
and leadership, as well as consolidation of laboratories. The
EPA operates some 35 laboratories to provide the scientific
foundation for its mission. When it was established in 1970,
EPA inherited 42 laboratories from programs in various federal
departments. EPA has since closed or consolidated some
laboratories and created new ones to support its core mission.
Of course, closing facilities always has an impact on the
surrounding community. That impact could, perhaps, be amplified
given the current state of the economy, and we must be mindful
of such outcomes. Despite this, it is still our responsibility
to explore all options for productive and effective cost
savings.
Independent evaluations of the GAO have highlighted the
need for the EPA to develop a coordinated planning process for
its scientific activities and improve agency-wide research
planning, among many other suggestions. It is important to note
that these issues are not new under the current Administration.
They span the activities and inactivity of several
Administrations. Don't be fooled by the rhetoric on the right
that the Obama Administration was the impetus of the concerns
expressed here. These concerns did not appear overnight or in
just the past three years. They will need to be corrected over
time, and any reorganization will need to be done in an
orderly, well thought out manner with much oversight and input.
In recent years, the IG has put forward many
recommendations to improve the ORD that appear to have been
embraced by the agency. Overall, the IG has found that the EPA
ORD peer review process adequately produces objective
scientific reviews. As we have said time and time again in this
committee, good policy and decisions begin with good science. I
am sure there is room for improvements, and I hope we can work
together to identify opportunities to make EPA more effective
in protecting our--the public and our environment.
Today we are presented with the perfect opportunity to show
American taxpayers that not every issue needs to be polarizing
or politicized. It is an opportunity for Congress to be
productive and objective. It is also an opportunity to put our
differences aside and have meaningful conversations and
exchanges of ideas. We need to build upon EPA's scientific
legacy and ensure that we continue to improve our shared
environment, including for future generations.
Chairman Harris, we look forward to working with you in the
months ahead. With that I conclude my opening remarks but would
ask, Mr. Chair, that before I yield back, I do have one further
point of business if you will allow me to continue.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]
Prepared Statement of Representative Paul Tonko
Mr. Miller wanted to be here at the start of this hearing but had a
scheduling conflict, and will join us later. I want to thank Chairman
Harris for holding a hearing to examine the ability of EPA's research
enterprise to meet the agency's mission to protect public health and
the environment. Scientific research, knowledge, and technical
information are fundamental to EPA's mission and inform its standard-
setting, regulatory, compliance, and enforcement functions. The
agency's scientific performance is particularly important as complex
environmental issues emerge and evolve. And it is science, not partisan
politics, which should guide their resolution. Unfortunately,
controversy continues to surround many of the agency's areas of
responsibility. Let me be clear, there may be some legitimate concerns
related to EPA's research enterprise, but EPA is not the demonic agency
that the Republican Majority has made it out to be this Congress.
This hearing is the beginning of a real opportunity to become
informed about structural and substantive concerns related to EPA's
research activities. I hope that my Republican counterparts are really
interested in reform that will lead to better research to enhance
public health and protect the environment.
I do not believe anyone would disagree that we should always adhere
to best practices, transparency, and integrity in all of our work. That
is why in 2008, the Ranking Member of this Subcommittee, Mr. Miller,
requested the GAO to take a look at the independent evaluations that
have been done over the past 20 years and that identified problems with
the EPA's 35 laboratories' operations and management. In an atmosphere
of constrained budgets, it is imperative that, with EPA's increasing
need to understand complex environmental problems,they are positioned
to formulate sound environmental protection policies.
These independent evaluations have called for improved planning,
coordination, and leadership, as well as consolidation of laboratories.
The EPA operates 35 laboratories to provide the scientific foundation
for its mission. When it was established in 1970, EPA inherited 42
laboratories from programs in various federal departments. EPA has
since closed or consolidated some laboratories and created new ones to
support its core mission. Of course, closing facilities always has an
impact on the surrounding community. That impact could perhaps be
amplified given the current state of the economy and we must be mindful
of such outcomes. Despite this, it is still our responsibility to
explore all options for productive and effective cost-savings.
Independent evaluations and the GAO have highlighted the need for
the EPA to develop a coordinated planning process for its scientific
activities and improve agency-wide research planning, among many other
suggestions. It is important to note that these issues are not new
under the current Administration--they span the activities and
inactivity of several Administrations. Don't be fooled by the rhetoric
on the ``right'' that the Obama Administration was the impetus of the
concerns expressed here. These concerns did not appear overnight or in
just the past three years. They will need to be corrected over time.
And any reorganization will need to be done in an orderly, well
thought-out manner; with much oversight and input.
In recent years, the IG has put forward many recommendations to
improve the ORD that appear to have been embraced by the agency.
Overall, the IG has found that the EPA ORD peer review process
adequately produces objective scientific reviews. As we have said time
and time again in this Committee, good policy and decisions begins with
good science. I am sure there is room for improvement and I hope we can
work together to identify opportunities to make EPA more effective in
protecting the public and the environment.
Today, we are presented with the perfect opportunity to show
American taxpayers that not every issue needs to be polarizing or
politicized. It's an opportunity for Congress to be productive and
objective. It's also an opportunity to put our differences aside and
have meaningful conversations and exchanges of ideas. We need to build
upon EPA's scientific legacy and ensure that we continue to improve our
shared environment, including for future generations.
Chairman Harris, we look forward to working with you in the months
ahead. I yield back.

Chairman Harris. Without objection.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Chair, I want to ensure that we include into
the record the written testimony of Dr. Granger Morgan, the
former chair of the EPA Science Advisory Board. He included
with his testimony a letter expressing his frustration with the
surrounding events of our committee's request for him to
testify, and he states, and I would read the first two
paragraphs of his letter that are addressed to you, Andy Harris
M.D., as Chair, and Representative Brad Miller of North
Carolina as ranking member of the Subcommittee on Energy and
Environment.
``Dear Congressman Harris and Miller, several days ago I
was contacted by committee staff about the possibility of
testifying to the hearing you are holding tomorrow afternoon on
the EPA Science Advisory Board. Because I had academic
conflicts I was not able to attend the hearing. Last evening
your staff indicated that arrangements could be made for me to
testify over a video link if I could get my testimony prepared
and submitted by midday today. Accordingly, I dropped
everything and prepared the testimony that follows. I have just
now been informed that my testimony is no longer desired.
I understand that such things happen, however, having
already spent the time to write my remarks, I thought you and
some other Members might find it of some use to see what I had
prepared.''
Chairman Harris, these are difficult words to read. Here in
Congress we call on some of the world's best experts to come
and testify. These are busy people who sacrifice their time and
their resources as a service to our country. I hope this type
of situation does not occur again and that under your
leadership we can improve the committee's relationship with
potential witnesses going forward.
Mr. Chair, I ask for unanimous consent to enter this
testimony into the record.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. Let me just ask for a
clarification. You want to submit the letter into the record.
Is that right? So not his testimony?
Mr. Tonko. It is included altogether I am told. His
testimony and his letter.
Chairman Harris. Well, I mean, my concern is that, you
know, with testimony we would get to actually question people
who actually submit testimony. So it is just a minor
clarification. I mean, I am perfectly willing to submit his
letter, a letter with an attachment into the record, but I
don't think we can really call it testimony.
Mr. Tonko. Yeah.
Chairman Harris. Okay.
Mr. Tonko. We will abide by that and provide----
Chairman Harris. Okay.
Mr. Tonko. --what we have here on behalf of the witness who
had hoped he could present, Mr. Morgan.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Tonko, and we
will absolutely. I mean, we do want--we recognize that the
people we ask to appear in front of this committee are very
busy and sometimes difficult to arrange a schedule, and you
know, even with the delay today, I mean, sometimes we have to
juggle even within that schedule, but, yes, it is my desire to
do that, to make it easy for someone to come and share their
experience with the American public in a Congressional hearing.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Chairman, I thank you, and with that I yield
back my time.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time I would like to introduce our witness panel.
Our first witness today is Dr. Paul Anastas, well known to the
Committee and Subcommittee, the Assistant Administrator of the
Office of Research and Development at EPA. The next witness
will be Mr. David Trimble, Director of Natural Resources and
Environment at the U.S. General Accounting Office, and I guess
the way you are sitting here, the other witness is Mr. Arthur
Elkins, Inspector General of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
Thank you all for appearing before the Subcommittee today.
Now, we were notified that we may actually in another half hour
or so go back for one more vote or possibly two more votes, so
we are going to go through the testimony. We are going to start
questioning, and we will see where that ends up.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each, after which Members of the Committee will
have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Paul Anastas,
Assistant Administrator of the Office of Research and
Development at the EPA. Dr. Anastas.

STATEMENTS OF DR. PAUL ANASTAS,

ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE OF RESEARCH

AND DEVELOPMENT, U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL

PROTECTION AGENCY

Dr. Anastas. Good afternoon, Chairman Harris, Congressman
Tonko, and distinguished Members of the Committee. I am Paul
Anastas. I am the Assistant Administrator for the Office of
Research and Development at the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, and I want to thank you for the opportunity to speak
with you today about EPA's research programs.
Scientific research is vital to pursuing EPA's mission of
protecting human health and the environment. As EPA
Administrator Lisa Jackson has said time and again, science is
the backbone of EPA. All of the agency's decisions and actions
are grounded in sound and rigorous science. That is what the
American people expect and deserve.
Every day the scientists and engineers in the EPA's Office
of Research and Development demonstrate excellence and
dedication in their scientific work. I could not be more proud
of my colleagues or more confident in their abilities.
But we all recognize that in science there is no room for
arrogance. That is why we work closely with our Science
Advisory Board to obtain independent, external peer review of
our research plans and with our Board of Scientific Counselors
to obtain peer review of our research products. At every step
along way we seek input from the scientific community and the
public. We welcome their comments, and we address them.
This process, which can include public comment periods,
open peer review sessions, and public meetings, is one of the
most rigorous and transparent peer review processes anywhere.
We firmly believe that when it comes to science, transparency
is the most powerful way to ensure integrity. The agency
depends on its Office of Research and Development to provide
the scientific tools, assessments, and technologies to inform
decision making.
For this reason in addition to being sound and transparent,
EPA's research must also be highly effective and responsive.
Over the past year EPA has engaged in a major effort to
strength its research program with two primary goals. First, to
ensure that our research most effectively meets the needs of
those who use and depend upon it, including EPA's program and
regional offices. Second, to ensure the cohesiveness of
research across the Office of Research and Development,
including the development of collaborative research plans that
cut across multiple disciplines and multiple laboratories.
With these goals in mind EPA research programs were aligned
into four crosscutting areas. One, air climate and energy, two,
safe and sustainable water resources, three, sustainable and
healthy communities, and four, chemical safety for
sustainability.
In addition, EPA is continuing to fulfill its scientific
responsibilities in two targeted research areas; homeland
security and human health assessment. Realigning our research
has made EPA's scientific enterprise more effective by design.
We have new opportunities to coordinate scientific expertise,
capabilities, and resources that were previously managed
separately.
We have built engagement with EPA's program and regional
offices into every stage of the research process to ensure that
their needs are met in a timely and responsive manner. We have
broken down the traditional boundaries between scientific
disciplines so that our scientists can more effectively address
crosscutting real world challenges.
In their 2011 joint report EPA Science Advisory Board and
Board of Scientific Counselors stated that they ``strongly
support ORD's consolidation and realignment of research
programs.''
Science and technology in EPA is not limited to the
agency's Office of Research and Development. A network of
laboratories spans across ORD, program offices, and regional
laboratory organizations, each with different objectives toward
the pursuit of EPA's mission.
To be clear, the Office of Research and Development
laboratories conduct research and assessments that inform many
of the agency's actions and decisions including protective
standards and guidance. The program offices' office
laboratories develop science that supports regulatory
implementation, compliance, and enforcements at the national
level. Regional laboratories provide technical information to
support immediate regional needs and regional decision making.
The recent GAO report on EPA's laboratory network
recommends that the EPA Administrator take several actions to
improve the cohesion and management of the agency's
laboratories. We take these recommendations very seriously, and
I invite you to review EPA's response to each of these
recommendations in my written testimony.
To conclude, EPA has a strong tradition of scientific
excellence. In all of our research we are committed to strong
science, continual improvement, and scientific openness on
behalf of the American people. Thank you for this opportunity
to appear before you today, and I will be happy to take
questions at the appropriate time.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Anastas follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Paul Anastas, Assistant Administrator, Office
Of Research And Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Good morning Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, and other
distinguished Members of the Committee. My name is Paul Anastas. I am
the Assistant Administrator for Research and Development at the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
The Office of Research and Development (ORD) is unique in the
environmental science community because it conducts intramural and
extramural research across the entire spectrum of disciplines necessary
to support the mission of EPA. EPA works with many providers of
scientific information to accomplish its mission, including
international and domestic academic institutions, state and local
agencies, industry, and other federal scientific agencies.
I appreciate the opportunity to talk with you today about our
research programs. I understand that the Committee would like me to
discuss a number of specific issues, but first I would like to talk
about the bigger picture--where I believe EPA needs to be orienting our
scientific efforts if it is going to provide the cutting edge knowledge
and tools needed in the 21st century and to be competitive in the
world.
Every day, EPA continues to transform the vision of a healthy
economy and a healthy environment into reality for all Americans. It's
a vision that starts with science. The Agency relies on ORD to produce
scientifically sound research, methods, and tools to fulfill its
legislative mandates and meet its mission to protect human health and
the environment. EPA is a world leader in scientific research for human
health and environmental protection. The environmental breakthroughs
mentioned above could only be achieved through research and development
including the that of EPA's scientific research. The cumulative
benefits of this work, along with work in other sectors, have restored
ecosystems, improved public health, and increased overall life
expectancy in a time when our economy and population have continued to
grow.
Further, in its 2011 report on Sustainability and the US EPA, the
National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences
recognized that current approaches aimed at decreasing existing risks,
however successful, are not capable of avoiding the complex problems in
the US and globally that threaten the planet's critical natural
resources and put current and future human generations at risk. In
considering sustainability as a way of ensuring long-term human well-
being, the report also states that the potential economic value of
sustainability to the U.S. is recognized to not merely decrease
environmental risks, but also to optimize the social and economic
benefits of environmental protection.

ORD RESEARCH PROGRAMS

During the past year, EPA's research programs have been realigned
to meet the emerging needs of EPA internal and external stakeholders
while advancing the science needed for sustainability. As a starting
point, ORD research programs are structured to address the EPA
strategic goals in the EPA FY 2011-2015 Strategic Plan. ORD'S research
program are focused on:

Air, Climate, and Energy;

Safe and Sustainable Water Resources;

Sustainable and Healthy Communities; and

Chemical Safety for Sustainability

In addition to above 4 programs, EPA has special responsibilities
for two targeted research programs --homeland security and human health
risk assessment, which integrates scientific information from EPA and
other research to develop health assessments for environmental
contaminants.
Organizing our research into these six areas provides ORD with
opportunities to integrate and coordinate research among areas that
were previously planned and managed separately. For example, the
Chemical Safety for Sustainability program now integrates research on
pesticides and toxics, endocrine disruptors, and computational
toxicology. Similarly, the Safe and Sustainable Waters program brings
together research on drinking water and surface water quality. Certain
topics, such as climate change, nitrogen, and children's health,
involve multiple scientific disciplines and, therefore, require
integration across research programs.
Research is conducted by ORD scientists and engineers working in
laboratories and research facilities at 14 locations around the
country. They are joined by a network of collaborators and partners,
including those supported through EPA's Science to Achieve Results
(STAR) extramural research program. The STAR program provides
competitive funding opportunities for research grants, graduate and
undergraduate fellowships, and larger, largely multidisciplinary
research centers. EPA is also one of 11 federal agencies that
participate in the Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) program,
enacted in 1982 to strengthen the role of small businesses in federal
research and development, create jobs, and promote technical
innovation.

Engaging Others in ORD's Research Planning

We are very serious about ensuring that the research and
development work in ORD is responsive to the needs of the Agency. Over
the past year, through meetings with managers and staff in EPA's
program and regional offices, webinars, ``listening sessions'' with the
public, and other open platforms, Agency researchers have undertaken an
unprecedented effort to engage EPA's partners and stakeholders inside
and outside the government. The discussions sparked collaboration,
innovation, and creativity from every corner of the EPA research
community involved in designing needed research. ORD is committed to
providing ongoing interactions to ensure that Agency program and
regional offices, states, tribes, and other stakeholders receive the
scientific information they need to make informed decisions and enforce
the nation's environmental laws.
In addition to the steps taken to ensure involvement by the Program
and Regional Offices in ORD's research planning process, ORD is
committed to providing scientific expertise to the Program Offices as
they develop regulations and policy. ORD research also provides the
tools needed to evaluate management options for thousands of sites
contaminated by past practices or current environmental releases.
Further, the Science Advisory Board (SAB) provides expert advice on
scientific and technical matters within the Agency. We formally request
the SAB to review our research plans and proposed allocation of ORD
resources each year and ORD values their input.

PEER REVIEW

The EPA takes its responsibility concerning peer review very
seriously. For example, all of ORD's draft human health assessments are
subjected to rigorous, open, independent, external peer review. The
external peer reviewers typically convene at a public meeting to
discuss their comments on our work. . We recognize the importance of
independent, external peer review in maintaining high standards for the
quality of the science and technical products that EPA produces and
sponsors. Peer review is an important component of the scientific
process that provides a focused, objective evaluation of a draft
product. The constructive criticisms, suggestions, and new ideas
provided by the peer reviewers stimulate creative thought, and
strengthen and confer credibility on the product. Comprehensive,
objective peer reviews lead to good science and product acceptance
within the scientific community. Thus, peer review ensures that the
Agency's scientific reports are held to the highest possible standards.
EPA makes every effort to assure that the scientists serving on
these review panels do not have any actual or potential conflicts of
interest, including an appearance of bias or lack of impartiality. This
rigorous process is designed to assure that the Agency's peer reviews
are independent, open, transparent, and of the highest scientific
quality.

EPA LABORATORIES -- RESPONSE TO THE GAO REPORT

Now I want to discuss EPA's network of laboratories and the
Agency's response to the recent GAO report about EPA laboratories. I
agree with the GAO observation that ``EPA's scientific research,
technical support, and analytical services underpin the policies and
regulations the agency implements.'' \1\ The connection between EPA's
laboratory science and Agency decision-making illustrates the strategic
importance of EPA's laboratory network. This network consists of 35
laboratories located in 29 cities nationwide. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Ibid., page 1.
\2\ Letter from EPA Deputy Administrator Robert Perciasepe to David
C. Trimble, Acting Director Natural Resources and the Environment, U.S.
GAO, July 11, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
EPA's laboratory network is comprised of ORD, program office, and
regional laboratory organizations. Each of these three laboratory
organizations has different objectives \3\ with respect to EPA's
mission-and a common need for coordination with Agency clients and
partners:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Letter from EPA Deputy Administrator Robert Perciasepe to David
C. Trimble, Acting Director Natural Resources and the Environment, U.S.
GAO, July 11, 2011.

ORD laboratories have primary responsibility for research
and development--developing knowledge, assessments, and scientific
tools that form the underpinnings of the vast majority of EPA's
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
protective standards and guidance.

Program Office laboratories have primary responsibility
for directly supporting regulatory implementation, compliance, and
enforcement at a national level--e.g., motor vehicle standards testing,
pesticide registration.

Regional laboratories are responsible for providing
scientific data and sampling results which support the Regional
environmental programs' needs for immediate information to make
decisions on environmental conditions, enforcement, and progress to
achieve our nation's standards for environmental and human health.

While the scientific activities of EPA's research and program
laboratories focus on long-term outcomes at a national level, EPA's
regional laboratories are designed and organized to meet the near-term
decision-needs of their Regions, State, and Tribal partners.
EPA has benefited from advice by the U.S. Government Accountability
Office (GAO)-most recently, from the GAO study of EPA's laboratory
network published in July 2011.
The report from GAO identifies a number of challenges to managing
federal laboratories government-wide. \4\ One major challenge is the
increasing cost of maintaining the portfolio of aging federal
laboratory facilities. A second major challenge is reducing the energy
consumed by laboratory facilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See the GAO High Risk Series on Federal Real Property,
beginning with U.S. GAO-03-122, January 30, 2003.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These facilities consume more energy and emit more greenhouse gases
per square foot of floor space than virtually any other type of
facility-from five to ten times the amount of energy than office
buildings with an equivalent footprint. \5\ EPA recognizes that
improving the energy and environmental ``footprint'' of federal
laboratory facilities is important for our nation's strategy to achieve
energy independence, improve the environment, and reduce consumption of
natural resources. \6\ In fact, Executive Order 13514 requires that
each federal agency prepare a strategic sustainability plan to guide
its efforts to `green' its facilities to improve their effectiveness
and efficiency. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Letter from EPA Deputy Administrator Robert Perciasepe to David
C. Trimble, Acting Director Natural Resources and the Environment, U.S.
GAO, July 11, 2011, pages 1-2.
\6\ ``Laboratories for the 21st Century: Program Overview.'' U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency and Federal Energy Management Program.
January 2004.
\7\ Executive Order 13514 of 2009. Federal Register Vol 74 No 194,
52117-52127. October 8, 2009
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The GAO report on EPA's laboratory network recommends that the
Administrator of EPA take seven actions to improve the cohesion and
management of the Agency's laboratories. In general, EPA agrees with
these GAO recommendations. EPA's Deputy Administrator Bob Perciasepe
communicated EPA's response to the GAO recommendations in a July 2011
letter, which GAO included in its report. \8\ Here are highlights of
the seven GAO recommendations and EPA's responses:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ This letter appears as Appendix IV (pages 39-45) in the GAO
report cited in the first footnote.

1) Develop an overarching issue-based planning process that reflects
the collective goals, objectives, and priorities of the laboratories'
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
scientific activities.

EPA will consult with stakeholders to determine the best approach to
develop an overarching planning process and system.

2) Establish a top-level science official with the authority and
responsibility to coordinate, oversee, and make management decisions
regarding major scientific activities throughout the agency, including
the work of all program, regional, and research laboratories.

EPA will expand the authority and responsibility of the Agency's
Science Advisor to coordinate, oversee, and make recommendations to the
Administrator regarding major scientific activities throughout the
agency, including the work of all program, regional, and ORD
laboratories. EPA's Science and Technology Policy Council (STPC) will
assist the Science Advisor with these new responsibilities. This
Council brings together senior leaders from EPA's programs, regions,
and laboratories to address the Agency's high priority science-policy
issues.

3&4) Improve the Agency's physical infrastructure and real property
planning and investment decisions by: managing individual laboratory
facilities as part of an interrelated portfolio of facilities, and
ensuring that facility ``master plans'' are up-to-date and that
analysis of the use of space is based on objective benchmarks.

EPA will strengthen its master planning process-which the Agency
believes overall has kept the Agency's laboratories and their support
buildings in good condition. Over the next 3-5 years the Agency plans
to: upgrade and streamline the master planning process; update the
plans as required; reinforce the current master planning portfolio
perspective; and strengthen the ties between the current annual and
five year Building & Facility call letter process and the master plans.

5) Improve the completeness and reliability of operating-cost and
other data needed to manage its real property and report to external
parties.

EPA will continue to refine the master planning process to upgrade
and validate its internal operating costs and other metrics. EPA is
also reviewing options for improving data reliability and completeness
for the remaining labs within its laboratory enterprise.

6) Develop a comprehensive workforce planning process for all
laboratories that is based on reliable workforce data and reflects
current and future agency needs in the overall number of federal and
contract employees, skills, and deployment across all laboratory
facilities.

EPA will develop a workforce planning process for its laboratory
network as part of a broader Agency workforce planning process.

7) If the EPA Administrator determines that another independent study
of EPA laboratories is needed, then the Agency should include--within
the charge questions for this study--alternate approaches for
organizing the laboratory workforce and infrastructure. These alternate
approaches should include options for sharing and consolidation.

The FY 2012 President's Budget includes funds to conduct a study of
EPA's laboratory enterprise which considers the long-term research
needs of the Agency while seeking opportunities to promote efficiencies
and reduce the Agency's physical footprint. This study will be
conducted by an independent expert body. EPA will request that this
external body consider information in this GAO report and alternate
approaches for organizing the workforce and infrastructure of EPA's
laboratory network, and explore options for consolidation.

CONCLUSION

In conclusion, I believe that we have a strong tradition of
excellence in science at EPA--and that we are poised to build upon this
tradition and take environmental protection to the next level. EPA
scientists and engineers, as members of, and in collaboration with, the
broader scientific community, are applying scientific innovation to
spark the scientific and technological breakthroughs that lie just over
the horizon--emission-free vehicles; smart phone apps that provide key
environmental and health information; benign, ``green'' chemical
processes and products; and water recycling and reuse technologies.
Agency scientists, researchers, and their partners, are working toward
the vision of a sustainable future.
I look forward to working with the Committee to address current and
emerging environmental problems that will help our Agency protect the
environment and human health. Thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Dr. Anastas.
I now recognize our second witness, Mr. Arthur Elkins,
Inspector General of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Mr. Elkins.

STATEMENT OF MR. ARTHUR ELKINS, JR., NSPECTOR GENERAL, U.S.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Mr. Elkins. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Harris,
Congressman Tonko, and Members of the Subcommittee. I am Arthur
Elkins, Jr., Inspector General at the EPA. I am pleased to
appear before you today to discuss recent work conducted by my
office related to EPA's Office of Research and Development. My
submitted statement for the record details this work. Today I
want to focus on three areas; peer review panels, scientific
integrity, and EPA's overall workforce and workload, which have
implications for ORD.
Peer review is an important process for enhancing
scientific work products so that the decisions made by EPA have
a sound, credible basis. In 2009, we reviewed EPA's peer review
process in response to concerns about EPA's handling of
allegations of a lack of impartiality on one of its peer review
panels. Our review focused on EPA's National Center for
Environmental Assessment, one of ORD's primary users of peer
reviews. We found that the laws, regulations, and requirements
governing EPA's peer review process are adequate to produce
objective scientific reviews, but that EPA needed to improve
its operating guidance. Basically, impartiality was vaguely
defined and procedures addressing conflict of interest needed
to be improved, as does documentation of resolutions.
We made recommendations to ORD to improve its peer review
process in each of these areas. ORD agreed to all of our
recommendations and certified that these corrective actions
were completed in December 2009.
This year we looked at whether ORD has controls to address
scientific integrity and research misconduct, and how effective
those controls are. We found that ORD has internal controls
that includes policies, procedures, training, and peer review.
However, ORD could improve how it evaluates the effectiveness
of its policies and procedures for scientific integrity. ORD
did not test its policies and procedures because ORD asserted
that few reported instances of misconduct meant that it
generally does not occur. However, few identified instances
could signal that staff lack awareness of criteria and
reporting requirements necessary to identify and report
misconduct. As part of our work we surveyed ORD science staff
on their awareness of EPA scientific integrity policies. We
found that nearly 2/3 of respondents were unaware of EPA's
policies and procedures on research misconduct, and nearly 1/3
of respondents were unaware of EPA's scientific integrity
principles.
We made recommendations to ORD to strengthen their controls
and raise awareness about scientific integrity and research
misconduct. ORD agreed with our recommendations and plans to
complete all corrective actions by September 2012.
For an organization to operate efficiently and effectively
it must know what its workload is so that it can accurately
determine the resource levels needed to carry out its work. We
have issued three reports since 2010 examining how EPA manages
its workload and workforce levels overall, which I believe have
implications for ORD.
We found that EPA has not collected comprehensive workload
data or conducted workload analys is across the Agency in about
20 years. The Agency does not require program offices to
collect and maintain workload data. Without sufficient workload
data, program offices are limited in their ability to analyze
their workloads and accurately estimate resource needs.
Therefore, the Agency must base budget decisions primarily on
subjective justifications at a time when budgets continue to
tighten, and data-driven decisions are critical.
We also found that the agency's policies and procedures do
not include a process for determining resource levels based on
workload as prescribed by OMB. As a result, the agency cannot
demonstrate that it has the right number of resources to
accomplish its mission.
Finally, we found that the Agency does not have a coherent
program of position management to assure the efficient and
effective use of its workforce.
We made several recommendations to address these findings.
EPA has not committed to a specific course of action with
milestones for completion for many of our recommendations.
Therefore, they remain open pending our receipt of an
acceptable corrective action plan.
In conclusion, OIG work has identified areas where ORD can
improve its operations and activities so it can better provide
the solid underpinning of science necessary for EPA regulatory
decision making. I believe the OIG has made a positive impact
through the many recommendations we have made to ORD in those
areas. To their credit, ORD has been receptive to many of our
recommendations. We will continue to work with ORD to identify
additional areas needing attention.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today.
I would be pleased to answer any questions the Subcommittee may
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Elkins follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Arthur Elkins, Jr., Inspector General, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency
Good afternoon Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, and Members
of the Subcommittee. I am Arthur Elkins, Jr., Inspector General at the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). I also serve as the
Inspector General of the U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation
Board. I am pleased to appear before you today for the first time since
becoming Inspector General in June 2010 to discuss recent work
conducted by my office related to EPA's Office of Research and
Development (ORD). As the scientific research arm of EPA, ORD conducts
research on ways to prevent pollution, protect human health and the
environment, and reduce risk. ORD's role is critical given that EPA
relies on sound science to safeguard human health and the environment.
Under the Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended, Inspectors
General are tasked with promoting economy and efficiency, and
identifying fraud, waste and abuse within their respective agencies. In
recent years, the Office of Inspector General (OIG) has increased its
focus on ORD's operations and activities. My testimony today highlights
the results of this work from 10 selected reports issued since 2009 in
the following areas: ORD controls, performance measures and resources;
and ORD's role in providing research for decision-making in selected
program areas.

ORD Controls, Performance Measures and Resources

OIG work has identified areas for improvement regarding ORD peer
review panels, internal controls to address scientific integrity and
research misconduct, performance measures, and how EPA manages its
workforce and workload that have implications for ORD.

Peer Review Panels

Peer review is a process for enhancing a scientific or technical
work product so that the decision or position taken by EPA, based on
that product, has a sound, credible basis. The former EPA Deputy
Administrator requested we review EPA's peer review process in response
to concerns about EPA's handling of allegations of impartiality on one
of its peer review panels. Our review focused on EPA's National Center
for Environmental Assessment (NCEA) peer review process. Specifically,
our objectives were to determine whether: 1) current laws, regulations,
guidance, and other relevant requirements for such panels are adequate
to produce objective scientific reviews; and 2) the current system of
populating and managing such expert panels could be improved.
In our April 2009 report, we noted that NCEA's peer review panel
selection process did not differ in many aspects when compared to the
processes of four other science-based organizations. One noteworthy
difference impacting panel selection was that Federal Advisory
Committee Act (FACA) panels, such as the National Academy of Sciences
and EPA's Science Advisory Board, attempt to achieve consensus among
panelists, and concerns about impartiality of panel members can be
mitigated by balancing the panel with varying viewpoints. Since NCEA
peer review panels are not designed to obtain consensus, NCEA strives
to select ``impartial'' panelists. However, we found that this concept
was vaguely defined in Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and EPA
guidance and was not explained in any NCEA-specific operating guidance.
Further, NCEA did not have procedures for addressing conflicts of
interest or potential biases impacting a panelist's impartiality that
became known after a panel had completed its deliberations. Finally,
there was no clear documentation of authority and responsibility for
making final determinations regarding panel selection or how potential
conflicts of interest were resolved.
We made several recommendations to ORD to improve the peer review
process. Among them were: 1) define the concept of ``impartiality'' and
maintain records of all management decisions pertaining to the
selection of peer reviewers, particularly resolution of potential
conflicts of interest; 2) in cases where panelists with potential
conflicts or biases are accepted on the panel, the records should
include a memorandum of decision explaining the suitability and
rationale for including or excluding each panelist, which is signed off
on by an EPA official; and 3) develop guidance to address conflict of
interest issues that arise after panel formulation and amend contracts
for external peer review services to require that panelists re-certify
their conflict of interest status prior to the panel convening. ORD
agreed to all of our recommendations and provided an acceptable
corrective action plan. EPA certified that these corrective actions
were completed in December 2009.

Scientific Integrity

Since EPA decision-making relies on science, it is critical that
EPA's scientific and technical activities be of the highest quality and
credibility. Since 2000, a number of federal and EPA policies on
ensuring the integrity of government science have been issued. EPA
Order 3120.5 implements the federal policy on research misconduct, and
ORD and others formulated the ``Principles of Scientific Integrity''
and the Principles of Scientific Integrity E-Training to further
highlight professional ethics for EPA scientists. We looked at whether
ORD has controls to address scientific integrity and research
misconduct and how effective those controls are.
We reported in July 2011 that ORD has internal controls that
include policies, procedures, training, and peer review. However, ORD
should improve how it evaluates the effectiveness of its policies and
procedures for scientific integrity and research misconduct. Currently,
ORD does not test its policies and procedures because ORD asserts that
few reported instances of misconduct means that it generally does not
occur. However, few identified instances of research misconduct could
signal that staff lacks awareness of key criteria and reporting
requirements necessary to identify and report misconduct.
We issued an electronic survey to over 1,300 ORD science staff on
their awareness of EPA's scientific integrity and research misconduct
policies and procedures. We found that 65 percent of respondents were
unaware of EPA Order 3120.5, and 32 percent were unaware of EPA's
Principles of Scientific Integrity. We also found that ORD has not
updated the Principles of Scientific Integrity E-Training since June
2005. The existing e-training is not mandatory for ORD staff and does
not include actual examples to aid understanding by training
participants. Sixty-five percent of our survey respondents indicated
they had not completed the e-training. Those who have not completed the
training may be unaware of key criteria regarding scientific integrity.
We made three recommendations to ORD. First, periodically test the
effectiveness of controls in place to address scientific integrity and
research misconduct. Second, work across EPA offices to initiate
outreach on EPA Order 3120.5 to raise awareness on roles/
responsibilities and reporting steps, and to identify EPA staff and
managers who should complete the Principles of Scientific Integrity E-
Training. Finally, continue to work with unions to update and implement
E-training. Without these additional internal control efforts, ORD
risks having its science called into question, potentially lessening
the credibility of its work. ORD agreed with our recommendations and
subsequently followed up with a corrective action plan addressing our
recommendations. ORD plans to complete all corrective actions by
September 2012.

ORD Performance Measures

In 2010, ORD had twelve national research programs that provided
science to support EPA's goals in its strategic plan. One research
program, the Land Research Program (LRP), provided the science and
technology needed to preserve land, restore contaminated properties,
and protect public health from environmental contaminants. The LRP
spent $186.2 million on land-related research between fiscal years
(FYs) 2005 and 2009. We conducted a review to determine whether the LRP
had appropriate performance measures for assessing the effectiveness of
its research products.
The difficulty of measuring research performance has been
recognized by the National Research Council of the National Academies
(NRC) and other authoritative sources. No single measure can adequately
capture all elements of research performance. LRP employed a variety of
methods to assess its research performance, such as: 1) OMB Program
Assessment Rating Tool (PART) measures; 2) client feedback; and 3) peer
reviews by EPA's Board of Scientific Counselors (BOSC) who provides
advice, information, and recommendations on ORD's research programs.
In our August 2010 report, we noted that improvements were needed
in each area to better enable ORD to assess the effectiveness of LRP
research products. Key findings included: LRP did not have measures
that assessed progress toward short-term outcomes; LRP's citation
analysis PART measures were not meaningful to ORD program managers and
were not linked to LRP's goals and objectives; ORD's survey of LRP
clients did not provide a meaningful measure of customer feedback
because ORD's client survey was not reliable; LRP lacked some key
measures that would aid BOSC in conducting its LRP program reviews; and
ORD had not clearly defined elements of its long-term goal rating
guidance for BOSC reviews.
Several underlying issues impacted ORD's development of LRP
performance measures. These included the inherently difficult nature of
establishing outcome-oriented research measures and ORD's decision not
to tailor its measures to each research program. As a result, ORD had
invested resources in performance measures and tools that had not
effectively measured key aspects of LRP performance. The measures did
not provide LRP with the data to assess program progress towards goals,
identify areas for program improvement, or track the short-term
outcomes of its research.
We made several recommendations to ORD to improve LRP's research
measures, including that ORD: 1) develop measures linked to short-term
outcomes in LRP's Multi-Year Plan; 2) augment LRP's citation analysis
with measures meaningful to ORD program managers and linked to LRP's
goals and objectives; 3) develop an implementation plan for the client
survey to ensure that the program has a reliable method for assessing
relevance (or develop a reliable alternative customer feedback
mechanism); 4) provide appropriate performance measurement data to BOSC
prior to full program reviews; and 5) revise its long term goal rating
guidance to BOSC for program reviews. ORD generally agreed with our
recommendations and provided an acceptable plan of action to address
our recommendations.

EPA Workload and Workforce

Over the last five years, EPA has averaged over 17,000 positions in
its organizational structure with annual payroll costs of approximately
$2 billion. ORD's enacted budget for FY 2011 was $582.1 million with an
authorizing level of 1907.2 full-time staff. For any organization to
operate efficiently and effectively, it must know what its workload is.
While there is no one exact definition of workload, it is commonly
thought to be the amount of work assigned to, or expected to be
completed by, a worker in a specified time period. Workload that is set
too high or too low can negatively affect overall performance. The main
objectives of assessing and predicting workload are to achieve an
evenly distributed, manageable workload and to accurately determine the
resource levels needed to carry out the work. The OIG has issued three
reports since 2010 examining how EPA manages its workload and workforce
levels. While not specifically focused on ORD, our findings and
recommendations are applicable to ORD since they span across EPA
programs and offices.
We found that EPA has not collected comprehensive workload data or
conducted workload analyses across EPA in about 20 years. EPA does not
require program offices to collect and maintain workload data, and the
programs do not have databases or cost accounting systems in place to
collect data on time spent on specific mission-related outputs. OMB
guidance states that agencies should identify their workloads to help
determine the proper workforce size, and federal accounting standards
require that agencies establish cost accounting systems to allow them
to determine resources consumed for work performed. Without sufficient
workload data, program offices are limited in their ability to analyze
their workloads and accurately estimate resource needs, and EPA's
Office of Budget must base budget decisions primarily on subjective
justifications at a time when budgets continue to tighten and data-
driven decisions are needed.
We also found that EPA's policies and procedures do not include a
process for determining resource levels based on workload as prescribed
by OMB. Further, EPA does not determine the number of positions needed
per mission-critical occupation using workforce analysis as required by
the Office of Personnel Management. These conditions occurred because
EPA has not developed a workload assessment methodology and has not
developed policies and procedures that require workload analysis as
part of the budget formulation process. As a result, EPA cannot
demonstrate that it has the right number of resources to accomplish its
mission.
Finally, we found that EPA does not have a coherent program for
position management to assure the efficient and effective use of its
workforce. Position management provides the operational link between
human capital goals and the placement of qualified individuals into
authorized positions. While some organizational components have
independently established programs to control their resources, there is
no Agency-wide effort to ensure that personnel are put to the best use.
Without an Agency-wide position management program, EPA leadership
lacks reasonable assurance that it is using personnel in an effective
and efficient manner to achieve mission results.
We made several recommendations to address these findings including
that EPA: 1) conduct a pilot project requiring EPA offices to collect
and analyze workload data on key project activities; 2) amend guidance
to require that EPA complete a workload analysis for all critical
functions to support its budget request; and 3) establish an Agency-
wide workforce program that includes controls to ensure regular reviews
of positions for efficiency, effectiveness, and mission accomplishment.
EPA has not committed to a specific course of action with milestone
dates for completion for many of our recommendations, therefore they
remain open pending completion.

ORD Role in Providing Research for Decision-Making in

Selected Program Areas

OIG work has also raised concerns about ORD's limited role in
chemical risk programs such as the children's chemical evaluation and
endocrine disruptor programs, and about the processes and procedures
for climate change research and greenhouse gases endangerment finding.

Voluntary Children's Chemical Evaluation Program

EPA utilizes voluntary partnership programs to help it address a
wide array of environmental issues by collaborating with companies,
organizations and communities. EPA often relies on scientific data
provided by its partners and self-certifications rather than
independently validate such data. The result is that ORD often plays a
limited role in these partnership programs. One example is the
Voluntary Children's Chemical Evaluation Program (VCCEP), a pilot
program administered by EPA's Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution
Prevention (OCSPP) and designed to assess the possible risks from 23
chemicals. EPA asked the manufacturers and importers of these chemicals
to volunteer to provide data sufficient for EPA to evaluate the risks
of these chemicals to children's health.
In a July 2011 report, we reviewed the VCCEP to determine the
outcomes of the program. Overall, we found that poor program design and
EPA's failure to use its regulatory authorities under the Toxic
Substances Control Act to compel data collection from industry partners
resulted in the failure of the VCCEP as an effective children-specific
chemical management program. ORD did not have a lead role in any aspect
of the program. ORD activities were limited mainly to participating as
a stakeholder during the program's design phase, and placing an ORD
scientist on the Peer Consultation Panel. The panel, comprised of
experts in toxicity testing and exposure evaluations, independently
analyzed the submitted data to determine whether additional data was
necessary to adequately characterize the risks the chemical may pose to
children. An independent third party was used to manage this peer
consultation process rather than ORD.

Endocrine Disruptor Screening Program
In our May 2011 report, we reviewed whether EPA has planned and
conducted the requisite research and testing to evaluate and regulate
endocrine-disrupting chemicals. We specifically focused on EPA's
Endocrine Disruptor Screening Program (EDSP), which is administered by
OCSPP with support from ORD. The Food Quality Protection Act, passed in
1996, gave EPA the authority to screen and test substances that may
have an effect in humans similar to that of a naturally occurring
estrogen, or such other endocrine effects as the EPA Administrator may
designate. Congress also passed the Safe Drinking Water Act amendments
in 1996, which provided EPA additional discretionary authority to test
substances. In 1998, EPA established the EDSP, which uses a two-tiered
screening and testing approach to assess endocrine effects.
We found that EPA has not adequately addressed the emerging issue
of endocrine disruptors. The program has made little progress in
identifying endocrine-disrupting chemicals. While we acknowledge that
EDSP encountered difficulties and delays, its lack of progress is also
due to EPA's lack of management control over the program. EDSP has not
developed a management plan laying out the program's goals and
priorities or established outcome performance measures to track program
results. EDSP has not finalized specific procedures to evaluate testing
results. Finally, EDSP has not clearly defined the universe of
chemicals it plans to evaluate over time. Developing a management plan
would ensure that the program's goals and priorities are transparent so
EPA's leadership and Congress can assess whether the goals of the
program are being achieved within reasonable cost and schedule.
ORD provides support for EDSP. EPA established the Endocrine
Disruptor Research Program in 1995, which conducts both basic and
applied research to develop the fundamental scientific principles used
by EPA program and regional offices in making risk assessment
decisions. ORD also conducted the underlying research to develop many
assays for chemical testing. ORD identified endocrine disruptors as one
of its top six research priorities and since 1998, ORD has issued a
research plan and two multiyear plans concerning endocrine disruptors.
Within the multiyear plans, ORD specifically identified the support of
EDSP as one of its three long-term goals. However, ORD stated in its
draft Multiyear Plan for Endocrine Disruptors for FY 2007-2013 that the
long-term goal of supporting EPA's EDSP will not be carried forward
beyond 2011. According to the plan, all future work would be under a
different long-term goal. It is unclear what impact, if any, this will
have on the program.
Climate Change Research
Since the enactment of the Global Change Research Act of 1990,
EPA's research on climate change - also known as global warming--has
been part of a national and international framework. EPA is 1 of 13
federal agencies that make up the U.S. Global Change Research Program,
which is a multi-agency effort focused on improving our understanding
of the science of climate change and its potential impacts. Part of
EPA's role is to understand the regional consequences of global change.
ORD manages EPA's climate change research function through its Global
Change Research Program. EPA's Office of Air and Radiation conducts
activities related to mitigating greenhouse gases.
In a February 2009 report we looked at how well EPA policies,
procedures, and plans help ensure that its climate change research
fulfills its role in climate change. We found that EPA did not have an
overall plan to ensure developing consistent, compatible climate change
strategies across the Agency. We surveyed EPA regions and offices and
found they needed more information on a variety of climate change
topics. They needed technical climate change research and tools as well
as other climate change policy guidance and direction. We learned that,
in the absence of an overall Agency plan, EPA's Office of Water and
several regional offices had independently developed, or were
developing, their own individual climate change strategies and plans.
The lack of an overall climate change policy can result in duplication,
inconsistent approaches, and wasted resources among EPA's regions and
offices.
At the time of our report, EPA's plan for future climate change
research did not address the full range of emerging information needs.
Specifically, the projected time of completion or the scope of some
research projects did not match the timing or the scope of regions'
needs. ORD did not have a central repository of its climate change
research for its internal users, nor did it effectively communicate the
results of its climate change research to EPA's internal users. While
ORD collected research requirements from regions and program offices,
the selection criteria for research topics were not transparent to the
regions. Finally, ORD did not have a system to track research requests
through completion, or a formal mechanism to obtain feedback from its
users.
We made several recommendations to ORD to establish various
management controls to ensure EPA fulfills its emerging climate change
role and related information needs. Among our recommendations was that
ORD must continue to routinely update the Science Inventory to include
the latest information from its laboratories and centers; establish a
formal mechanism to track regional research needs from research project
selection to completion; and establish a formal method for coordinating
research work with regions and program offices, communicating research
results, and collecting feedback on research products. ORD agreed with
our recommendations and has certified that all corrective actions have
been completed.

Greenhouse Gases Endangerment Finding

In September 2011, we reported on our review of the process EPA
used to make and support its greenhouse gases endangerment finding
based on a congressional request. Our objective was to determine
whether EPA followed key federal and EPA regulations and policies in
obtaining, developing, and reviewing the technical data used to make
and support its greenhouse gases endangerment finding. Our review
examined the data quality procedures EPA used in developing the
endangerment finding. We made no determination regarding the impact
that EPA's information quality control systems may have had on the
scientific information used to support the finding. We did not test the
validity of the scientific or technical information used to support the
endangerment finding, nor did we evaluate the merit of EPA's
conclusions or analyses.
We found that EPA met statutory requirements for rulemaking and
generally followed requirements and guidance related to ensuring the
quality of the supporting technical information. However, EPA's peer
review of the technical support document (TSD) for the endangerment
finding did not meet all OMB requirements for peer review of a highly
influential scientific assessment primarily because the review results
and EPA's response were not publicly reported, and because 1 of the 12
reviewers was an EPA employee. In our opinion, the TSD was a highly
influential scientific assessment because EPA weighed the strength of
the available science by its choices of information, data, studies, and
conclusions included in and excluded from the TSD. EPA officials told
us they did not consider the TSD a highly influential scientific
assessment. We also found that no contemporaneous supporting
documentation was available to show what analyses EPA conducted prior
to disseminating information from other agencies in support of its
greenhouse gases endangerment finding.
We recommended that ORD: 1) revise its Peer Review Handbook to
accurately reflect OMB requirements for peer review of highly
influential scientific assessments; 2) instruct program offices to
state in proposed and final rules whether the action is supported by
influential scientific information or a highly influential scientific
assessment; and 3) revise its assessment factors guidance to establish
minimum review and documentation requirements for assessing and
accepting data from other organizations. EPA stated that its response
to the final report will address our recommendations. We consider our
recommendations unresolved pending our receipt and analysis of EPA's
response to our final report, which is due at the end of December 2011.

Unimplemented ORD Recommendations

The Subcommittee expressed an interest in OIG recommendations that
ORD has not implemented. Unimplemented recommendations refer to
recommendations from prior OIG reports on which corrective actions have
not been completed. The OIG is mandated by the Inspector General Act to
identify unimplemented recommendations in our semiannual reports to
Congress. We prepare a Compendium of Unimplemented Recommendations to
satisfy this requirement. Our Compendium highlights for EPA management
those significant recommendations from previous semiannual reports to
Congress that have remained unimplemented past the date agreed upon by
EPA and the OIG. It also provides a listing of all of the other
significant recommendations with future completion dates.
In our most recent Compendium, we identified one unimplemented
recommendation by ORD that is past due from a 2009 report that reviewed
actions EPA has taken to mitigate health risks from chemical vapor
intrusion at contaminated sites. We specifically recommended that ORD
finalize toxicity values for Trichloroethylene and Perchloroethylene in
the Integrated Risk Information System database. The agreed-to
completion date was September 30, 2011. We also identified eight
unimplemented recommendations with future planned completion dates from
four reports. Corrective actions are set to be completed by ORD on
these recommendations ranging from December 2011 out to 2015.

Planned and Ongoing Work on ORD Activities

In addition to the completed work discussed above, the OIG is
currently conducting reviews of other ORD activities that may be of
interest to the Subcommittee. One area we are reviewing is ORD's
management of Science to Achieve Results (STAR) grants, which fund
research grants and graduate fellowships in numerous environmental
science and engineering disciplines through a competitive solicitation
process and independent peer review. For FYs 2008 through 2010, this
program received over $90 million in funding. We are planning a review
of the actions EPA takes before awarding a STAR grant and during its
monitoring of a grant to ensure no research misconduct occurs. We
expect to start this work during the current FY. We have also started
an evaluation of ORD's review process for proposals submitted for one
particular STAR grant competition. Specifically, our objectives are to
determine whether ORD followed applicable federal and EPA policies and
procedures in managing the technical peer review panel process, and
communicated with grant applicants in an accurate, timely, appropriate,
and transparent manner regarding the status of their proposals. We
expect to complete this work by April 2012.
Another area we are currently examining is EPA's approach to
nanomaterials, which has become an emerging issue. Nanomaterials are
particles so tiny they cannot be detected by conventional microscopes.
These miniscule materials are being widely used in consumer products
because of their unique properties and potential benefits, but the
health and environmental implications associated with their use have
not been fully determined. We have started a review to determine how
effectively EPA is managing the human health and environmental risks of
nanomaterials. We expect to complete this work by January 2012.

Conclusion

OIG work has identified areas where ORD can improve its operations
and activities so it can better provide the solid underpinning of
science and technology necessary for EPA regulatory decision-making. I
believe the OIG has been a positive agent of change through the many
recommendations we have made to ORD in those areas. To their credit,
ORD has been receptive to many of our recommendations. We will continue
to work with ORD to identify additional areas needing attention.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I would
be pleased to answer any questions the Subcommittee may have.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Elkins.
Our third and final witness, Mr. David Trimble, Director of
Natural Resources and Environmental at the U.S. General
Accounting Office. Mr. Trimble.

STATEMENT OF MR. DAVID TRIMBLE, DIRECTOR,

NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT,

U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Trimble. Chairman Harris, Congressman Tonko, and
Members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to be here today to
discuss GAO's work on EPA's laboratories. As you know, EPA
operates its own laboratories because scientific research,
knowledge, and technical information are fundamental to its
mission and underpin the policies and regulations the agency
implements.
My testimony draws on the report we issued in July of this
year on EPA's laboratory operations and will focus on three
areas; longstanding planning, coordination, and leadership
issues; management of EPA's workload and workforce; and
management of EPA's real property.
First, EPA has not fully implemented key recommendations
from prior independent evaluations that were aimed at improving
longstanding planning, coordination, and leadership issues. A
1992 expert panel recommended that EPA implement a planning
process that integrates and coordinates scientific work
throughout the agency, including the work of its regional,
program, and office and research and development laboratories.
EPA has not fully implemented this recommendation.
Instead, these offices independently plan the activities of
their respective laboratories based on their own office's
priorities and needs. Consequently, the EPA has a limited
ability to know if scientific activities are being
unintentionally duplicated among the laboratories or if
opportunities exist to collaborate and share scientific
expertise, equipment, and facilities across organizational
boundaries.
A 1994 evaluation by MITRE recommended EPA consolidate and
realign its laboratory facilities and workforce, finding that
the geographic separation of laboratories hampered their
efficiency and technical operations, and the consolidation and
realignment could improve planning and coordination, problems
MITRE noted had hampered EPA's science and technical community
for years.
EPA has not fully implemented this recommendation and
currently operates 37 labs across the Nation. Three studies,
including two by the National Research Council, noted that
EPA's planning and coordination issues are due in part to the
lack of a top science official with the responsibility or
authority to coordinate, oversee, and make management decisions
regarding major scientific activities throughout the agency.
In a 2000 report on improving science at EPA, NRC noted
that the lack of a top science official was a formula for weak
scientific performance in the agency and poor scientific
credibility outside the agency. Currently EPA operates its
laboratories under the direction of 15 different senior
officials using 15 different organizational and management
structures.
In response to our report EPA has proposed to increase the
responsibilities of its science advisor. It is not clear that
this will fully address the issue. On this point let me note
that the NRC's 2000 report concluded that the designation of
ORD as a coordinator for the agency's scientific planning
activities had proved to be insufficient because the position
did not provide the level of authority or responsibility for
oversight, coordination, and decision making. It also noted
that the assistant administrator for ORD could not be
reasonably expected to direct world-class science at ORD and
also try to improve science practices throughout the rest of
EPA.
Second, EPA does not use a comprehensive planning process
for managing its laboratories' workforce. Many of the regional
laboratories provide the same or similar core analytical
capabilities, but each region independently determines and
attempts to address its individual workforce needs. EPA also
lacks basic information on how many scientific and technical
employees it has working its laboratories, where they are
located, what functions they perform, or what specialized
skills they may have.
In addition, the agency does not have a workload analysis
for the laboratories to help determine the operable numbers and
distribution of staff throughout the enterprise. We believe
that such information is essential for EPA to prepare a
comprehensive laboratory workforce plan to achieve the agency's
mission with limited resources.
Third and finally, EPA does not have complete and accurate
data on the real property associated with its laboratories.
EPA's 37 labs are housed in 170 buildings and facilities in 30
cities across the Nation. Real property management is a
government-wide challenge that has been identified by GAO as a
high-risk area.
In 2010, the Administration directed agencies to speed up
efforts to identify and eliminate excess properties to help
achieve $3 billion in cost savings by 2012. In July, 2010, EPA
told OMB that it did not anticipate disposing of any of its
labs in the near future because the facilities were fully used
and considered critical to the agency.
However, we found that EPA did not have accurate and
reliable information called for by OMB to inform this
determination. Specifically, EPA did not have complete or
accurate data on the need for the facilities, the property use,
facility condition, and the facility's operating efficiency.
This concludes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to
answer any questions that you or other Members of the
Subcommittee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Trimble follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. David Trimble, Director, Natural Resources
And Environment, U.S. Government Accountability Office

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Trimble, and I
thank the panel for their testimony. Reminding Members that
Committee rules limit questioning to five minutes. The chair
will at this point open the round of questions, and I recognize
myself for five minutes. And, again, thank you all for being
here.
Dr. Anastas, I have got some questions with regards to
science and some with regards to administration. Let me start
with regards to science.
I understand that actually the EPA just issued its--the
outline of how it is going to study the hydrofracturing. I
think it was just issued a couple of weeks ago, and I
understand part of that is the EPA plans to retrospectively
sample its sights.
Now, I got to ask, I mean, when I remember back to
epidemiology, you only sampled retrospectively when prospective
data is either, you know, unavailable or too expensive to
obtain, but there are thousands of hydrofracturing wells being
drilled where you can prospectively obtain data. Why would you
choose retrospective data analysis? Again, this goes to the
quality of the data that you are going to gather.
I am sorry. Your mic is not on.
Dr. Anastas. Thank you for the question. The study is
designed to both include retrospective and prospective data.
The retrospective data is to look at sites that have had
reports of contamination to, one, verify if that contamination
has, indeed, taken place, and two, what the cause of that
contamination, if it----
Chairman Harris. And that is exactly my point, Dr. Anastas,
and I am sorry because we have got a few so I have got to rush
you along a little bit, but you could never know how that
contamination took place. All you know is the contamination is
there then. You don't know if it naturally was occurring at
that site, if it occurred before the hydrofracturing occurred.
I mean, I got a real problem when we say we are going to do
really good science, and then we say, well, by the way, we are
going to look at something retrospectively that we can do
prospectively.
Now, at those samplings my understanding is that yesterday
EPA indicated would not permit industry to shadow EPA when it
sampled its sites. Now, you said that integrity--the one way
you ensure integrity or at least encourage the perception of
integrity is through transparency. Why wouldn't you want
someone to be there when you sample the sites? Was that a
decision that you all made or someone else in the--you know,
your shop made or someone else?
Dr. Anastas. The study is designed to have very close
interaction with partners who are at the sites.
Chairman Harris. Doctor, you know exactly what I am asking
you. Can industry representatives be there when you sample
these sites? I am being told that EPA indicated they would not
permit industry to shadow EPA at the sampling of sites.
Do you have something to hide with the way you sample? If
not, why not let the sun shine in?
Dr. Anastas. Of course not.
Chairman Harris. You will reconsider that decision you
think?
Dr. Anastas. I think that the study is designed so that if
the property owner allows for the presence of people beyond EPA
on that site, then we have every desire to work collaboratively
and as openly as possible.
Chairman Harris. Boy, am I glad to here that. Thank you
very much.
Now, you said that science, Lisa Jackson says science is
the backbone of EPA, and I want to read you a couple of things
that she said, and I am going to ask you as a scientist if you
agree.
She said, ``We are actually at the point in many areas of
the country where on a hot summer day the best advice we can
give you is don't go outside, don't breathe the air, it might
kill you.''
Do you think that is the way a scientist would word
findings? Are you comfortable with that as a scientist?
Dr. Anastas. I believe the administrator was talking about
the air quality concerns that she had and that when we are not
doing what is needed to be done to improve the air quality that
it is unacceptable that the advice is to simply stay inside.
Chairman Harris. Don't breathe the air. It might kill you.
Okay.
Now, she also said in September that, ``If we could reduce
particulate matter to health levels, it would have the same
impact as finding a cure for cancer.'' Dr. Anastas, 600,000
people in this country died from cancer. You--are you going to
say scientifically, you are going to tell us that if we just
reduce particulate matter to healthy levels, we are going to
save 600,000 lives a year?
Dr. Anastas. I believe what the administrator was saying
was that the dramatic health benefits to reducing particulate
matter statistically have the type of dramatic increase that
you would have on increasing the battle against cancer.
Chairman Harris. Six hundred thousand deaths a year. Dr.
Anastas, a scientist, true standard deviations out from your
estimate, does it include 600,000 deaths being avoided?
Dr. Anastas. I do not have the numbers.
Chairman Harris. Could you get me the numbers because that
leads to my point, and I only have about 30 seconds I guess. I
have asked for that exact information from someone who
testified in front of this committee two months ago, and it
said that the cross-state regulations avoid, ``up to 34,000
premature deaths.''
Now, Dr. Anastas, you are a scientist. That is not the way
you word a result. That is the way you word a discussion,
something else, opinion. The scientific answer is it is this
estimate, this is the range of the estimate, and this is how I
derived it. That is a pretty simple question I asked two months
ago. Where is the holdup at the EPA? Is it your office, or is
it some other place to get that very simple answer? Where does
34,000 come from, what does up to 34,000 mean, what are the
standard deviations associated with that estimate, is it a
summary of the individual estimates that, you know, because you
and I both know how you can get up to 34,000. You can take zero
to 1,000 34 times and actually have a chance of it being zero.
And yet I could say that it is up to 34,000.
And you know as a scientist that wouldn't be subject to
rigorous examination. So where is the holdup? Do you have any
idea why I have to wait two months for a simple answer?
Dr. Anastas. I will be happy to follow up with you to get
those--that information to you.
Chairman Harris. Thank you so very, very much, because, you
know, I agree with you that, you know, science should be the
backbone of EPA, and I agree with you that transparency will
paint a--will contribute to the perception of integrity, but we
have got to have both those things. Thank you, Doctor.
And I now recognize Mr. Miller for five minutes, and
welcome.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, and I apologize for arriving on a
dead run and not having been part of the hearing to this point.
I did chair the Oversight Subcommittee of this Committee, the
Science Committee, for four years and in the 2007 to 2009
period, a turnaround time of two months from any agency in the
Bush Administration would have been a great turnaround time.
Mr. Elkins, you conducted a report on the EPA's peer review
process, and you determined the EPA's peer review process was,
your term was adequate to produce objective scientific review,
and you said in your written testimony that there are areas
where EPA's peer review process can be improved.
Please tell us how the peer review process is adequate and
how it could be better than adequate.
Mr. Elkins. Well, our report for the most part looked at
areas related to potential conflicts of interest in the peer
review process and whether or not EPA adequately had procedures
in place to not allow a conflict of interest to occur. What we
found is that the procedures that EPA had in place did not
adequately address that issue, but generally speaking we found
that the peer review process was adequate.
After our report was issued EPA agreed with our
recommendations, amended its peer review handbook, and as of
today it is adequate.
Mr. Miller. Okay, and how long ago did they make those
changes in their peer review process based on your
recommendations?
Mr. Elkins. I don't have that information with me. I
believe that report was back in 2009. I can get that for you if
you would like.
Mr. Miller. Okay. I think this hearing is based upon a GAO
report that I requested, and I requested it based on the
Subcommittee's work, to see if EPA's agency-wide management of
its research enterprise and laboratory infrastructure was all
that it could be, and we have seen the results of those
criticisms being a much broader criticism of EPA science, not
just whether it was well managed or properly coordinated but
whether it was honest and reliable.
Dr. Trimble, in your investigation did you find any reason
to question the quality of EPA scientific results? Was the
science still valid?
Mr. Trimble. The scope of our work did not go into issues
of scientific quality. That would not be something that we
would venture into, not being a science agency. Our work is
really more are they positioned organizationally to be as
strong as they could be.
Mr. Miller. Okay. So you simply did not look at that. You
have no reason based upon your evaluation, there is nothing in
your evaluation that questions the quality of EPA's scientific
work?
Mr. Trimble. No, sir.
Mr. Miller. Dr. Anastas, in light of the various problems
or suggestions that GAO has made, what is the EPA now doing to
ensure the quality and credibility of the scientific data and
results? Are you changing based on the GAO's study?
Dr. Anastas. In short the answer is yes. The
recommendations from the GAO are welcome. Our response to the
GAO enunciates how we are positively responding to those
recommendations, each of those recommendations. Those responses
are detailed in my written testimony and in short, we welcome
the suggestions and outline how we are proceeding to act on
those recommendations.
Mr. Miller. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I will yield back 40
seconds.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
The chair now recognizes our colleague from California, Mr.
Rohrabacher, for five minutes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, and thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman, for the leadership that you are showing on
this very significant issue of scientific integrity and the
EPA. Those of us who have been around for awhile have seen that
there are various methodologies that people utilize to obtain
their political agenda, and I would have to say that in my 30
years here in Washington I have never seen the politicalization
of science so dramatically as we have in the last few years.
But there has been evidence that for longer than that, of
course.
Let me just note that we have the IG here, the EPA's IG
here. You stated and there is word from your office that the
peer review process, which is, of course, one of the mainstays
into the scientific process, when applied to greenhouse gas
endangerment findings, that the EPA did not meet OMB's actual
requirements for a peer review that withstands, that basically
meets the standard. Is that correct?
Mr. Elkins. Well, what our report looked at is process, and
what we--what our report stated was that we believe that the
endangerment finding process should have incorporated a highly-
influential scientific assessment, and if you follow that
model, there are certain steps that need to occur as opposed to
just the influential scientific assessment.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Uh-huh.
Mr. Elkins. And so our findings was based that if the HISA
was not--that the EPA did not consider or they did not follow
the HISA process when they----
Mr. Rohrabacher. So it didn't meet the OMB requirements in
this case. So those requirements had said it wasn't met and
maybe you could tell us what has been done to alleviate that
problem. Peer review of greenhouse gas research seems to have
been compromised. How have you corrected that?
Dr. Anastas. As Inspector General Elkins noted, there was
no--and I believe as you know there is no determination that
there was any problems at all with the science. What was looked
at was the process. The----
Mr. Rohrabacher. But if the process is faulty, you can't
say that the outcome, oh, boy, the IG didn't find the outcome
bad. If the process is bad, you don't know what your outcome
is.
Dr. Anastas. The EPA made the determination----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay.
Dr. Anastas. --that this was not a high-impact scientific
assessment according to the OMB bulletin, a high-impact
scientific assessment, that it was not a high-impact scientific
assessment according to the OMB bulletin, and OMB agreed with
that determination.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So you did nothing. Thank you.
Dr. Anastas. And if I may----
Mr. Rohrabacher. So you determined that you didn't have to
do anything even though you found that--even though the IG's
office right there has found that you didn't meet the right
standard.
Dr. Anastas. And yet despite following OMB's direction we
have still taken the IG's recommendations and are addressing
each of those recommendations and will be addressing them
fully.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, we would hope that the next time
that we hear that your IG reporting that your peer review
process doesn't meet the OMB standards, that maybe they will be
able to report that you do next time, but at this point I am
not sure what your answer reflects, whether or not you have
done anything differently, but we will see what the IG's report
says next time around.
The--let me just note that when you determine that there is
a problem to be examined and that you are--then the EPA moves
forward that now something is going to be regulated because you
found a problem with it, it automatically means that there is a
lot of things that the people are going to have to do now that
they otherwise wouldn't have to do.
There is a great deal of expense that takes place in our
society based on your finding that there is a problem, and even
though--and I would like you to tell me why, and let me see if
I can pronounce it right, perchlorate. I have been noticing
here, and I have been given by my staff, that the National
Academy of Sciences and others have not found any problem with
perchlorate, but the EPA has designated it as something that
needs to be regulated by the EPA.
Now, why is that? What is the scientific basis that you
disagree with the National Academy of Sciences and others who
did not find that a problem?
Dr. Anastas. The scientific assessment of perchlorate had
findings about the hazard, the degree of hazard of perchlorate.
The determination of whether or not to regulate has certainly
scientific input and other statutory considerations that need
to be considered when making that determination. In whole all
of those factors are considered by the administrator in making
that determination.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much. I yield back. Thank
you.
Chairman Harris. I now recognize the gentleman from New
York, Mr. Tonko, for five minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Anastas, thank you for your testimony and to all of you
on the panel. But Doctor, in your testimony you mentioned that
ORD has organized its research into six areas, providing ORD
with opportunities to more effectively plan in what is a
coordinated way rather than the ongoing individual basis.
How do these six areas of research align with the research
areas of the program and regional offices?
Dr. Anastas. Thank you for the question because it is the--
it is that alignment that is the basis of why we undertook this
effort. What has been done is to--rather than look at
fragmented programs, instead engage our offices of water and
air and solid waste in order to determine what the highest
priority there is are and have that discussion directly between
the program offices, the regional offices, and our researchers
in ORD.
It was through that very intensive process over the course
of the past year that we identified these crosscutting areas
that will not only give greater synergies and flexibility but I
believe there is agreement not only internally but by our
Science Advisory Board and our Board of Scientific Counselors
that this will make it more effective in being responsive to
those high-priority areas.
Mr. Tonko. Now, when you do that, there might be a concern
for duplication or overlap, and just what does the agency do to
ensure that there isn't any of the overlap or duplication
between ORD's research, for instance, and that of their program
offices?
Dr. Anastas. Yes. It is this effort, these conversations
between ORD and the program offices that quite frankly are
happening more now than any time in the past, that are looking
to ensure that we don't have duplication. Those are the
conversations that are taking place not only with individual
offices but across program offices to ensure either
complementarity to make sure that they are not--there is not
duplication.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, and Dr. Anastas, you mentioned that
ORD takes steps to ensure that there is an involvement by the
program and regional offices in ORD's research planning
process. You also indicate that ORD provides scientific
expertise to those program offices as they develop those
regulations and their policy.
Now, does ORD have involvement in the research planning
process of the program offices?
Dr. Anastas. Yes. It is part of the same discussions that
the program offices and the regional offices are, as I
described, have complementary duties, complementary
responsibilities. So the Office of Research obviously has
responsibility for research, but other scientific analysis will
take place in the program office, technical support, generation
of data for immediate needs will take place in the regional
offices, and those are coordinated through these conversations.
Mr. Tonko. And what impediments, if any, are there to ORD
and the program offices from being involved in one another's
research planning process?
Dr. Anastas. I believe that the efforts that we have
undertaken over the course of the past year have removed many
of those impediments and have--these regular dialogues, these
formalized meetings, this regular follow-up is looking to and I
think quite successfully removing the historical impediments.
Mr. Tonko. Now, you say most of them. Are there any that
might exist for which there is a concern or where there is a
need for better flow or interaction?
Dr. Anastas. I would be happy to give a thoughtful answer
to that, and I will be happy to follow up if I can think of any
additional impediments.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, and I will take
advantage of the 40 seconds that the gentleman had to ask Dr.
Anastas one question that is kind of burning to me because we
would like to wrap this up before we go to vote.
As a scientist, purely as a scientist, forget the EPA
hydrofracturing study, forget that there is language saying,
you know, we urge the EPA, which we know that is not, you know,
statutory, binding, as a scientist, you have five objectives.
You are looking at five things in the lifecycle, and that is--
one is, you know, whether or not you are withdrawing ground
water, affecting groundwater resource, but then the last four
have to do with contamination of ground water. Let's talk about
those last four.
Your testimony yesterday at Transportation &
Infrastructure, there have been 1.2 million hydrofracturing
wells drilled with no documented case of drinking water
contamination, no--and I asked the panel, I keep on asking
every panel, is there any--no. As a scientist 1.2 million
applications of a technology with no documented affect on those
last four things that study is looking for.
Will you--I mean, do they come to you and say, look. Dr.
Anastas, as a scientist should we really be studying that? Do
we really need to study it? Did that question ever occur, or it
is just--the assumption is we are going to do this study, so I
am going to plow ahead.
Dr. Anastas. There are two things that I would like to say.
One is when concerns are raised to this Congress and Congress
urges the EPA to undertake a study, we take that seriously, and
I think that we all have a bias toward wanting more information
out there.
The second thing that I think answers your question
directly is that you can't find what you are not looking for,
and so how we thoughtfully construct a study that Congress
urged us to do to ensure that we find out whether or not these
concerns are valid and to what degree, I think that that is
incumbent upon us when we are urged to do it by this Congress.
Chairman Harris. The one thing I asked at the very
beginning is forgetting the urging to do by Congress. As a
scientist, 1.2 million applications of a technology.
Dr. Anastas. You can't----
Chairman Harris. Is there a justification for spending
monies to do that study as a scientist?
Mr. Miller. Mr. Chairman, I am really not persnickety about
the rules, but the conduct of this hearing does not even
resemble anything provided for in the House rules. Mr. Tonko
did not yield you his 40 seconds.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let me note for my----
Chairman Harris. Recognize the gentleman from California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I have been the chairman, having been the
chairman of various subcommittees that you are absolutely wrong
in your reading of the House rules, because those may have been
the House rules before, but it is the prerogative of the
chairman of a subcommittee as to how he will conduct that
subcommittee hearing. I have been in many subcommittees where
the chairman went on for 10 minutes in order to get a straight
answer from a witness.
Chairman Harris. Well, thank you, and look. I will end
because this is the problem. We are blending politics with
science. That is the disappointment.
I recognize the gentleman from Maryland for five minutes.
Mr. Bartlett. My question has to do with the same
commonsense that the Chairman is talking about.
We have a little community in western Maryland, George's
Creek. By the way, in Maryland MDE acts instead of EPA, and
that is because they are at least as stringent as EPA, so
that--EPA lets them act.
The effluent from the sewage treatment plant at George's
Creek was a little bit out of bounds, and so they had to put in
a new treatment plant. That was enormously expensive. This is a
very small, very poor community. The state gave them all the
grants that legally they could give them and still it was a
huge financial burden on the community. All three county
commissioners lost their last--their next election over it.
Trying to negotiate with MDE over this that the juice
wasn't going to be worth the squeezing was like trying to talk
the fly out of snatching the--the toad out of snatching the
next fly. That wasn't going to happen. They were totally
mindless.
George's Creek is hundreds of miles from the bay, and the
river enters in where the bay empties into the ocean. It is
going to be little or no effect to this. There were many other
better places to spend that money than forcing George's Creek
into this.
Where does commonsense enter in? Clearly that money could
have been better spent somewhere else than at George's Creek,
but there was no negotiating with these people, and there are
many regulations that you might have that will cause such an
economic burden that the money might be better spent somewhere
else in our society.
How do you make these commonsense decisions?
Dr. Anastas. One of the things that I would like to say
about making commonsense decisions or decisions about science
is that politics cannot, will not, and must not enter into
scientific decisions. Politicizing science is antithetical to
everything I am and everything that I do.
When we engage in scientific studies with the hydraulic
fracturing study being discussed today, we have engaged
scientific experts from all walks of life, from industry, from
academia. We have engaged thousands of people from the public
to ensure that this scientific study will be objective. We will
not presuppose the results of this scientific study one way or
the other.
Mr. Bartlett. Sir, I think the chairman's concern is that
if there had been 1.2 million frackings and there is zero
evidence of any groundwater contamination, any aquifer being
contaminated, why would it be commonsense to spend any money on
a scientific study? Aren't there other places we can better
spend our money?
Dr. Anastas. I believe that with an endeavor of the
importance of hydraulic fracturing . . .
Mr. Bartlett. But we have done it 1.2 million times and no
evidence of any contamination. Isn't there better places we
might spend our money than scientific--I am a scientist. I
spent a whole lot of my life doing that, so I understand
science.
Dr. Anastas. The level of concern that has been raised by
the public needs to be addressed as recognized by this----
Mr. Bartlett. But how can the public have a concern when
there are zero evidences of contamination after 1.2 million
fracking operations?
Dr. Anastas. I have to repeat that you can't find something
if you don't look, if you don't ask the questions, if you don't
do the science. That is why we do science, to answer the
questions, to address the concerns. So one way or the other
objectively we can state what the current state of affairs is.
Mr. Bartlett. You don't think that there is some validity
in observing that 1.2 million fracking operations that have not
produced any evidence of water contamination, you don't think
that that is relevant?
Dr. Anastas. I think all data is relevant. All objective,
scientifically-credible data is relevant. The absence of data
is not proof of anything. We construct scientific studies to
get data that we can turn into information, that we can turn
into knowledge. That is what the scientific----
Mr. Bartlett. Let me ask you a question. If you go to the
communities where we have had these 1.2 million fracking
operations and you ask them, has there been any water
contamination, and they tell you, no, so is that not a
reasonable scientific investigation?
Dr. Anastas. It is exactly because we have gone out and
asked have there been contaminations, and when people say the
answer is yes, part of this study is to validate whether or not
that is true, whether or not that has happened.
Mr. Bartlett. But it is my understanding that there has
been no documented evidence of contamination with 1.2--who says
there has been contamination if that is not documented?
Dr. Anastas. It is the documentation or lack of
documentation that we seek. If somebody reports that there has
been contamination, that needs to be scientifically validated.
Mr. Bartlett. I hope that is the most urgent place to spend
your money. I doubt that it is.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Bartlett.
Mr. McNerney, the gentleman from California, is recognized
for five minutes. Thank you.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
panel for coming here today.
The EPA is a large organization, it has a lot of different
laboratories, the statutes haven't been changed for a long
time. There is no doubt in my mind that there is room for
improvement. There is possible duplication, there is possible
processes that could be improved, and so on, and I think that
is an important function that this Subcommittee should be going
after, and yet, nothing in this hearing today from the other
side has been helpful in that stated goal of this hearing, to
gain an understanding of the best ways to reorganize and
reauthorize the ORD.
So moving forward, Mr. Elkins and Mr. Trimble had a fairly
good list of suggestions that they claimed have not been
implemented by the ORD. So, Mr. Elkins and Mr. Trimble, is it
your opinion that this is being resisted, that these changes
are being resisted, or are there statutory or resource
limitations that are keeping these suggestions from being
implemented?
Mr. Elkins. Actually, the reports that we have issued to
ORD for the most part they have been responsive to our
recommendations. We have, you know, we have had a few
recommendations such as the endangerment finding, we are still
waiting a response back from, but generally speaking they have
been responsive.
Mr. McNerney. So the impression I had earlier in your
testimony was that they weren't being responsive, but what I am
hearing now is, yes, the recommendations are being listened to,
and they are being responded to as the agency has the
capability to respond.
Mr. Elkins. Generally speaking I think that would be
accurate----
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Mr. Trimble.
Mr. Trimble. I think EPA has generally been agreeable to
our recommendations, taking a very positive approach to this.
The one area where I think we have a disagreement is concerning
the recommendation about establishing a top science official
for EPA to manage all the science activities.
As I noted in my opening comments their proposal to add
additional responsibilities to the science advisor I think is
probably going to be problematic. We will track that, but as I
noted the NRC back in 2000 when they were tracking the same
issue stated in their report that they had underestimated the
size of the challenge that would be faced in coordinating
science activities across the agency, and they explicitly noted
the challenge of dual heading the chief of ORD with this
responsibility. And much of what they focus on is to corral all
the sort of three types; the programs, the regions, and ORD,
you need somebody with authority. In a bureaucracy that means
management and budget in reality to make things happen and to
knock heads and make----
Mr. McNerney. I mean, that sounded like a good
recommendation. Do you think there is a statutory limitation
that is preventing that from happening, or is there just some
resistance within the department? What is your----
Mr. Trimble. I know in the NRC's recommendation it
requested that go forward with a second deputy, which I believe
would require action by the Hill. We didn't recommend that it
go that far, but we recommended that it be a senior person
above all the labs. Whether or not EPA could do that on its own
I suspect they could, but that is not something we have delved
into.
Mr. McNerney. Okay. Thank you. Now, what has suffered from
these problems that you all have found? Is it the quality or
the quantity? What has been the negative fallout from those
deficiencies?
Mr. Elkins. Well, I think it depends on the report. You
know, it depends on the area that we have looked at, but
generally speaking, for instance, on the workload issues and
the workforce planning, position management, the issue there is
not being able to estimate exactly what your workload is, and
therefore, not being able to determine what human resources you
need to address those issues or the specialties that you need
on staff. That is an issue.
The other issue that has come up in other studies has to do
with data quality, which relates to the information coming in
whether it is reliable and whether or not there are systems and
procedures in place to make sure that it is reliable.
These are the types of concerns and questions that have
come up through the reports that we have done.
Mr. Trimble. What I would highlight specifically to this
top science official, I would just go back to the NRC report
that noted that the lack of a top science official is a formula
for weak scientific performance and poor scientific
credibility. So I think you have this over-arching effect.
More specifically, you have potentially lost opportunities
for collaboration, for consolidating resources, you know,
especially with the tight budgets in terms of workforce and
workload and facilities. You miss opportunities to leverage
that.
And then without the data on workload and workforce, you
are not in a position to know whether you have got the right
people at the right place doing the right thing.
Mr. McNerney. Okay. Then, again, this may be a statutory
issue. It may not--it may be that the EPA doesn't have the
authority to create that position on its own.
I yield back.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I would now recognize the chairman of the committee, Mr.
Hall from Texas, for five minutes.
Chairman Hall. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Anastas, I would like to raise a few concerns about
EPA's study of the relationship between hydraulic fracturing
and water. We have had a lot of testimony here, and basically
the testimony has been that there is just no way in the world
that the testimony you and others from your department have
given could be true. And I want to ask you in response to
questions I sent to you for the record from hydraulic
fracturing hearing in May, you responded on September 23 that
all aspects of this research would have, and I quote, this is
your quote, ``an associated quality assurance project plan''
which has been ``reviewed and approved prior to the stated data
collection.''
However, your agency started testing and data collection
before the final study plan was done.
My question is were specific project plans completed and
subjected to public comment and external peer review prior to
testing and prior to the release of the full final study plan?
Yes or no?
Dr. Anastas. A quality action project plan is not----
Chairman Hall. I didn't ask you that. Just give me a yes or
no answer to the question I asked you. I don't want a lecture
from you.
Dr. Anastas. The quality action project plans are reviewed
by experts both internally and externally.
Chairman Hall. Were they reviewed?
Dr. Anastas. They were reviewed.
Chairman Hall. Well, that is what I asked you. Were
specific project plans completed and subjected to public
comment and external peer review prior to testing and prior to
the release of the full final study plan, and your answer----
Dr. Anastas. The review process----
Chairman Hall. --to that is yes. Is that right?
Dr. Anastas. No. The answer is that they were externally
and internally reviewed. The process by which they go through
that review is different from that of the full project
protocols and plan.
Chairman Hall. Do you consider this study, ``a highly
influential scientific assessment?''
Dr. Anastas. That determination has not been made.
Chairman Hall. Why do you think it hadn't been made?
Dr. Anastas. I can tell you that it has not been made but--
and that it certainly will be a decision that we will--and a
determination that we will make.
Chairman Hall. Do you think it doesn't meet the threshold?
Dr. Anastas. That determination has not been made.
Chairman Hall. Mr. Elkins, in your opinion do you think the
hydraulic fracturing study should be considered a highly-
influential scientific assessment?
Mr. Elkins. Sir, we really haven't taken a look at that
particular issue, so I am not in a position to comment.
Chairman Hall. Okay. E&E News reported that EPA has
abandoned its announced study protocols in order to, ``release
more of its findings in 2012.'' Can I get any assurance that
the committee--can you give the committee any assurance that
this target release date is not politically driven?
If so, what is the difference between releasing findings in
the late 2012 versus, say, early 2013?
Dr. Anastas. I can give this committee complete assurance
that the release of data is not politically driven.
Chairman Hall. I have one last question. Do I have a little
time left?
Chairman Harris. Yes, you do, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. Mr. Trimble and Mr. Elkins, your offices
have been critical of EPA's process for selecting impartial
scientific advisory panels. Can you describe the problems that
you have incurred in the agency's handling of external peer
review panels and what can be done to prevent EPA from stacking
the panels?
Mr. Elkins. Well, yes, sir. In the one report that we have
done that addressed that specifically, again, that I believe we
did back in 2009, the specific issue was whether or not the
Agency had systems in place to identify any conflicts of
interest. At that time we found that the system wasn't robust
enough to make those sorts of determinations, but since we
brought that to the agency's attention, they have addressed
that, and in their current peer review handbook it does
address, you know, our concerns.
Chairman Hall. I thank the gentlemen. I yield back.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I just want to--before we break up I want to thank the
witnesses for their valuable testimony, all the Members for
their questions. To provide a brief clarification for Dr.
Morgan's letter for the record, unfortunately Dr. Morgan was
unable to confirm his video attendance at this hearing until 5
hours after the deadline for testimony to be submitted. We are
happy to include his comments in letter form as we have
accepted and look forward to working with all members of the
scientific community in the future.
The Members of the Subcommittee may have additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
those in writing. The record will remain open for two weeks for
additional comments from Members. The witnesses are excused.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:02 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix I:

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by DR. Paul Anastas,
Assistant Administrator,
Office Of Research And Development,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency;

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Arthur Elkins, Jr., Inspector General,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. David Trimble, Director,
Natural Resources And Environment,
U.S. Government Accountability Office

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Submitted Statement for the Record by Mr. M. Granger Morgan, Head,
Department of Engineering and Public Policy University and Lord Chair
Professor of Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


