- THE OFFICE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY: EXAMINING PRIORITIES AND EFFECTIVENESS OF THE NATION'S SCIENCE POLICIES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE OFFICE OF SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY POLICY: EXAMINING
PRIORITIES AND EFFECTIVENESS OF
THE NATION'S SCIENCE POLICIES
=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 20, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-91

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-728                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              PAUL D. TONKO, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Tennessee                        VACANCY
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, June 20, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Ralph M. Hall, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    12
Written Statement............................................    13

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking
Minority Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
U.S. House of Representatives..................................    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Statement by Representative Jerry F. Costello, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..
Written Statement............................................    16

Witnesses:

Dr. John P. Holdren, Assistant to the President for Science and
Technology, and Director of the Office of Science and
Technology Policy
Oral Statement...............................................    19
Written Statement............................................    21

Discussion.......................................................    36

Appendix 1: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. John P. Holdren, Assistant to the President for Science and
Technology, and Director of the Office of Science and
Technology Policy..............................................    67

Appendix 2: Additional Material for the Record

Prepublication Copy: Managing for High-Quality Science and
Engineering at the NNSA National Security Laboratories:
National Research Council......................................    90

THE OFFICE OF SCIENCE

AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY:

EXAMINING PRIORITIES AND

EFFECTIVENESS OF THE

NATION'S SCIENCE POLICIES

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 20, 2012

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in Room
2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ralph Hall
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.010

Chairman Hall. The Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology will come to order, and I say good morning, and
welcome to today's hearing entitled ``The Office of Science and
Technology Policy: Examining Priorities and Effectiveness of
the Nation's Science Policies.''
In front of you are packets containing the written
testimony--and thank you for your testimony ahead of time--
biography and Truth in Testimony disclosure of today's witness,
Dr. John Holdren.
We will have our opening statements, and I will begin with
my opening statement.
Dr. Holdren, thank you for joining us today. In your dual
role as the President's Science Advisor and as Director of the
Office of Science and Technology Policy, you have the
President's ear, and that is very important, and as such, you
have a real, far-reaching influence on this Administration's
direction in science and technology, probably for this
Committee, not a more important position on the Hill.
We may not always agree with the advice the Director
provides to the President, but science and technology have
played a vital role in the making of this Nation and is going
to continue to fulfill that role in the future, and as such, I
doubt you would find anyone here who would challenge the need
for science and need for technology advice in this White House
or in any White House. Throughout the history, that advice has
come through both informal and formal methods.
The Office of Science and Technology Policy that we know
today is a result of the National Science and Technology
Policy, Organization, and Priorities Act of 1976, which
formally created both the office and established the roles of
the Director. The House Committee on Science and Technology was
instrumental in the passage of this Act, and it is our
responsibility to make sure that the office continues to
function in a way that is beneficial to American citizens.
And while Directors historically have joined us annually to
review the Administration's budget request and have appeared
before us on specific issues from time to time, this is the
first time this Committee has met to focus primarily on
oversight of OSTP since it was created in statute.
In addition to reviewing its responsibilities, operations,
and management, we will also look at its function in shaping
our Nation's policies. It should come as no surprise that I
remain concerned about a number of this Administration's
science and technology policy issues, ranging from an
unprecedented emphasis on clean energy at the expense of other
priorities to a larger focus on applied research at the expense
of basic scientific research to the lack of a clearly
identified and compelling long-term mission for human
spaceflight. Further, there are other areas still awaiting
action from OSTP and the Administration. These include
transparency and data access issues, a position on the transfer
of the Joint Polar Satellite System from NOAA to NASA, a
position statement on INKSNA, and a strategic plan for STEM
Education.
Dr. Holdren, I know you take your role seriously, and as
the House Committee responsible for Science, Space, and
Technology, we also take our oversight role seriously. Today,
we look forward to receiving your testimony and learning about
the current organization and priorities of OSTP and the
Administration as part of this Committee's oversight
responsibilities.
I thank you, and I yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hall follows:]

Prepared Statement of Chairman Ralph M. Hall

Dr. Holdren, thank you for joining us today. In your dual role as
the President's Science Advisor and as Director of the Office of
Science and Technology Policy, you have the President's ear, and as
such, you have a real, far-reaching influence on this Administration's
direction in science and technology.
We may not always agree with the advice the Director provides to
the President, but science and technology have played a vital role in
the making of this Nation and will continue to fulfill that role in the
future. As such, I doubt you would find anyone here who would challenge
the need for science and technology advice in any White House.
Throughout U.S. history, that advice has come through both informal and
formal methods.
The Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) that we know
today is a result of the National Science and Technology Policy,
Organization, and Priorities Act of 1976 (P.L. 94-282), which formally
created both the Office and established the roles of the Director. The
House Committee on Science and Technology was instrumental in the
passage of this Act, and it is our responsibility to make sure that the
Office continues to function in a way that is beneficial to American
citizens. While Directors historically have joined us annually to
review the Administration's Budget Request and have appeared before us
on specific issues from time to time, this is the first time this
Committee has met to focus primarily on oversight of OSTP since it was
created in statute.
In addition to reviewing OSTP's responsibilities, operations, and
management, we will also look at its function in shaping our Nation's
policies. It should come as no surprise that I remain concerned about a
number of this Administration's science and technology policy issues,
ranging from an unprecedented emphasis on clean energy at the expense
of other priorities to a larger focus on applied research at the
expense of basic scientific research to the lack of a clearly defined
and compelling long-term mission for human space flight. Further, there
are other areas still awaiting action from OSTP and the Administration.
These include transparency and data access issues, a position on the
transfer of the Joint Polar Satellite System (JPSS) from NOAA to NASA,
a position statement on INKSNA, and a Strategic Plan for STEM
Education.
Dr. Holdren, I know you take your role seriously, and as the House
Committee responsible for Science, Space, and Technology, we also take
our oversight role seriously. Today, we look forward to receiving your
testimony and learning about the current organization and priorities of
OSTP and the Administration as part of this Committee's oversight
responsibilities.
Thank you, and I yield back my time.

Chairman Hall. At this time I recognize Ms. Johnson for her
opening statement.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and good
morning. We are pleased to have the second hearing with Dr.
Holdren at the Committee.
As you know, every year we invite the Director of the
Office of Science and Technology Policy to appear before the
Committee to help us understand not just that year's R&D budget
but others as well.
We live in an increasingly complex world, and the
challenges we face will be both impacted by and hopefully
alleviated by science and technology. As Americans, we should
celebrate the fact that a highly respected scientist such as
Dr. Holdren has the ear of the President and is truly part of
his inner circle of advisors on matters of science and
technology. We in Congress also can benefit from good advice on
matters of science and technology policy, and I am looking
forward to your testimony today.
The truth is that OSTP has been asked to do a lot by both
Congress and the President. In addition to your more visible
initiatives, I know that you have to carry out necessary
interagency coordination, a job that probably goes
underappreciated and undervalued by all of us. The work of OSTP
staff helps to minimize unnecessary duplication in research and
development programs across the government and ensure that
significant research gaps are addressed.
Dr. Holdren, you have been asked to testify about the
structure, function and funding of your office, as well as the
two hats you wear as both Science Advisor to the President and
Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. You
face many challenges, some of which you inherited, such as the
NOAA satellite program, and others that are more recent, such
as the arm-twisting you probably had to do to get agencies to
complete their scientific integrity policies. I think we forget
sometimes that your actual authority is limited and that much
of what you accomplish is through your leadership, persuasion
and persistence.
As you know, I care deeply about the need to ensure that we
remain competitive in a challenging world economy as well as
improve the quality of life for all our citizens. Research and
innovation are essential ingredients of any effort to meet
those two goals, as is STEM education. You have a number of
initiatives underway related to STEM education, and I would
like to hear how those are faring and any issues that you are
facing.
With respect to research and innovation, I would like to
hear about your efforts to promote innovation and to move new
technologies towards commercialization. I know that the
Administration has a number of initiatives underway in that
regard, such as the Startup America Initiative, and I would
like to get your assessment of how well those initiatives are
working and what additional steps may be needed.
And finally, in addition to hearing about your key
priorities and goals for your office, I would like to hear what
you might need from Congress, whether it is related to a
general function of your office or to a specific goal or task.
You have an important responsibility, and we want you to
succeed.
Dr. Holdren, I look forward to your testimony and I yield
back the remainder of my time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Johnson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson

Thank you, Chairman Hall, for holding this hearing and wecome, Dr.
Holdren, to the Committee for the second time this year. As you know,
every year we invite the OSTP Director to appear before the Committee
to help us understand not just that year's R&D budget request but also
your office's role in the federal R&D enterprise.
We live in an increasingly complex world, and the challenges we
face will be both impacted by and--hopefully--alleviated by science and
technology. As Americans, we should celebrate the fact that a highly
respected sceintist such as Dr. Holdren has the ear of the President
and is truly part of his inner circle of advisors on matters of science
and technology. We in Congress also can benefit from good advice on
matters of science and technology policy, and so I am looking forward
to your testimony today.
The truth is that OSTP has been asked to do a lot by both Congress
and the President. In addition to your more visible initiatives, I know
that you have to carry out necessary interagency coordination--a job
that probably goes underappreciated and undervalued by all of us. The
work of OSTP staff helps to minimize unnecessary duplication in R&D
programs across the government and ensure that significant research
gaps are addressed.
Dr. Holdren, you have been asked to testify about the structure,
function, and funding of your office, as well as the two hats you wear
as both Science Advisor to the President and Director of OSTP. You face
many challenges, some of which you inherited, such as the NOAA
satellite program, and others that are more recent, such as the arm-
twisting you probably had to do to get agencies to complete their
scientific integrity policies. I think we forget sometimes that your
actual authority is limited and that much of what you accomplish you do
through leadership, persuasion, and persistence.
As you know, I care deeply about the need to ensure that we remain
competitive in a challenging world economy as well as improve the
quality of life for all our citizens. Research and innovation are
essential ingredients of any effort to meet those two goals, as is STEM
education. You have a number of initiatives underway related to STEM
education, and I would like to hear how those are faring and any issues
that you are facing.
With respect to research and innovation, I would like to hear about
your efforts to promote innovation and to move new technologies toward
commercialization. I know that the Administration has a number of
initiatives underway in that regard, such as the Startup America
Initiative, and I would like to get your assessment of how well those
initiatives are working and what additional steps may be needed.
Finally, in addition to hearing about your key priorities and goals
for your office, I'd like to hear what you might need from Congress,
whether it's related to a general function of your office or to a
specific goal or task. You have an important responsibility, and we
want you to succeed.
Dr. Holdren, I look forward to your testimony and I yield back the
remainder of my time.

Chairman Hall. I thank you, Ms. Johnson.
At this time, if there are Members who have opening
statements, they will be added to the record.

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics Chair Jerry
F. Costello
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.050

And at this time, I would like to introduce our witness.
Dr. John Holdren is Assistant to the President for Science and
Technology, Director of the White House Office of Science and
Technology Policy, and Co-Chair of the President's Council of
Advisors on Science and Technology. Prior to joining the
Administration, he taught at Harvard and was Director of the
Woods Hole Research Center. Chairman, as our witness should
know, spoken testimony is limited to five minutes, but you are
a very important and valuable witness. We will be a little more
lenient with that with you if you need such, and I say that; if
I didn't say it, Ms. Johnson would insist on it, so it is
easier for me just to take that position, so we are going to be
fair with you is what I am trying to tell you. After that, the
Members are going to have five minutes each to ask questions
and the Chair is able to provide some flexibility, as I said,
as you are the only witness today, Doctor. I thank you for your
testimony.
Reminding Members of the Committee that rules limit our
questioning to five minutes, and I surely will adhere to that.
We recognize you at this time while I look for my
testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN P. HOLDREN,

ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT FOR SCIENCE

AND TECHNOLOGY, AND DIRECTOR OF THE

OFFICE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY

Mr. Holdren. Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson, Members
of the Committee, I am pleased to be here with you today to
discuss the organization that I lead in the Executive Office of
the President, namely the Office of Science and Technology
Policy.
As you know, science, technology, and innovation have been
at the core of the American success story since the days of the
Founding Fathers. Advances in agronomy, electrification,
mechanized transportation and wireless communication, among
others, have each in their time brought waves of economic
growth, generated new opportunities industries and jobs while
also raising policy challenges. It was in recognition of the
importance of these domains and challenges that Congress in
1976 created OSTP to advise the President on the scientific,
engineering and technological aspects of the issues before him
and to help coordinate, lead and develop budgets for federal
R&D programs.
Today, OSTP's work is accomplished by a staff of about 100
people spread across four divisions and the Director's Office.
Almost 90 percent of these are science and technology
professionals, many of them detailed to us from agencies. This
diversity of talent is essential, given the scope of the
intellectual terrain that we cover and the wide range of our
oversight, coordination and support functions, which include
running the National Science and Technology Council and the
major interagency initiatives that fall under it, for example,
the U.S. Global Change Research Program and the National
Nanotechnology Initiative, as well as supporting the
President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology in
the development of its reports for the President.
I have submitted for the record a detailed summary of
OSTP's activities, and in my brief remarks this morning, I will
highlight just a few of these.
First, reflecting the Administration's strong focus on jobs
and the economy, OSTP has been active in efforts to leverage
science and technology for economic growth. We partnered with
the Council of Economic Advisers and the National Economic
Council to develop the Administration's Strategy for American
Innovation, and we launched such jobs-focused initiatives as
Startup America, focused on small businesses and entrepreneurs,
the Advanced Manufacturer Partnership, which brings together
universities, industry and others to invest in emerging
technologies that have the potential to create high-quality
domestic manufacturing jobs, and most recently, U.S. Ignite,
aimed at accelerating availability to U.S. users of ultrafast
Internet and new products and services based on it.
Second, in support of the Administration goal that the
United States lead the world in clean energy technology, we
have prioritized budgetary support for basic and applied
research in this important domain and have pushed the
development of advanced materials, in part through the
Materials Genome Initiative, which is another public-private
partnership combining the comparative advantages of both
sectors.
Third, OSTP has very actively supported science,
technology, engineering and math education. We worked with the
President and the Domestic Policy Council to launch Educate to
Innovate, a public-private partnership to improve K-12 STEM
education that has attracted more than $700 million in
corporate and philanthropic commitments to work in classrooms
across the country to improve instruction in science and
mathematics and Change the Equation, a nonprofit organization
that is mobilizing the business community to improve STEM
education across the United States. And we have been
aggressively addressing STEM education tasks specified in the
America COMPETES Reauthorization Act, including completion of a
comprehensive inventory of federal STEM education programs.
Fourth, I want to mention OSTP's leading role with other
White House offices in the implementation of the President's
Open Government Initiative. Under the leadership of U.S. Chief
Technology Officer, Todd Park, we have been opening the
workings of government to the American people and focusing
heavily on making government data a driver of private-sector
innovation and job creation.
In closing, let me simply say that with continuing support
from our partners in Congress, OSTP is working every day to
ensure that the policies and proposals emanating from the
Executive Branch are informed by the most up-to-date and
objective insights about the relevant science and technology
and to strengthen the U.S. science, technology and innovation
enterprise and the benefits to the Nation that flow from it.
I look forward to continuing to work with this Committee to
these ends, and I will be pleased to answer any questions that
the Members may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holdren follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.025

Chairman Hall. I thank you, sir, and I will start out with
some questions for you.
OSTP released a fact sheet highlighting some of the
President's energy priorities, and the opening sentence of that
fact sheet states that ``We now face a make-or-break moment for
the middle class and those trying to reach it.'' However, it is
unclear whether the President's energy agenda is actually good
for the middle class. The Administration is working to advance
these policies, policies to restrict oil and gas exploration
and production, and rejected the Keystone pipeline, which would
enhance domestic energy security; an avalanche of EPA
regulations on coal plants, on refineries, on automobiles and
numerous other industries that ultimately will raise energy
prices for all Americans; and a ``Clean Energy Standard'' that
would mandate Americans buy electricity from more expensive and
less reliable sources such as wind and solar power, which are
both good but not as reliable.
How does the ``regulate at any cost'' approach to energy
policy benefit the middle class and the overall American
community, not just the middle class but all of us? Explain
that to us, if you would, sir.
Dr. Holdren. Well, first of all, Mr. Chairman, the
President and the Administration have what the President has
described as an all-of-the-above energy strategy in which
development of our domestic resources of oil and gas and coal
plays an important part, nuclear energy plays an important
part, renewable energy, which you have mentioned, plays an
important part, and increasing energy efficiency plays an
important part. We recognize that we need all of these energy
options to secure our energy future, and we are working to
enable all of them and lift all of them to their highest
potential. We do not have a policy of regulation no matter what
the cost. In fact, regulations are reviewed very carefully in
light of the science evidence that is available before they are
put forward, and I think we have been doing a good job in this
Administration of only putting forward regulations that are
strongly based in solid science. It is certainly our intention
to provide an energy future in which the United States imports
less energy, therefore pays less to other countries for its
imported energy, and relies on a wide diversity of domestic
energy sources to provide the affordable and reliable energy
supply that our economy needs, that our consumers need,
including, of course, the middle class.
Chairman Hall. Well, I don't totally agree with you there,
and I think some of his indications, evidence of disdain for
energy, he certainly declared war on agriculture early and got
around to energy. We have enough energy and enough energy
access to be selling energy rather than buying it. I think it
is kind of a sad situation when we are in the situation we are
in here.
In July or August--I accept what statements you made. I
just don't agree with it. In July and August, NASA's Commercial
Crew Program is going to select the next round of companies for
the third phase of domestic development known as the Commercial
Crew Integrated Capability Program. NASA plans to give $300
million to $500 million each to two and possibly three
companies using Space Act Agreements instead of more typical
government contracts, and according to NASA's Office of General
Council, Space Act Agreements don't permit NASA to impose
design or safety requirements on the contracts.
With regard to NASA's use of Space Act Agreements on the
Commercial Crew Program, how can we be assured that NASA is
developing safe systems if it is prohibited from levying any
design requirements, prohibited from demanding performance
tests from the companies?
Dr. Holdren. Before I turn to that NASA question, let me
just mention, Mr. Chairman, that our energy imports have been
sharply declining under this Administration. We are moving in
exactly the direction that you also endorse, which is moving
toward importing less, and I think that is very beneficial.
On the NASA question, it is my understanding that NASA has
in fact been able to apply its International Space Station
visiting vehicle requirements to the cargo transportation
development efforts that have been taking place. The contracts
that will be awarded in the next phase of commercial cargo and
commercial crew will also very clearly allow NASA to specify
safety requirements and to oversee them. So I am certainly
confident, the President is confident that we will continue to
maintain NASA oversight of safety in these operations.
Chairman Hall. I surely hope so, but my time is expired.
I now recognize Ms. Johnson for five minutes.
Ms. Woolsey. You forgot to look to see who is over here--
Ms. Woolsey.
Chairman Hall. I am going to make about a five-minute
speech about Ms. Woolsey. We are going to lose her, and I am
going to miss her. I recognize you, and if Ms. Johnson is here,
I would recognize her.
Ms. Woolsey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. I have to be more careful.
Ms. Woolsey. Yes, you do, more discerning about your women.
So Dr. Holdren, thank you for all you do. We put a lot of
importance on your office and we expect a lot, and we get a
lot.
How is the United States stacking up as compared to the
rest of the world in our support for science and technology and
the policies that we put in place? And feel free to tell us
where we could do better.
Dr. Holdren. Well, first of all, I would say that the
United States continues to lead the world in science,
engineering and innovation across a very wide array of crucial
fields of fundamental research and applied research. The United
States leads the world. We remain by far the largest funder of
research and development in the world. The sum of our
expenditures on R&D in the public and private sector together
is over $400 billion a year. That is in the vicinity of 30
percent of all of the world's expenditures on R&D. We continue
as well to lead the world in space, although sometimes the
contrary is asserted. Our planetary exploration programs have
absolutely no peer. We have missions on the way to or at seven
out of the eight officially designated planets and more. The
Voyager is now reaching the edge of the solar system; we have
missions to asteroids. No one is even close.
When you look at the firsts in space, some people say gee,
China is overtaking us. Well, China just put its first woman in
space a few days ago. We put our first woman in space, Sally
Ride, in 1983. One can go on through the list. China is talking
about maybe being able to land someone on the moon after 2020.
We did it in 1969.
The one area where I think we need to work much harder is
one I have already mentioned, the area of STEM education, where
the United States that used to lead the world in most indices
of performance in STEM education has now fallen to the middle
of the pack. That is a bad trend and one we are working very
hard across a wide variety of fronts to help remedy.
At the same time, I would argue that across the board, we
cannot afford to be complacent. One of the areas that is
clearly crucial in linking science and technology and
innovation to the economy is the translation of discovery from
laboratories in research universities and our great national
laboratories, accelerating the translation of those discoveries
into commercial products and services and new processes, and
there the American Manufacturing Partnership, the Materials
Genome Initiative, the Startup America Initiative are all aimed
at accelerating and making more efficient the processes by
which we turn scientific and engineering advance into economic
advantage.
Ms. Woolsey. So because we are increasingly on the cutting
edge of science and there is intersections of multiple
disciplines, what are the challenges that you face involving
different federal agencies, academia and industry in the
efforts of our country to go forward with science and
technology?
Dr. Holdren. Well, thank you for that question. Let me
answer it in two parts. First is the question of interagency
engagement and coordination, and there, as mentioned at some
length in my testimony, OSTP has the responsibility and I have
the responsibility as its Director to oversee and lead efforts
to coordinate science, technology and innovation initiatives
that cross agency boundaries, and for that purpose, we have the
National Science and Technology Council, which is nominally
chaired by the President but in practice usually I chair it. It
has five standing committees, one on science, one on
technology, one on STEM education, one on national security and
international affairs, and one on environment, natural
resources and sustainability. Under those standing committees
are many subcommittees. This entity is exceedingly active, and
the departments and agencies are stepping up and participating
energetically in cooperative efforts to build these interagency
initiatives that have to draw on the competencies and the
resources of the wide range of agencies that we have engaged.
USGRCP, the Global Change Research, Program, for example, has
13 agencies engaged. Similarly, National Nanotechnology
Initiative, the Networking and Information Technology R&D
Initiative both have large numbers of agencies and they are
stepping up. Even in tight budget times, they understand that
we cannot afford to ignore these crucial interagency
collaborations.
With respect to the private sector and the academic sector,
the other part of your question, it is really remarkable and
inspiring to me the extent to which private companies and
universities are stepping up. Folks from coalitions of private
companies and universities are in my office almost every day
asking how they can help, how they can do more, and we have
engaged them across the range of these partnerships that I have
already mentioned. I think the private sector is particularly
interested in being sure, number one, that we maintain the
foundation of basic research on which the private sector needs
to draw for the research and development of a more applied
nature that they primarily undertake. They are also very
interested in helping with and helping us maintain our emphasis
on STEM education because they are well aware of the need to
maintain the pipeline of the next generation of innovators,
inventors, makers, discoverers but also the skilled workforce
that they need across the board in our high-tech industries in
order to continue to compete and succeed.
Ms. Woolsey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time is up.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady's time is expired.
I recognize Mr. Rohrabacher, the gentleman from California,
for five minutes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I am noticing that the Department of Energy in their
nuclear program still seems to be focused on light-water
reactors, and I would like to ask you your view on that, and it
seems that what we have been doing, at least from what I can
see from budget requests, that the DOE is basically going from
25 percent of its nuclear energy program aimed at the fact-
spectrum reactors and the new high-temperature gas-cooled
reactors. We have been spending 25 percent of our research
money on those and now it is going down to 15 percent while the
spending on light-water reactors, which is essentially old
technology, is being increased in the budget requests. Is this
a matter of policy coming out of the Administration?
Dr. Holdren. Well, let me say first of all that the light-
water reactor investments that the DOE is making are not
investments in old technology. They are investments in advanced
light-water reactor technology including modular light-water
reactors, which we think have an enormous potential to
contribute not only to energy supply in this country but to a
substantial export market.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Basically it is an old concept but a new
approach. Is that a----
Dr. Holdren. When you say it is an old concept----
Mr. Rohrabacher. It is 60, 70 years old.
Dr. Holdren [continuing]. Congressman Rohrabacher, with
respect, fast-spectrum reactors are also a very old concept and
have been explored and deployed for a very long time. We are of
the view that if you want nuclear energy to be an expanding
contributor to low-emission energy supply in this country in
the near future, that is going to happen largely on the basis
of advanced light-water reactors, and we need to make sure that
succeeds in order to provide a continuing base----
Mr. Rohrabacher [continuing]. Then will leave us with
reactors rather than the new reactors that I am referring to
that would somewhat solve the nuclear-waste problem or at least
from many scientists are telling us that as compared to the
light-water reactors that you are now suggesting that you
approve of in that direction. Would they not lead the same
nuclear-waste problem that we have?
Dr. Holdren. First of all, I approve of light-water
reactors of advanced varieties, and the Secretary of Energy
does for the next phase. We have a multiphase----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Would those reactors that are you now
approving for the next phase leave us with the same nuclear-
waste problem that we have been having so much trouble dealing
with?
Dr. Holdren. The problem would be the same if we didn't
take steps to solve it but----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Unless we focus on a completely new
approach in which 97 percent of the waste is consumed rather
than having so much left over.
Dr. Holdren. We are, Congressman, focusing on research and
development on those new approaches looking for possibilities
that would help us----
Mr. Rohrabacher. You are focusing on it, but you are
decreasing the spending on that and increasing the spending on
the nuclear program that actually leaves us with the same old
problems.
I would like to shift this now, because I only have a
couple minutes here. It is very clear in the Appropriations Act
of 2011 that we have, that Congress has directed the
Administration not to be cooperating on science projects with
China. We have the world's human rights abuser, a country that
still murders religious believers, a country that its
government has mandated a massive technology theft program
towards our country and is using that technology that they are
stealing with us to try to leapfrog us in a number of
technological areas. Are you--is your office complying with
this law that is suggesting that you should not be engaged in
cooperating with the Chinese on scientific matters?
Dr. Holdren. Congressman Rohrabacher, the current law does
not say that we should not be cooperating with China. It says
that when we do, we must notify the Congress 14 days in advance
and assure the Congress that we are not in the course of this
cooperation surrendering national security secrets or corporate
secrets or dealing with people who are directly involved with
human rights violations.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, the GAO doesn't agree with you. I
will quote a GAO report. ``The plain meaning of Section 1340 is
clear. The OSTP may not''--and this is a quote from the GAO
here--``may not use its appropriations to participate,
collaborate or coordinate bilaterally in any way with China.''
You are suggesting that the GAO is wrong?
Dr. Holdren. The GAO was right at the time it wrote that.
That language has been superseded by the subsequent
appropriations legislation, which clearly specifies that we may
cooperate with China subject to the conditions that I was
mentioning, and so we are in complete compliance with the
current law on that subject.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Why is it that you feel, this
Administration feels so compelled to reach out to the world's
worst human rights abuser that is already in the process of
stealing so much from us and who we have examples over and over
again that scientific cooperation has turned into a transfer of
wealth and technology to our adversary, to what appears to be
economic if not military and political adversary?
Dr. Holdren. First of all, the Administration is no admirer
of the human rights policies in China and when we travel to
China for whatever purpose, raise the human rights issues with
them. We also raise with them the issue of the theft of
intellectual property.
Mr. Rohrabacher. When you raise issues like that, when you
go to China, don't your actions speak louder than your words
because you are there to find ways to cooperate with the people
who you are now saying we are very concerned about this, now we
met that responsibility, so let us go do this.
Dr. Holdren. Actually, Congressman Rohrabacher, the point
that I make with my interlocutors in China is cooperation in
which we are engaged, which is cooperation carefully selected
to be beneficial to us as well as to China, is jeopardized by
China's human rights abuses and intellectual property theft and
that if those activities do not stop, that these beneficial
activities, mutually beneficial activities, will not be able to
continue. That is an explicit point that I make.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much.
Chairman Hall. I don't think you are going to get the
answer that you expected to get, Mr. Rohrabacher. I, too, have
seen our President bow and scrape to the enemy on many
occasions.
The Chairman recognizes Ms. Bonamici for five minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Dr.
Holdren, for your testimony and for the work that you do.
You describe one mission of your office as advising the
President on the application of science and technology to
matters of national importance. One matter of serious
importance in my district and to the Nation more generally is
the aftermath of the devastating tsunami that hit Japan last
year. The Oregon coast has beaches and a coastline that thrives
on tourism and the fishing industry. Oregon is the only State
where the entire coastline is public. Three weeks ago, a 66-
foot-long dock washed up onto the shore from Japan, and thus
far it is the biggest piece to land on our shores, but we have
seen an increase in smaller debris. Scientists at NOAA are
predicting that more is on the way.
Last week, I held a roundtable discussion to discuss the
coordination of efforts to detect, mitigate and clean up the
debris resulting from the tsunami. It is an effort that
involves multiple federal agencies but also State and local
governments and even the public at large. Additionally, the
cost of the debris removal is looking certain to stretch the
budgets of our State and local governments. But beyond the
sheer cost of the debris, the potential for the debris to carry
invasive species from Japan such as those that were discovered
on the dock poses a challenge to our scientists who have to
assess the threat to the marine ecosystems.
The two other federal agencies that have been working on
the detection and monitoring from the tsunami are the EPA and
NOAA. Considering your office's coordination with federal
agencies on science matters and the potential impact of the
debris on our coastal ecosystems, where do you see your office
fitting in to the response effort at a federal level? Please
describe any efforts that you have taken thus far on this
issue. Thank you.
Dr. Holdren. Thank you for that question. My office is, of
course, advisory and analytical more than operational, and so
we try to work with the departments and agencies that have
operational responsibilities to be sure that what they are
doing is coordinated and consistent with the best
understandings of science as we know them. We are in close
coordination in that sense with both NOAA and EPA in their
responsibilities around the coast including the
responsibilities for monitoring and responding to what reaches
us from Japan as a result of that devastating tsunami.
We have been particularly engaged in my office in
conducting and overseeing assessments of the levels of
radioactivity that have reached or could reach the United
States, and the reassuring thing I can say about that is that
although our ability to monitor is so good that we are able to
detect even very tiny concentrations of radioactivity, the
radioactivity that has, in fact, reached the United States so
far is all in that very tiny category and does not reach levels
of public health concern. But we will continue to work with
NOAA and EPA to monitor particularly that radioactivity aspect
of what reaches our coast, but also other aspects.
I will say that I think NOAA, as with many agencies, has
been struggling with 20 pounds of missions in a 10-pound
budget, and we all struggle with that challenge today. I think
NOAA would tell you, if Administrator Lubchenco were here
today, that while they are working very hard at fulfilling
these responsibilities, it would be easier to do if they had a
little more money.
Ms. Bonamici. I appreciate that, Dr. Holdren, and I must
say that many people around the table understood that this is
something unprecedented, and not knowing what and when and
where the debris will wash up has been challenging.
In the minute that I have left, would you please discuss
some of the work that you are doing on increasing STEM
education? We all understand the importance of it, but could
you discuss the deficiencies in our skilled workforce and
promoting STEM education among young people in this country?
Dr. Holdren. Well, I would mention, since time is short,
just a couple of things. One is that the President's 2013
budget proposal calls for $3 billion in programs across the
government in STEM education, which has a 2.6 percent increase
over 2012 enacted, and a considerable part of that investment
is in two specific critical aspects of the education system.
One is K-12 teacher effectiveness, teacher preparation where we
are working very hard to prepare 100,000 new high-quality STEM
ed teachers at the K-12 level over the next decade, and the
post-secondary STEM education domain is one in which we
currently lose about 60 percent of the students who enter
college intending to get a STEM degree, only 40 percent who
enter do get a STEM degree. And the PCAST, the President's
Council and Advisors on Science and Technology, among many
others, has studied this question and we conclude that there
are two basic reasons for it, both of which we are working to
fix. One is the math gap where students enter college without
sufficient math preparation to succeed in college-level
science, math and engineering courses, and the other is what
you might call a teaching effectiveness gap, where the
introductory courses in science, engineering and math are often
so boring that they drive even very good students into other
majors. We have a variety of programs addressed at both of
those problems.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, and my time is expired.
Chairman Hall. The Chair recognizes Mr. Palazzo, the
gentleman from Mississippi, for five minutes.
Mr. Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Holdren, I kind of agree with the comments you have
been saying on STEM education, especially in light of the less
than 15 percent of Americans actually pursue STEM where other
countries such as China, more than 50 percent of their youth
are pursuing STEM education, and Mississippi actually
recognizes the global implication of this, and through public
and private contributions, we just recently opened a $30
million Infinity Science Center with the sole purpose to
educate, challenge and excite young people to consider studies
in STEM education and it ties in very well with the affiliation
with NASA's Stennis Space Center on the role of science and
math and exploration across history.
Now, my first question is, as you are probably aware, in
order to continue buying seats on the Russian Soyuz spacecraft
to ferry U.S. astronauts to the International Space Station and
to buy certain engineering services to keep ISS operational,
the Iran, North Korea, Syria Nonproliferation Act, commonly
called INKSNA, must be extended beyond the current 2016
expiration date. Late last year, the House passed an INKSNA
bill enabling our reliance on the Russians through 2020 but the
prospects of its enactment would be greatly enhanced if the
Administration would put forth a policy statement on INKSNA. Do
you anticipate the White House putting out a position statement
on INKSNA, and if so, when? And would you agree it would be
far, far better to address the issue now versus waiting until
the last moment? And given House passage of the bill, I would
think the White House would attempt to capitalize on this
opportunity.
Dr. Holdren. Well, Congressman Palazzo, I agree with the
importance of getting a modification to the Iran, North Korea
and Syria Nonproliferation Act for the purpose you indicate,
and it is clear that that is going to be required. It is clear
that sooner is better than later. The Administration has been
studying the options for just how to modify it, and we'll
certainly be working closely with the Congress to get that
issue resolved. I expect that there will be some more specific
statement forthcoming in the future but we clearly recognize
the need and we recognize that sooner is better than later.
Mr. Palazzo. In the near future? Can you give a possible
timeline?
Dr. Holdren. I don't want to put a timeline on it, but I
know a lot of attention is going to it in the Administration.
It is obviously not mainly my domain, but I expect that there
will be a close interaction with the Congress on how to fix
this, and it will happen soon.
Mr. Palazzo. So you will definitely carry back our concerns
about sooner better than later?
Dr. Holdren. I will carry back that concern. And let me
just add, by the way, to your comment on the science center in
Mississippi. I have been enormously impressed in my time in
this job with the importance of science museums, science
centers, and the connectedness of science centers to some of
our science-rich agencies and the effectiveness that they have
in inspiring kids. I have had my own grandchildren into a
number of these centers in different parts of the country, and
I can tell you firsthand, it works.
Mr. Palazzo. Well, they convinced me to buy a brick to help
fund it.
A follow-up on Chairman Hall's question where we were
discussing NASA's use of Space Act agreements in the Commercial
Crew Program. What recourse does the government have if these
companies fail to perform or go out of business?
Dr. Holdren. Well, of course, there is always a risk in any
public or private enterprise that companies will fail to
perform. What is happening so far in the commercial space
operation is extremely encouraging. The companies involved have
met most or all of their milestones. As you know, the SpaceX
Falcon 9 rocket and Dragon capsule just pulled off an
extraordinary first in docking with the International Space
Station, carrying cargo up there and returning to earth
bringing cargo and garbage back down. The other competitors are
I think close on their heels at meeting their milestones.
Obviously, one can never rule out a failure, a shortfall, but
so far we are doing well.
Mr. Palazzo. And last, what, if anything, will NASA own
after making these expenditures?
Dr. Holdren. The idea is not for NASA to own something. The
idea is for the private sector to own something from which NASA
can purchase services to carry crew and cargo to the
International Space Station. This is basically an increasing
privatization of this particular mission of carrying cargo and
crew to low earth orbit, and we believe that the efficiencies
obtainable from the private sector and from competition in the
private sector are going to be a great national benefit in
which NASA's investments in the early phases are basically a
public investment in a long-term private enterprise that is
going to be a great success and that is going to enable us to
carry out these missions more efficiently and less expensively
but still very safely.
Mr. Palazzo. Of course, we don't wish any business to go
out of business and we want them to succeed, but just say if
one does, does NASA obtain the intellectual property or the
hardware created to date? And we can wrap up my time.
Dr. Holdren. I would have to refer you on that to the legal
counsel at NASA. I can't answer details what the fate of
intellectual property might be in the contracts.
Mr. Palazzo. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. Does that give you the answer you wanted?
The Chair recognizes Ms. Edwards from Maryland for five
minutes.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Dr.
Holdren, for your testimony and your work today.
You know, I know, I have heard from the Administration and
from the President and really can see a commitment even in
tough fiscal times to the need for our Nation to invest in
innovation. It is very clear in the President's speech last
week. He talked rather extensively about the importance of
investing in basic research and innovation and technology and
advanced manufacturing. So I have a question as to how we
decide what our priorities are. The National Academies comes
out with its decadal surveys, and sometimes it seems to me,
particularly when it comes to an innovation agenda and
especially at NASA, that the recommendations of priorities that
the Academies spend an awful lot of time putting together and
exploring don't really match the Administration's budgets and
the priorities that we then set here in the Congress. And so I
wonder if you could tell us how our science priorities are
lined up in keeping with recommendations that come out of the
surveys.
And then related to that, with respect to the Mars program,
it does seem to me that, you know, some time ago fears were
expressed at a hearing of this Committee about cuts to
planetary science and to Mars missions and those were confirmed
by the Administration's budget submission in the 2013 budget
request and especially the collaboration between NASA and the
European Space Agency ExoMars mission was terminated, and as a
result, we won't be participating. We won't participate in the
development of the Mars organic molecule analyzer instrument,
and it leads me to wonder if the Administration is placing a
priority over the long term on this kind of science why our
budget recommendations don't line with the priorities.
Dr. Holdren. Thank you for that question. The Mars program
remains robust, notwithstanding our deciding under serious
budget constraints not to proceed with 2016 and 2018 Mars
missions that had been under discussion with the European Space
Agency. We concluded with respect to those particular missions
that there was no way under foreseeable budgets for NASA that
our participation in them and in the very expensive follow-on
mission that would actually be necessary to return samples,
which was the ultimate idea. No way that that was going to be
feasible under foreseeable NASA budgets.
The decadal surveys that we get from the National Academy
are very valuable. We look at them very closely. In the case of
the decadal survey on planetary exploration, while they put a
high priority on that flagship set of Mars missions, they also
specified what we should do in the event that budgets did not
permit carrying through with adequate support for that flagship
mission. And in fact, in the fallback position that we
developed, we actually followed very closely what the decadal
survey said we ought to do if budgetary constraints prevented
us doing plan A, and that in general is what we do. We give a
lot of weight to those decadal surveys because they represent a
huge amount of work by the top level of the wider science
community in those domains.
But we have not by any means given up on our leadership in
planetary exploration. As I mentioned before, we remain by far
the world's leader. We will remain the world's leader in
planetary exploration. We have the most complex, largest and
most capable planetary rover that ever landed anywhere on its
way to Mars, expected to land there in August. We have a
follow-on mission called Maven investigating the upper Martial
atmosphere to develop knowledge that will be necessary when
ultimately we send humans to Mars. We are investigating a
number of small and medium-sized Mars missions that could be
afforded under the kinds of budgets we have going forward and
we have, as I mentioned before, a wide variety of other
planetary and asteroidal probes heading outward or scheduled
for launch.
So while we determined that we couldn't afford these
particular flagship missions, we very much intend to maintain
our commitment to lead in the exploration of Mars and the
exploration of the solar system more widely.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you. And I will just finish by saying,
just leave you with this thought, and for our Committee: You do
not science and research by jumping in and out, by not knowing
from one year to the next year what your budgets are going to
be, and it seems to me that if the Administration and this
Congress has a real commitment to science, to research, to
advanced manufacturing, to making sure that our students have
some place to go if we are encouraging them to engage in STEM,
then we darn sure better figure out how to do this from year to
year, letting our researchers know what the future looks like,
and it is very frustrating, and I know it is frustrating for
all of the agencies as well, to do science on a hit-or-miss,
year-to-year basis, and it really is unacceptable, and frankly,
at the end of the day, it just makes us spend more money. Thank
you.
Dr. Holdren. I agree, and I would love if it we could----
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady's time has expired. She gives
you good advice, and I think she ought to give that advice to
the EPA.
Chair now recognizes Mr. Hultgren from Illinois.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Chairman. And thank you, Dr.
Holdren, appreciate you being here.
I just was reading this morning in Space News an article
about their statement that in the last four years they were
arguing that we have gone from first place to probably third
place as far as nations in the forefront of space exploration.
I think that is a shame.
I want to focus my comments mostly on something else. You
were here back in February and I appreciate you coming back
today. Following the hearing that we had back in February, I
had submitted a couple of questions to you, the answers which I
just recently received from your office. One of the questions I
asked you in February started by pointing out that particle
physics has become a global field that it is now entering an
extremely exciting phase and then I asked what you thought what
role the United States should play in that. I asked if you
thought the United States should be building world-class
physics facilities and bringing partners to the United States
to collaborate here as the Europeans, Japanese, Italians, and
Chinese are all now currently doing in their own countries.
Your answer was, ``I think the U.S. should continue to play a
leadership role in the field as the U.S. is doing even for
experiments that are taking place in facilities abroad. I am
confident that U.S. researchers can continue to be at the
forefront of particle physics and other scientific
disciplines.''
While I share your enthusiasm for U.S. leadership in these
fields, you really didn't answer my question. Not only did you
not answer the question, you also seemed to imply that we would
be just fine without having any world-class facilities in the
United States. That really is troubling to me because--and I
want to just ask for clarification on that if I am
misunderstanding. And so, very clearly, I would ask the
question, yes or no. Does President Obama believe that we
should build large-scale, world-leading physics facilities in
the United States as we used to do? Or is he satisfied in
spending our scarce research dollars on solar panels and wind
turbine subsidies while the next generation of American
students is forced to go abroad to study physics?
Dr. Holdren. Let me start by saying on the space front I
simply do not agree with the Space News formulation that the
United States has fallen from first to third. By any
respectable set of metrics I know of, the United States is
still number one in space and intends to stay that way.
On high-energy physics, it is not true that we are content
to leave the future of high-energy physics and facilities for
doing that to the rest of the world. We support fundamental
research broadly and we support research in high-energy
physics. The President's 2013 budget has $800 million for
research and facilities at the high-energy, high-intensity, and
cosmic frontiers, provides funds for new initiative at all
three of those. There is an ongoing planning exercise in the
Office of High-Energy Physics at the DOE for the development of
new facilities at Fermilab in your State and I expect that
there will be positive developments coming out of that.
We are not giving up on high-energy physics, although
again, we are constrained. Everybody in this room knows the
budget challenges under which the government is operating. And
within those challenges we intend to continue to invest in
cutting-edge, high-energy physics in the United States, as well
as in the participation of our scientists in cutting-edge
facilities elsewhere when that is where they are.
Mr. Hultgren. Well, talk is very important but action is
even more important. We have seen significant cuts under the
President's budget to many of our laboratories, much--
significant increase going to some applied science that
obviously the President supports. Dr. Holdren, I know you were
able to train at MIT and Stanford, both here in the United
States. You were also able to teach at Harvard and Berkeley,
also here in the United States. You had a lot of opportunities
and a very distinguished career. Wouldn't you have thought
differently about your own career path if you didn't think
there was an opportunity to have such an illustrious and
accomplished career and that you had to leave the United States
to pursue that career?
Dr. Holdren. Well, the short answer is probably yes. If
that had been my impression of the state of play, it is
possible I would have done something else. But I don't think
that is a correct impression of the state of play today. I
think the United States remains at the cutting edge of high-
energy physics and a great many other fields. You continue to
see that in U.S. preeminence in the awards of Nobel Prizes and
other prizes, including some that are often awarded for work in
the more recent past rather than the distant past. This is a
leadership role that we are going to keep and I think we are
determined to continue to inspire our young people to believe
that there are exciting and rewarding careers in fundamental
science in this country.
We still have, by the way, enormous flows of the most
talented and brightest students from countries all around the
world eager to study high-energy physics and other topics in
our great universities. And I think we are unmatched in the
world in terms of the attractiveness of our university system
in general and the science focuses in our great research
universities in terms of the attractiveness to students from
around the world.
Mr. Hultgren. My time is running out, but I think we all
need to ask the question--and, you know, are the President's
policies offering today's students the same opportunities your
generation of scientists had in terms of training, learning,
and working in world-class user facilities here in the United
States? I think that is a real question I would say no. The
opportunities are not the same. They are not as good. It is
declining. Our space program is declining. While others are
advancing, ours is declining. We have--I have heard firsthand
from physicists in my district that they would certainly think
twice about starting a career in a field where they would have
no choice but to fly to China, Japan, or Europe all the time to
be an active participant.
That attitude of thinking that the President seems to have,
the attitude that we shouldn't build facilities here, is a sure
way to keep our physics programs from being competitive, not to
mention a deterrent to young people to get into those sorts of
scientific fields, which I think is a huge failure for our
future.
Again, we talked about this ahead of time. I know these are
difficult times but that is where difficult and important
leadership must step up. And so I hope we can continue to do
that through these difficult times, setting that type of vision
for our young people that, yes, not only can you study here but
you can apply it here because we are going to continue to grow
and build new world-class facilities for basic scientific
research.
Again, my time is up. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. If you asked the question, you did a good
job of answering it.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Miller, the gentleman for North
Carolina.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
An issue that this Committee has dealt with in the last few
years is rare earth and energy critical elements. The
Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee held hearing--held a
hearing after articles appeared in the press I think
principally in the New York Times about the topic. And unusual
for the Oversight Subcommittee, we developed legislation to
address the problem that Kathy Dahlkemper introduced in the
last Congress and I introduced in this Congress and there has
been interest by Republicans on this Committee as well.
Rare earths, of course, are something that most Americans
have never heard of, or if they have heard of them, they maybe
heard of them in high school chemistry and promptly forgot. But
they are increasingly being used in sophisticated technologies
and we are at a distinct disadvantage to the Chinese, who
largely have a monopoly on many rare earths and energy-critical
elements. And they are using those which, in many of the
sophisticated technologies, are important to our national
security. And they are leveraging their control of those
elements to require that manufacturing using those be done in
China. To some extent I understand that. I understand they
don't want to have an extractive economy. They don't want to be
Angola. But it is certainly not acceptable from our point of
view that we are closed out of that important manufacturing
that would be a source of jobs, very highly skilled, well-paid
jobs for American workers.
But the problem with dealing with it is complex as I am
sure you know. There is a variety of suggested programs and it
does sound certainly like--it does certainly appear that we
need a strong role by our government in coordinating those
efforts.
Dr. Holdren, what do you think are the appropriate
activities for the government in this area? And what are the
notable research gaps?
Dr. Holdren. Thank you for that good question. We have been
paying a lot of attention to this challenge and the critical
materials challenge and the challenge of rare earth minerals in
particular. Let me just say as a start that China does not have
a monopoly on resources of rare earth minerals, but they
currently have a practical monopoly on the whole production
system because they were able to undercut everybody else and so
everybody else got out of the business. And this is something
obviously that we need to fix.
OSTP has been leading an interagency process on how to
address the rare earth minerals and related raw materials
issues that has involved the Department of Energy, the
Department of Commerce, the U.S. Trade Representative, and the
Department of Defense. We have created several working groups
to address different parts of the problem, including focusing
on those resources that are particularly important either to
our national security or our economic future. We have hosted
roundtables with industry on this subject and looked into what
we can do to encourage industry to rebuild some of these supply
chains in the United States where we actually have the raw
resources but have let the supply chains atrophy. DOE has been
pursuing research and development that addresses material
separation and processing and reducing the intensity of use of
these materials in different applications so that we can make
the materials that we do have go further.
In the 2012 appropriation, DOE received $20 million for an
innovation hub on critical materials. The 2013 budget requests
a continuation of funding for that hub. Both DOE and EPA have
announced small business innovation research, SBIR grants
addressing processing of these critical materials. We also have
an R&D program at DOE aimed at early stage technology
alternatives that can reduce or eliminate the dependence we
have on minerals that we are not in a position to produce in
this country. So we have a lot going on in this domain. We
understand its importance. We agree with you about that and we
are putting money and resources into remedying the problem.
Mr. Miller. I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes Mrs. Biggert, the gentlelady from
Illinois.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing.
Dr. Holdren, the Administration's big data research and
development initiative announced earlier this year focused on
improving our ability to derive new insights and knowledge from
large and complex collections of scientific and other data. The
growth of the big data and data-intensive computing is going to
require comparable advances in high end or high performance
computing platforms if we are going to effectively and
efficiently and affordably extract value from large and growing
volumes of data. The power demands alone will limit the
development of larger and faster supercomputing systems and
their ability to process big data. And I don't view this as an
either/or proposition. While the Administration is proposing
new financial commitments to big data, we have yet received a
report from the Administration on the strategy for achieving
exascale computing. And it is my understanding that a report
was due out in February of this year outlining the research,
development, and engineering efforts to achieve exascale. And
again that was due in February. So when can we expect to see
it?
Dr. Holdren. Let me start by agreeing with your point that
the future of computing is going to involve both what we call
big iron and big data. And you are asking about the big iron
part, the hardware development and the energy requirements. I
will have to look into where in the process that exascale
computing report is and how soon you can expect it. I will get
back to you on that. But I know that we are paying a lot of
attention to the needs in that domain and particularly the need
that you mentioned to reduce the energy requirements of our
fastest computers. And there have been some very important
developments in that domain, which promise to substantially
reduce the otherwise soaring requirements for power of petaflop
computers and more.
Mrs. Biggert. I really--I worry about, you know, what is
happening in the world and we are just on hold because of a
report. But I was pleased to see that the IBM supercomputer at
Argonne National Lab in my district ascended to number three as
the fastest in the world, third and then behind the fastest
computer is at Lawrence Livermore and behind that is a Japanese
supercomputer. But I think that all of--the group at Argonne
should be proud of their hard work, but clearly, the U.S.
leadership is being challenged in this area.
And as one article put it, the latest list marks the return
of the European systems in force with the addition of two
German systems and one Italian system. And the U.S.-based
supercomputer that got the top billing in this latest report is
now ranked at number six. And I have certainly been looking at
this for a long time and we are facing stiff competition. And
the value of supercomputing seems to be globally understood and
we can't let us fall behind if we are--and we have to have that
plan for achieving exascale and I would urge you to see that it
is completing and submitted to the Congress as soon as
possible.
Dr. Holdren. I agree and I will certainly get back to you
on the report. We intend to stay number one. We can expect
challenges from around the world in this domain and in others--
--
Mrs. Biggert. Um-hum.
Dr. Holdren. In high technology but we intend to stay
number one. We recognize the importance of this one.
Mrs. Biggert. Yeah. Well, it certainly has been--you know,
there is--and now in the 2013 budget there has been a
submission for $21 million for new data-intensive science
efforts. But the exascale remains on hold so we have got to get
those two to be balanced. Thank you.
Yield back.
Chairman Hall. The Chair recognizes Ms. Lofgren, gentlelady
from California.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Dr.
Holdren, for being here and for your good work.
Recently, the National Academy of Sciences issued a report
titled, ``Managing for High-Quality Science and Engineering at
the NNSA National Security Laboratories.'' And I would ask, Mr.
Chairman, unanimous consent to submit this report into the
record.
The report highlights--and it is a long report but
basically it highlights the broken relationship between the
National Nuclear Security Agency and the scientists at our
research labs. One senior scientist at Los Alamos was quoted in
the report as saying this: ``when I started as a young post-doc
and then later in my career as a university professor and also
here at the lab, there was a social contract which basically
said you will never get rich in science but we treat you as
adults, respect you for your commitment, and in turn you can
pursue science and have fun.'' Today, this contract is badly
broken, an atmosphere of distrust, rigorous control, and
checks.
And the report went on to note the increasing operational
formality of being dictated by the NNSA headquarters that had
contributed to a bias against experimental work. And the report
said, ``without a strong experimental program, the quality of
scientific and engineering at the laboratories will be at risk,
as will the core mission of these laboratories.''
Since this report came out last year, are you aware of
anything that NNSA has done to repair the distrust and the
damaged relationships that the report outlines both with the
directors and with the scientists at our national labs?
Dr. Holdren. Thank you for the question. First of all, I am
very much aware of the report and----
Ms. Lofgren. I know you are.
Mr. Holdren [continuing]. As you and I have discussed
offline, we have a taskforce in OSTP in the National Security
and International Affairs division following up on that
report's recommendations looking at the health and adequacy of
the way we are running our national security, science,
technology, and innovation enterprise. I myself just two weeks
ago visited both the Sandia National Labs and the Los Alamos
National Lab in New Mexico, spoke with the directors of both
labs, and I will be going to Livermore to talk to the
management at Livermore about this set of problems, among
others, and what we can do about them. And I have talked to
Secretary Chu about it and with Administrator D'Agostino. And
they understand that there is a problem and they are as
determined as I am to address it. Obviously, we have to
maintain the quality of the science and engineering at our
national defense laboratories and excessive micromanagement is
obviously not contributing to the attractiveness of continuing
employment for our brightest scientists and engineers at these
labs. So we are determined to fix that.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you very much for that report. That is
very encouraging news and perhaps I can follow up offline with
some of the details of that. I am so pleased that you are
taking responsibility for this issue.
As you know, I am very interested in inertial confinement
fusion and I am aware that both you and Dr. Koonin, the former
Undersecretary for Science, were instrumental in calling for
the report from the National Academy of Sciences to assess our
prospects on inertial confinement fusion energy. The National
Academy released their interim report, and again, I would ask
unanimous consent to put the interim report into the record.
Chairman Hall. Excuse me. This is not a report that has
been discussed with the other side. Normally, you know we do
that.
Ms. Lofgren. Oh, I wasn't aware of that, Mr. Chairman, but
I----
Chairman Hall. And it would be objection unless you want to
work it out with them.
Ms. Lofgren. It is a National Academy of Science report. It
is on the Internet so----
Chairman Hall. I understand it is a very big report and we
are aware of it. The normal procedure is to have it worked out,
and I think they would probably work with you if you would do
it.
Ms. Lofgren. Okay. That would be fine, be happy to do that.
But I would like to note that the report basically--it is a
long report--but it is I would say enthusiastic about the
prospects. Originally, the goal for ignition was 2014. Somehow,
that morphed into 2012 and as the report--the National Academy
report indicates, there is no guarantee. This is science, not
engineering. I mean we may get this this year; it may be next
year.
Would it be your belief, Dr. Holdren, that we should not--
especially given that China and Russia are trying to overtake
our lead in this matter that we should not give up, close as we
are, on this quest for ignition at this point?
Dr. Holdren. Certainly, I agree with that. And Secretary
Chu agrees with it, I know. The NIF is a national resource,
National Ignition Facility. It has the potential to achieve
ignition although there are still obstacles in the way of that.
We think that they can be overcome and that they should be
overcome. So we remain committed to the use of that facility
for that purpose as well as others.
Ms. Lofgren. My time is up. I would just like to say, Dr.
Holdren, it is a delight to have you here and to listen to your
wisdom. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Brooks, gentleman from Alabama.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In his State of the Union Address, the President reiterated
his call to Congress to pass a ``Clean Energy Standard'' which
would require utilities to produce and sell electricity from
expensive sources such as wind and solar. You may also be aware
that the Department of Energy has undertaken numerous analyses
of the impact of Obama's Clean Energy Standard on electricity
prices, including one requested by our own Chairman Hall and
another requested by Senator Bingaman. Both Department of
Energy studies found that Obama's Clean Energy Standard would
significantly increase electricity prices and result in heavy
economic cost to the people of America. Dr. Holdren, do you
agree that President Obama's Clean Energy Standard will result
in increased electricity cost to American consumers?
Dr. Holdren. Well, first of all, let me note that the clean
energy standard is not just about wind and solar. It is about
nuclear energy, it is about fossil fuel energy with improved
emission control technologies, and it is the view of the
Administration that we are going to need all of those in
increased measure in order to provide the reliable and
affordable energy the country needs while addressing the need
to reduce emissions, including emissions that are threatening
to change global climate, that are changing global climate,
which itself----
Mr. Brooks. Dr. Holdren, please answer my question. Do you
agree that the solar and wind aspects of Obama's Clean Energy
Standards will increase energy costs for American consumers, as
has been determined by the Department of Energy in their
studies?
Dr. Holdren. Congressman, I have not personally read that
study and so I don't want to endorse or criticize its findings
without having done so. But we are talking about a portfolio of
energy sources that would fall under the clean energy rubric,
and my assumption is that that portfolio will be pursued in a
way to minimize impacts on energy prices and on American
consumers.
Mr. Brooks. Okay. Do you have a judgment as to whether the
solar and wind aspects of Obama's Clean Energy Standards
program will increase cost to consumers? You still haven't
answered that question. You used the word ``minimum.'' I am
asking about will there be an increase? Do you have a judgment?
Dr. Holdren. I think the answer depends on a lot of factors
that I haven't analyzed. But we know that at the present time
both solar energy and wind are more expensive than some of the
other options. At the same time, the prices of the other
options are changing.
Mr. Brooks. Are you testifying, then, to this Congress that
in your capacity with OSTP you have no judgment, no idea as to
whether energy costs will go up or down should the President's
Clean Energy Standards with respect to solar and wind power go
into effect?
Dr. Holdren. The proposal is not with respect to solar and
wind power alone. And what happens to prices depends on the
portfolio.
Mr. Brooks. Dr. Holdren, I have limited time. You have
already covered that it spans different parts. I have focused
my question on the wind and solar part. That is where the focus
is. I don't want to go into everything else. I want your
judgment if you have a judgment. And if you don't have a
judgment, that is fine in your capacity with OSTP. If you have
no judgment whatsoever, that is fine. Say so. Do you have a
judgment is the first question.
Dr. Holdren. I think it depends on what the alternatives
are. I think it depends on----
Chairman Hall. Answer the question. He asked if you had a
judgment.
Dr. Holdren. I do not have a judgment on the question he
has posed to me.
Chairman Hall. That answers the question. Go ahead with
your questions.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Inasmuch as he doesn't
have the background or knowledge to answer that question, I
will go to another one.
President Obama has made clean energy spending and the
``green jobs'' associated with them a centerpiece of his
domestic policy agenda. However, as we review and consider the
impact of these programs, there has been some controversy
regarding the Administration's definition and accounting of
what constitutes a ``green job.'' This resulted in many
headlines a mere two weeks ago when a senior Labor Department
official testified to Congress that the following occupations
constitute green jobs under the Administration's definition:
college professors teaching environmental courses, school bus
drivers regardless of whether the bus is hybrid or an
alternative, workers who fuel school buses, employees at
bicycle shops, antique dealers because they sell recycled
goods, Salvation Army employees, people who sell rare books and
manuscripts because the items are used, hence recycled.
Dr. Holdren, as the President's top science and technology
advisor, would you agree the Administration's definition of
green jobs is flawed and that it overstates a number of true
green jobs that exist?
Dr. Holdren. The definition as you just described it seems
to me to be overly broad, yes. I was not responsible for
producing that definition. I would be inclined to ask the
Council of Economic Advisors how they would define green jobs.
I don't think the Administration as a whole as embraced a
decision, but I do agree that the definition you read is overly
broad.
Mr. Brooks. With respect to those seven different
professions that the senior Labor Department official testified
to Congress constitute green jobs under the Administration's
definition, are there any that you would consider to actually
in fact be a green job of those seven?
Dr. Holdren. I would want to look at that in more detail.
You went by the seven rather quickly and I have not focused on
this issue.
Mr. Brooks. Well, would you like me to go through them
again or----
Dr. Holdren. No, I think that would not be necessary. I
would be happy to respond to you in writing following the
hearing.
Mr. Brooks. All right.
Dr. Holdren. But this is not a domain in which the Office
of Science and Technology Policy has actually gotten involved.
Mr. Brooks. Well, thank you for your agreement, then, that
the senior Labor Department official, his view of what is a
green job and the Administration's view of what is a green job
differs from yours.
Dr. Holdren. His view may not be the Administration's view.
Mr. Brooks. Chairman, I have no other questions. Well, now,
wait a second. This resulted in many headlines two weeks ago
when a senior Labor Department official testified to Congress
that the following occupations constitute green jobs under the
Administration's definition.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman's time is----
Mr. Brooks. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. You are over.
The Chair recognizes Mr. McNerney. We will get back to that
question before we leave.
The Chair recognizes Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Holdren, thank you for joining us today. In your
testimony you mentioned a few new projects such as the website
about manufacturing databases and the robotics initiative.
Would you please discuss how these and other initiatives create
jobs locally and how they advance our leadership in the world
with regard to innovation?
Dr. Holdren. All of the initiatives that we have been
pursuing in this domain--advanced manufacturing, robotics,
nanotechnology, and others--are aimed, as I mentioned before,
at accelerating the transfer of fundamental advances and
discovery in science and engineering into commercial processes,
products, services, and therefore into economic growth and
jobs. And the fact that all of these initiatives are
constructed around partnerships with the private sector working
together with the public sector and the academic sector is, in
fact, leading to success in accelerating the transfer of these
initiatives.
We already see signs that manufacturing is moving back to
the United States. We are already seeing benefits from this
approach. And we are also seeing benefits from an approach in
which we are working very closely between industry, government,
and community colleges to increase the extent to which the
coursework that students take in community colleges prepares
them for jobs in the industries that exist in their regions.
This I think is an extremely important concept that we have
been pursuing and it is already bearing fruit.
One of the striking aspects of our current economic
predicament is that in spite of an overall unemployment rate of
over eight percent, many high-tech firms cannot find the high
skill workers that they need. They can't find the fit between
the jobs they actually have open and the people who are
available in the unemployed labor force. And we intend to fix
that.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Well, as we all know,
cybersecurity is an issue that is critically important to our
national security and our national economic well being. How has
your office created initiatives to help the cybersecurity
effort and what has the OSTP done to strengthen our national
cybersecurity?
Dr. Holdren. OSTP has a number of responsibilities in the
domain, particularly of national security and emergency
preparedness communications. And cybersecurity, therefore,
intersects our responsibilities in that domain. But more
generally, on cybersecurity we work very closely with the
National Security staff, the Homeland Security Staff, the FBI,
the National Security Agency, the Department of Homeland
Security in an interagency process that is aimed at
strengthening cybersecurity across the United States.
We also have a variety of bodies and boards in which these
government agencies sit with the CEOs of the major
communications internet service providers and the like to build
the sort of cooperation that we need between the public and
private sector to better protect our electronic systems from
attack and from theft. As I think everybody in this room knows,
this is an enormous challenge and it is a high priority for the
Administration.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Well, moving on, then, you know, I
am very interested in the STEM education initiatives. Would you
please elaborate on how the STEM initiatives you discussed will
be utilized in our individual districts?
Dr. Holdren. I think going through the individual districts
would be----
Mr. McNerney. Well----
Dr. Holdren [continuing]. A great challenge. Both Change
the Equation and the Educate to Innovate strategy have a
specific focus in scaling up models that have proven to work to
a much wider variety of locations. So, for example, under the
Change the Equation initiative, they have a program to transfer
to 100 new sites around the country successful efforts at
improving the quality of K-12 classroom education through
better teacher preparation. All of these approaches are of
course designed to work with educators at the local level
because that is where it happens.
Educate to Innovate is, among other things, bringing
practicing scientists, engineers, and mathematicians from
companies, from national labs, and from universities into
classrooms all around the country to work with K-12 teachers in
improving the classroom experience through more hands-on
activities and also to serve as role models so that the
practicing scientists and engineers and mathematicians can
relay to the students the excitement and the opportunity
available from STEM careers. So we are absolutely trying to do
this on the ground across the country and taking models that
have worked in particular places and translating them to many
more.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Dr. Holdren.
I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman's time is expired.
Chair recognizes Mr. Quayle, gentleman from Arizona.
Mr. Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Dr. Holdren, for being here. Earlier this week,
my colleagues and I sent you a letter seeking additional
information on the National Network of Manufacturing Innovation
that was included in the Administration's fiscal year 2013
budget request. And NIST has been tasked with coordinating this
interagency effort. The original budget justification stated
that the Administration would propose legislation creating a
mandatory account making available $1 billion but really few
details have been made available. Now, my Subcommittee has
subsequently held two hearings with NIST on their fiscal year
2013 budget request and another specifically on the NNMI
proposal. And we have been really frustrated by the lack of
information and the inability to receive answers on basic
questions about the proposal's funding and structure. We have
been told that the Administration is leading this initiative,
so I would like to follow up directly with you.
And my first question is how did the Administration arrive
at the funding level of $1 billion for the greater network?
Dr. Holdren. Well, the basic answer to that question is we
expect, number one, that the $1 billion from the Federal
Government over a period of five years will stimulate at least
matching contributions from the private and philanthropic
sector. So we are looking at a program which over five years
would spend about $2 billion in total. And the idea is to have
15 institutes for manufacturing innovation around the country
which would spend about $30 million a year each. So that is
$450 million a year times five years is $2.25 billion. And
basically that is where the $1 billion number came from. The
government----
Mr. Quayle. Where did the estimates for the spending for
each of those different institutes come from? I mean how are
you basing those estimates? I am just trying to get an
understanding.
Dr. Holdren. I mean obviously it is a back-of-the-envelope
calculation----
Mr. Quayle. Right.
Dr. Holdren [continuing]. Designed to estimate about how
much money it would take to make a dent in a regional institute
with this focus. But, you know, I could not produce a sharp
enough pencil to tell you that $30 million is exactly the right
number----
Mr. Quayle. Right.
Dr. Holdren [continuing]. Rather than $25 or $35.
Mr. Quayle. Okay.
Dr. Holdren. So it is a ballpark number that takes you to
the ballpark number of a billion dollars from the government.
Mr. Quayle. Okay. Now, the proposal states that it is a
mandatory account which is interesting because most of the
times these programs are discretionary. But the proposal states
that it is a mandatory account and the authorizing legislation
would be subject to PAYGO. Can you tell us the specific offsets
that the Administration has identified for establishing this
mandatory fund?
Dr. Holdren. No specific offset has been identified to this
program. It is offset within the mandatory policy changes
proposed in the budget, but we have not tried to offset the
program explicitly.
Mr. Quayle. Okay. And then on March 9 of this year, the
President held a public event in Virginia where he announced
the creation of a pilot program supported by up to $45 million
in fiscal year 2012 funds drawn from existing resources in
multiple agencies, including some within this Committee's
jurisdiction. NIST, NSF, and the DOE more recently we heard
that NASA will also be participating in the pilot program. Can
you tell us specifically what activities at NIST, NASA, NSF,
and DOE are going to be reduced in order to fund the pilot
program?
Dr. Holdren. I don't think any activities are going to be
reduced. The agencies that are going to collaborate in the
additive manufacturing pilot are advancing specific missions
that they are already authorized to pursue and they are
undertaking activities for which funds have been appropriated.
But they are doing it under this overarching rubric.
Mr. Quayle. So were the funds not necessary--did--are we
overly funding these programs? Because it seems like we are
actually extending and expanding what they are supposed to be
doing by putting this additional money into new programs. Did
they not need that money before and it was just excess?
Dr. Holdren. I think we are improving efficiency and
coordination by focusing these efforts under this rubric.
Mr. Quayle. Okay. Now, one other quick question is why
would the Administration propose to fund the NNMI in fiscal
year 2013 when the pilot, which is supposed to serve as proof
of concept for the greater network--and that won't be completed
until at least the end of fiscal year 2014--why the discrepancy
there when you are asking for the funds in fiscal year 2013
when you are actually not even going to get proof of concept
until the end of fiscal year 2014? It seems like you are
putting the cart before the horse here.
Dr. Holdren. Well, actually, the solicitation for the
additive manufacturing pilot closed last week. We expect to
announce an award in the coming month to six weeks, and we
therefore expect that the pilot would begin to operate before
the end of fiscal 2012.
Mr. Quayle. But operation isn't proof of concept. I mean
you can have an operation and say that you are going to try to
prove a concept----
Dr. Holdren. No, the proof of----
Mr. Quayle. You are going to be spending a billion dollars;
you would think that we would want to put forth the proof of
concept in the totality, not just, hey, we have started the
process of a proof of concept, which seems what you are doing
then if you are talking about those awards. That is not a proof
of concept; that is just the beginning of that process.
Dr. Holdren. Well, I think we are talking about a phased
process, and we think that the order we have laid out makes
sense.
Mr. Quayle. Okay. Thank you, Dr. Holdren.
I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes Ms. Johnson from Texas for five
minutes.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Holdren, I know that in terms of staffing, the OSTP
experiences a high turnover both during the transition in
leadership and throughout any given administration because of
your heavy reliance on detailees from the agencies. But your
day-to-day coordination duties carry on from one year to
another and from one administration to another. So how many
OSTP staff tend to carry over from one administration to the
next or at least what are your own--what is your experience in
it?
Dr. Holdren. Well, of course, there is continuing turnover
in these positions. When I took over the office upon my
confirmation by the Senate in March of 2009, there were 40 some
people who had stayed from the previous administration. The
turnover in that group proceeded over the intervening three
years and there are now probably more like 10 or 12 who have
carried over from the previous administration. The continuity
is obtained in a lot of ways, partly as the folks who are
carried over, partly is the really extraordinary performance of
OSTP directors from one administration to another in handing
over to their successor an extraordinary degree of
documentation about the activities and responsibilities of the
office. I got a tremendous amount of valuable information from
my predecessor, the late John Marburger, who served in this
capacity in the Bush Administration, who in turn got a
tremendous amount from his predecessors in the Clinton
Administration.
There is also a continuity that comes from people coming in
and out. That is, I was in and out of OSTP throughout the
Clinton Administration in my role as one of President's Council
of Advisors on Science and Technology. So I actually knew quite
a bit about what goes on in OSTP before I ever got the job.
There are other folks who have been in OSTP before and are now
back again but weren't carried over from the previous
Administration. There are a lot of ways we deal with continuity
but I think we are doing well.
Ms. Johnson. The benefits--I know there are benefits and
limitations of this current model, but I think what it does
emphasize is that outcomes are not necessarily partisan; they
are strictly based upon----
Dr. Holdren. Yes. I mean we think of science and technology
policy as a domain that has largely been bipartisan over the
years. I think it continues to be. There is wide bipartisan
support for at least most of what we do and we don't think of
ourselves as a partisan office.
Ms. Johnson. Does your budget adequately support the mix of
staff and that you think might be best or do you get too much?
Dr. Holdren. Well, of course, we took a 32 percent budget
cut for fiscal year 2012. Unfortunately that caused a lot of
stress and a lot of challenges to manage OSTP's wide range of
responsibilities with a budget cut of that magnitude. We are
pleased that the appropriators both in the House and in the
Senate have this year voted out the President's full request of
$5.85 million as opposed to the $4.5 we got in 2012 and we hope
that ends up, obviously, in the final appropriations bill. It
would put us in a much better position to cover the range of
responsibilities we have. We really do a lot on a shoestring
and we do it in part, as your question implies, with the help
of a lot of detailees who come from the science reg agencies,
they come from NSF, NOAA, NASA, DOE, DOD, NIH, and they bring
insights about those domains and they enable us to cover the
broad terrain in a way that we would not be able to cover if we
had to do it all on our own budget.
Ms. Johnson. Now, one last quick question. The current
statute limits the office to four Associate Directors and makes
them subject to Senate confirmation. And right now, you are
taking advantage of all four slots but unfortunately all
without any Senate-confirmed directors. Do you have any
thoughts either on the number of directors or the requirement
for Senate confirmation?
Dr. Holdren. Well, I think four Senate-confirmed Associate
Directors correspond to the four divisions--Science,
Technology, Environment and Energy, and National Security and
International Affairs is the right number. We started out after
some delays in confirmation having three of the four Senate-
confirmed. The fourth, the President's nominee for National
Security and International Affairs, was never confirmed. He got
an interim appointment that subsequently that expired and so he
has left. But in the meantime, the Senate-confirmed Associate
Director for Technology Aneesh Chopra has left just a few
months ago. The Senate-confirmed Associate Director for
Environment and Energy Shere Abbott left a little longer ago.
And the Senate-confirmed Associate Director for Science, Dr.
Carl Wieman, Nobel Laureate in Physics left just a couple of
weeks ago for personal reasons--health reasons really.
And so we are currently in a position very late in the
term, when the prospects of getting additional nominees through
the Senate are very poor, we have one nominee, the President's
nominee for an Associate Director for National Security and
International Affairs, Dr. Pat Falcone, has had her hearing and
we hope she will be confirmed. But the other divisions are
currently under strong leadership but leadership that I have
delegated the responsibilities to on an interim basis. And I
think it is--while we are working on the problem of finding
people who would be Senate confirmed for those slots, I am not
sure how many of those we will be able to get confirmed before
the election.
Ms. Johnson. And it is even more of a challenge for the
Nation.
Thank you very much. My time has expired.
Chairman Hall. The Chair recognizes Dr. Harris, gentleman
from Maryland, for five minutes.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Dr. Holdren, for appearing in front of the
Committee.
Let me ask, you know, one of the issues that came up before
my Subcommittee has to do with transparency, and in your
testimony, you kind of brag about the first day in office the
President signing the memorandum on transparency and open
government. With that in mind, as the President's Science
Advisor, do you think it is a matter of principle that the
Federal Government should make scientific data that it uses to
justify regulatory actions public? Specifically, we have an
issue with the EPA and some of their regulatory actions that
they claim are based on scientific data but we have had a hard
time getting them to release the original data upon which they
base action. As a matter of principle, do you think we should
expect that?
Dr. Holdren. Yes.
Mr. Harris. Okay. Would you work with the Committee to see
that we get----
Dr. Holdren. Be happy to do that. If there is a problem
there, I would happy to work with you. I think the principle
is--absolutely the data on which regulatory decisions and other
decisions are based should be available to the Committee and
should be made public unless there is a classification reason--
--
Mr. Harris. Right, and----
Dr. Holdren [continuing]. It seems unlikely.
Mr. Harris [continuing]. I imagine unlikely in that
situation.
Dr. Holdren. Unlikely in this case.
Mr. Harris. Well, thank you. Let me ask you, also in your
testimony you talk about clean energy but when the President
talked about clean energy in the State of the Union, he
actually included natural gas as clean energy. You left it out
of your testimony. Do you consider natural gas a clean energy
source?
Dr. Holdren. Yes. On that----
Mr. Harris. Okay. Is there a reason----
Dr. Holdren [continuing]. Natural gas----
Mr. Harris [continuing]. Why you left it out of your
testimony?
Dr. Holdren. No. Natural gas is the cleanest of the fossil
fuel resources----
Mr. Harris. So you think we should have----
Dr. Holdren [continuing]. Inherently----
Mr. Harris [continuing]. Significant research and
development into it as a clean energy source?
Dr. Holdren. Well, I think the natural gas business is so
well developed that the private sector does most of the further
R&D that is needed in that domain. I don't think we need a
large federal R&D program, although we do need federal R&D to
ensure, for example, that hydrofracturing can be done in a way
that protects drinking water and protects other environmental
values.
Mr. Harris. Is there--you are a scientist. Is there a
documented case of contamination of drinking water from
hydrofracturing?
Dr. Holdren. There is not.
Mr. Harris. There is not. So as a scientist with 1.2
million applications of hydrofracturing, your testimony is that
despite 1.2 million applications with no case of drinking water
contamination, we should be expending monies in the Federal
Government for 10 agencies to look for a reason to regulate
hydrofracturing?
Dr. Holdren. We are----
Mr. Harris. As a scientist now, 1.2 million applications,
Doctor, you admit no documented case of drinking water
contamination. Now, to me it looks like--that looks like a wild
goose chase, but you might have a different opinion.
Dr. Holdren. I think it is very important that we develop
hydrofracking in a way that the American public has confidence
in it and can continue to rely on it.
Mr. Harris. Do you think that----
Dr. Holdren. I think the danger is, Congressman----
Mr. Harris. Dr. Holdren, I am going to interrupt you for a
second because I only have two more minutes and I have one more
question. Do you think it is scientifically--that it is
scientific integrity when the EPA issues a press release, a
fear-mongering press release about the data from Pavillion
study and basically has to go back and admit a few months later
that we have to actually go back and collect some more data? Do
you think that is good science?
Dr. Holdren. I don't want to defend a particular press
release.
Mr. Harris. Okay----
Dr. Holdren. I didn't see it.
Mr. Harris [continuing]. Dr. Holdren, I would suggest that
part of the reason why the American public has no faith is that
the scientific community in this Administration has not come
out and said you know what? You ought to have confidence in a
technique that has been used 1.2 million times with no
documented case of water--now, we are going to look at it, but
as a baseline it looks pretty safe. It is exactly 180 degrees
from what scientists in the Administration have said.
Now, finally, in my final minute, there is a conference
going on in Rio de Janeiro this week, and Americans quite
appropriately are pretty skeptical whenever we get together at
international conferences and come to agreements because they
are concerned that our taxpayers are going to bear the costs
and economic burdens of any agreements that come from these.
In 2007, at a Climate Change Conference in Bali, your
response to an interview question asked about whether
``Americans need to reduce their living standards,'' you said--
and this is a quote and I need to know whether it is accurate--
``there is going to have be a degree of redistribution of how
much we consume.'' Is that an accurate quote of what you said
in 2007?
Dr. Holdren. I do not remember, sir, exactly what I said in
2007, but it sounds to me that I would have been talking about
distribution between clean energy technologies and dirty energy
technologies and where we get our consumption, what the
processes are more broadly by which we support our standard of
living.
Let me note as well that both the President has said, and I
have said, that we believe that the country's natural gas
resources can be developed safely. We have both been clear on
that. The question that you are getting at is whether the
government needs to pay any attention at all to the range of
potential environmental----
Mr. Harris. No, the question--my specific question is
whether you said there is going to have to be a redistribution
of how much we consume. And I will go back and pull the final
quote whether we were talking about energy or whether we are
talking about this perception that the government just thinks
that Americans just consume too much and that maybe this is not
fair somehow. Well, I would suggest that we--you know, if you
think that what we ought to reduce our GDP, consume less, maybe
have a lower GDP, that is certainly consistent with the
President's economic policies.
Dr. Holdren. That is not----
Mr. Harris. We are at the----
Dr. Holdren [continuing]. What I think and it is not what
the President thinks.
Mr. Harris. Well, thank--I am glad he doesn't think it but,
you know, when they continually revise down our GDP estimate
and then we have folks in the Administration who have said a
few years ago, well, you know, we ought to redistribute our
consumption and you have other Administration officials say,
well, you know, it would be nice if the price of gas were at
European energy gas levels, then some people are skeptical of
that. But with that--and that was just a rhetorical question. I
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Lipinski, the gentleman from
Illinois, for five minutes.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Dr. Holdren, for your testimony and for all the
work that you are doing. I know it has been almost two hours
now. A couple questions that I have here, the first is the
America COMPETES Act and the reauthorization, I think, were
very, very critical for our Nation and we need to remain
committed to those. I am particularly interested in talking
with you about innovation inducement prizes at federal
agencies. OSTP recently released a report on prizes
highlighting successes and best practices in federal prize
programs. I was glad to see this report, and I am glad that you
support the use of innovation prizes. Something I had
originally been a part of is the creation of the H-Prize for
hydrogen. I have continued to promote the use of innovation
prizes.
So can you update us on what has been done with the prizes
authority so far in 2012 and what OSTP is doing to promote the
use of prizes at agencies like the National Science Foundation?
Dr. Holdren. Well, thank you for that question. First of
all, we have issued a memorandum that went to all the
departments and agencies making clear that they had the
authority to use prize competitions to achieve the goals of the
departments and agencies where that made sense. And we think--
and I think you agree from your own background in this domain--
that prizes and competitions are often an extremely efficient
way to generate innovation because you end up only paying for
success. You describe a goal but don't prescribe the ways to
get there, and you draw on the innovation of a very wide--or
the creativity of a very wide community to find the
innovations.
We now have prize competitions going on in something like
40 different departments and agencies, including the NSF,
including the DOD, the VA, the Department of Transportation,
and many others. And the ones that have already come to
completion have shown some quite remarkable results. I mean one
that I am sure you know about is the Automotive X Prize, which
was corporate money but DOE orchestration of the prize
competition. There was $10 million in prizes for folks who
could construct and demonstrate a vehicle that gets more than
100 miles per gallon equivalent fuel economy. And three
vehicles succeeded and split the prize money, but the
interesting thing is the competitors invested $100 million in
pursuit of $10 million in prizes. I call that leverage.
Mr. Lipinski. And I thank you for that, and I think we both
agree that it is certainly not a substitute for research grants
but another way of trying to promote innovation in our country.
A couple other things I wanted to touch on that were
brought up earlier. First, very briefly I want to concur with
Ms. Lofgren on the NIF and I am also very interested in NIF and
what we are going to do in the continuation of that. And STEM
education, as Co-Chair of the STEM Ed. Caucus, one thing
particularly that I wanted to raise with you is the federal
investment in formal science education, which has shrunk in
recent years, and this year's NSF budget request, for example,
included 22 percent reduction in Advancing Informal STEM
Learning grant program. So I just want to ask do you expect
informal education programs, including grant programs, to be an
important part of future federal STEM education portfolio or
are we going to continue to see this going down?
Dr. Holdren. No, I think it will continue to be an
important part. We are in the late stages of producing a STEM
Education Strategic Plan that draws on the results of the
inventory I mentioned before where, for the first time, we
conducted a comprehensive inventory of all the Federal
Government STEM ed. programs across all departments and
agencies that do these things. We are already benefitting from
some of the insights from that inventory in finding ways to
expand programs that are more cost-effective and shrink some of
those that are less cost-effective. But I would certainly not
expect the informal education programs to go away. I think when
the STEM Education Strategic Plan comes out fairly shortly,
those programs will continue to have a role.
Mr. Lipinski. Well, I certainly encourage you to continue
including informal STEM ed. I know how important that was for
me personally and for a lot of others and I look forward to
seeing the federal STEM Education Strategic Plan later this
year. Anything else you could tell--anything more specific
about when this may come out or anything else you could tell us
about that plan very briefly?
Dr. Holdren. I believe that STEM Education Strategic Plan
will be out by fall.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back.
I thank Dr. Holdren for your testimony. And we may have
other questions. I have some questions I will submit in writing
and get them to you and hope within a couple of weeks we can
leave the record open for that.
And to Ms. Lofgren, it is my understanding that they have
an agreement on the content of her request, and without
objection, her request is granted.
[The information may be found in Appendix 2.]
Chairman Hall. And with that, Doctor, you are excused.
This hearing is adjourned. We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:52 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.046

Appendix 2

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Prepublication Copy: Managing for High-Quality Science and Engineering
at the NNSA National Security Laboratories: National Research Council
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74728.069



