- STIMULUS OVERSIGHT: AN UPDATE ON ACCOUNTABILITY, TRANSPARENCY, AND PERFORMANCE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STIMULUS OVERSIGHT:
AN UPDATE ON ACCOUNTABILITY,
TRANSPARENCY, AND PERFORMANCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
AND OVERSIGHT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-53

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

71-345 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
Tennessee                        FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight

HON. PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         PAUL D. TONKO, New York
Wisconsin                        ZOE LOFGREN, California
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             JERRY McNERNEY, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
RALPH M. HALL, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, November 30, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Paul C. Broun, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................    18
Written Statement............................................    19

Statement by Representative Paul Tonko, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    20
Written Statement............................................    21

Witnesses:

Dr. Frank Rusco, Director, Natural Resources and Environment
Team, Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    25

Mr. Michael Wood, Executive Director, Recovery Accountability and
Transparency Board
Oral Statement...............................................    48
Written Statement............................................    50

Hon. Gregory Friedman, Inspector General, U.S. Department of
Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    57
Written Statement............................................    59

Hon. Todd Zinser, Inspector General, U.S. Department of Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................    72
Written Statement............................................    73

Ms. Allison C. Lerner, Inspector General, National Science
Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    87
Written Statement............................................    89

Ms. Gail Robinson, Deputy Inspector General, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    95
Written Statement............................................    96

Discussion
...............................................................   105

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Frank Rusco, Director, Natural Resources and Environment
Team, Government Accountability Office.........................   120

Mr. Michael Wood, Executive Director, Recovery Accountability and
Transparency Board.............................................   127

Hon. Gregory Friedman, Inspector General, U.S. Department of
Energy.........................................................   131

Hon. Todd Zinser, Inspector General, U.S. Department of Commerce.   143

Ms. Allison C. Lerner, Inspector General, National Science
Foundation.....................................................   148

Ms. Gail Robinson, Deputy Inspector General, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration.......................................   154

STIMULUS OVERSIGHT: AN UPDATE ON
ACCOUNTABILITY, TRANSPARENCY, AND PERFORMANCE

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Paul Broun
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS & OVERSIGHT

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Stimulus Oversight:

An Update on Accountability,

Transparency, and Performance

wednesday, november 30, 2011
10:00 a.m.--12:00 p.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

Chairman Broun. Good morning, everyone. The Subcommittee on
Investigations and Oversight will come to order.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``Stimulus Oversight:
An Update on Accountability, Transparency, and Performance.''
You will find in front of you packets containing our witness
panel's written testimony, biographies, and truth-in-testimony
disclosures. I want to welcome our witnesses here today. Thank
you all for being here. I now recognize myself for five minutes
for an opening statement.
Welcome to the Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee
hearing titled ``Stimulus Oversight: An Update on
Accountability, Transparency, and Performance.'' This is the
Subcommittee's third oversight hearing of the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act of 2009. The Subcommittee's previous
hearings focused on monitoring the development of internal
agency controls and reviewing external oversight mechanisms
prior to money going out the door. Now that funding has been
obligated and recipients are actually spending the money, it is
important for this Subcommittee to take a step back and see if
we can develop any lessons learned, any best practices, and
identify any areas of concern that require additional review.
With funding available for many more months, the agencies, the
IGs, the GAO, the Recovery Board, this Subcommittee, and the
American people will continue to monitor how this money is
spent. To put this task into perspective, the Stimulus Bill
contained roughly $787 billion, of which approximately $40
billion was for science-related activities. This accounts for
roughly the amount already appropriated for that fiscal year,
essentially doubling the funding. Monitoring this funding is
proving to be a daunting task for agencies and watchdogs.
As we have seen in recent months, efforts by agencies to
conduct the proper due diligence can be challenging for a
number of reasons including external deadlines, insufficient
training, or inadequate staffing or funding levels. A lot of
attention has been paid to Section 1705 and the Loan Guarantee
Program because of Solyndra and Beacon Power. While these
certainly garner a lot of press attention, the fact that many
of these loan guarantees were made in such a rushed fashion
before the deadline makes me believe that we will see a lot
more of the same.
Separate from the Loan Guarantee Program, issues also exist
in other areas like ARPA-E, DOE program offices like EERE, and
Section 1603 payments. Additionally, potential areas of concern
include facility construction at NIST and NSF and shipbuilding
efforts at NOAA and NSF.
Although there is certainly enough oversight work to go
around, I am pleased to hear that a positive theme has
developed as well. Funding for basic research at the Department
of Energy's Office of Science, and NASA appears to have been
administered quickly and efficiently. This may be because they
simply used existing mechanisms to get funding out the door,
accelerated existing work, or funded projects that were
previously found to be meritorious.
Much of the work done by the IGs, GAO, and the Recovery
Board has focused on waste, fraud, abuse, mismanagement,
transparency, and accountability--and rightfully so. A lot of
the work done on accountability has focused on being able to
track where money is going and for what purpose. While this is
important, evaluations of accountability should also address
whether the intended goals of the Act have been met using
specific metrics. I hope the agencies, the IGs, GAO, and the
Recovery Board can assist Congress in this endeavor as well.
Regardless of whether you agree with the underlying Act,
Congress has an obligation to make sure that if taxpayer money
is going to be spent, it is done appropriately. Minimizing
waste, fraud, and abuse is a nonpartisan endeavor, and I am
sure we can all agree with that.
Now, I recognize my Ranking Member from New York, Paul
Tonko. You are recognized for five minutes, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Broun follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Chairman Paul C. Broun

Good morning. Welcome to the Investigations and Oversight
Subcommittee hearing titled ``Stimulus Oversight: An Update on
Accountability, Transparency, and Performance.'' This is the
Subcommittee's third hearing on oversight of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009.
The Subcommittee's previous hearings focused on monitoring the
development of internal agency controls, and reviewing external
oversight mechanisms prior to money going out the door. Now that
funding has been obligated, and recipients are actually spending the
money, it is important for this Subcommittee to take a step back and
see if we can develop any lessons learned, any best practices, or
identify any areas of concern that require additional review. With
funding available for many more months, the agencies, the IGs, the GAO,
the Recovery Board, this Subcommittee, and the American people will
continue to monitor how this money is spent.
To put this task into perspective, the Stimulus Bill contained
roughly $787 billion, of which approximately $40 billion was for
science-related activities. This accounts for roughly the amount
appropriated for that fiscal year, essentially doubling the funding.
Monitoring this funding is proving to be a daunting task for agencies
and watchdogs.
As we have seen in recent months, efforts by agencies to conduct
the proper due diligence can be challenging for a number of reasons
including external deadlines, insufficient training, or inadequate
staffing or funding levels. A lot of attention has been paid to Section
1705 and the Loan Guarantee Program because of Solyndra and Beacon
Power. While these certainly garner a lot of press attention, the fact
that many of these loan guarantees were made in such a rushed fashion
before the deadline makes me believe that we will see a lot more of the
same. Separate from the Loan Guarantee Program, issues also exist in
other areas like ARPA-E, DOE program offices like EERE, and Section
1603 payments. Additionally, potential areas of concern surround NIST's
research facility construction account and NOAA's procurement,
acquisition, and construction account.
Although there is certainly enough oversight work to go around, I
am pleased to hear that a positive theme has developed as well. Funding
for basic research at the Department of Energy's Office of Science and
NASA programs appear to have been administered quickly and efficiently.
This may be because they simply used existing mechanisms to get funding
out the door, accelerated existing work, or funded projects that were
previously found to be meritorious.
Much of the work done by the IGs, GAO, and the Recovery Board has
focused on waste, fraud, abuse, mismanagement, transparency, and
accountability--and rightfully so. A lot of the work done on
accountability has focused on being able to track where money is going
and for what purpose. While this is important, evaluations of
accountability should also address whether the intended goals of the
Act have been met using specific metrics. I hope the agencies, the IGs,
GAO, and the Recovery Board can assist Congress in this endeavor as
well.
Regardless of whether you agree with the underlying Act, Congress
has an obligation to make sure that if taxpayer money is going to be
spent, that it is done appropriately. Minimizing waste, fraud, and
abuse is a nonpartisan endeavor that I am sure we can all agree with.

Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to our
distinguished witnesses. You are all busy people and thank you
for sharing your time with us.
Public investment in innovative technologies and
infrastructure not only creates jobs; it lays the foundation
for further private sector job creation. The American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act made a significant difference in stopping
the precipitous loss of nearly 800,000 jobs per month that
occurred prior to its enactment. Without the Recovery Act,
millions more Americans would be facing unemployment and we
would indeed be months further behind in the admittedly
sluggish economic recovery.
According to the Congressional Budget Office's August 2011
report, the Recovery Act increased real GDP by .8 percent to
2.5 percent, and it increased the number of full-time
equivalent jobs by between 1.4 million and 4 million compared
to no Recovery Act effort for the second quarter of calendar
year 2011. That is positive news. But the American economy is
not out of danger yet. Economic growth is still weak, and job
creation is still far below what is required to provide
employment for all who need a job.
Recovery Act funding was significant but it is not
realistic to expect some $840 billion to compensate for the
loss of over $10 trillion worth in wealth that we experienced
at the end of 2008. Because of the huge disparity of these
figures, it is imperative that Recovery Act dollars be spent
efficiently and effectively. That is why we are here today.
I have several concerns about the Recovery Act funds, and I
hope our witnesses can shed some light on these matters. First,
it looks as if too much of the money has still not been
invested. Federal agencies have distributed it; yet it remains
uncommitted by the recipients. We need to create at least seven
million jobs to get back to full employment. If these funds are
not being spent, they cannot fuel the job creation that we
need. I am looking for a solution. We all are looking for a
solution. And I hope that our witnesses today have some advice
about how to get that uncommitted money moving to create more
jobs and to fuel a more robust level of economic growth.
Second, I worry about the size of public exposure in some
of the loan programs that are operated at the Department of
Energy. Grants and contracts that lead to direct expenditures
carry with them risks limited by the value of the award, risks
that can be minimized through sound management by experienced
staff, and DOE has a long history of managing grants and
contracts.
In contrast, the Department of Energy's Loan Guarantee
Program is relatively new. Loan guarantees are for much greater
amounts of money than an average grant or contract and
therefore carry billions of dollars in risk. DOE's relative
lack of experience with this authority and limited experience
with assessing market conditions and commercial risks should
increase our scrutiny of awards provided under this program.
All investments carry some risks and we should be willing to
take them where there is opportunity for significant benefits
or advances, but the Department should do all it can to ensure
these awards will result in successful outcomes.
While the press is focused on the loan to the solar company
Solyndra, the fact is that other DOE loans may be just as
risky. Particularly in the nuclear sector, taxpayers' financial
exposure dwarfs that of the Solyndra loan. Just one of these
nuclear energy loans is 16 times the size of the award made to
Solyndra. Markets can shift against these mega-projects just as
easily as they shifted against the far more modest solar
project that went bankrupt. I hope that the Department is
taking steps to reevaluate the size of its commitments in the
Loan Guarantee Program and the challenges that face those
investments.
Finally, I look forward to hearing whether there are
meaningful lessons about managing the public's money that
should be applied to all federal spending based on the
experiences of our Recovery Act. The effort to bring an
unprecedented level of transparency to spending may suggest new
expectations for all governments--all government funding
rather--in the future. We do not want to cripple agencies in
their ability to make awards and manage them through burdensome
requirements; nor do we want to discourage companies and
individuals from working with our government. If we can build
on the best of the Recovery Act's lessons, it would make our
government more accountable and transparent to the public.
Mr. Chair, I believe you have brought the right people
before us today to address these issues, and I look forward to
their testimony. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Paul Tonko

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Public investment in innovative technologies and infrastructure not
only creates jobs, it lays the foundation for private sector job
creation. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act made a significant
difference in stopping the precipitous loss of nearly 800,000 jobs per
month that occurred prior to its enactment. Without the Recovery Act,
millions more Americans would be facing unemployment, and we would be
months further behind in the admittedly sluggish economic recovery.
According to the Congressional Budget Office's August 2011 report,
the Recovery Act increased real GDP by between .8 percent and 2.5
percent and it increased the number of full-time equivalent jobs by
between 1.4 million and 4.0 million compared to no Recovery Act effort
for the second quarter of calendar year 2011.
That is positive news, but the American economy is not out of
danger yet. Economic growth is still weak and job creation is still far
below what is required to provide employment for all who need a job.
Recovery Act funding was significant, but it is not realistic to expect
$840 billion to compensate for the loss of over $10 trillion in wealth
we experienced at the end of 2008. Because of the huge disparity in
these figures, it is imperative that Recovery Act dollars be spent
efficiently and effectively. That is why we are here today.
I have several concerns about the Recovery Act funds, and I hope
our witnesses can shed some light on these matters.
First, it looks as if too much of the money has still not been
invested. Federal agencies have distributed it, yet it remains
uncommitted by the recipients. We need to create at least seven million
jobs to get back to full employment. If these funds are not being
spent, they cannot fuel the job creation we need. I am looking for a
solution. I hope that our witnesses today have some advice about how to
get that uncommitted money moving to create more jobs and to fuel a
more robust level of economic growth.
Second, I worry about the size of public exposure in some of the
loan programs that are operated at the Department of Energy. Grants and
contracts that lead to direct expenditures carry with them risks
limited by the value of the award--risks that can be minimized through
sound mangement by experienced staff, and DOE has a long history of
managing grants and contracts.
In contrast, the Department of Energy's loan guarantee program is
relatively new. Loan guarantees are for much greater amounts of money
than an average grant or contract and therefore carry billions of
dollars in risk. DOE's relative lack of experience with this authority
and limited experience with assessing market conditions and commercial
risks should increase our scrutiny of awards provided under this
program. All investments carry some risks and we should be willing to
take them where there is opportunity for significant benefits or
advances, but the Department should do all it can to ensure these
awards will result in successful outcomes.
While the press has focused on the loan to the solar company
Solyndra, the fact is that other DOE loans may be just as risky.
Particularly in the nuclear sector, taxpayers' financial exposure
dwarfs that of the Solyndra loan. Just one of these nuclear energy
loans is 16 times the size of the award made to Solyndra. Markets can
shift against these mega-projects just as easily as they shifted
against the far more modest solar project that went bankrupt. I hope
that the Department is taking steps to reevaluate the size of their
commitments in the loan guarantee program and the challenges that face
those investments.
Finally, I look forward to hearing whether there are meaningful
lessons about managing the public's money that should be applied to all
federal spending based on the experiences of the Recovery Act.
The effort to bring an unprecedented level of transparency to
spending may suggest new expectations for all government funding in the
future. We do not want to cripple agencies in their ability to make
awards and manage them through burdensome requirements, nor do we want
to discourage companies and individuals from working with the
government. If we can build on the best of the Recovery Act's lessons,
it would make our government more accountable and transparent to the
public.
Mr. Chairman, I believe you have brought the right people before us
to address these issues, and I look forward to their testimony.

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Tonko. I appreciate the
accolades. That is the nice thing about this Committee. We are
working in a bipartisan manner.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time, I would like to introduce our panel of
witnesses. First is Dr. Frank Rusco, the Director of Natural
Resources and Environment Team at the U.S. Government
Accountability Office; Mr. Michael Wood, the Executive Director
of the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board; the
Honorable Gregory H. Friedman, the Inspector General, the U.S.
Department of Energy; the Honorable Todd Zinser, the Inspector
General of the U.S. Department of Commerce; Ms. Allison Lerner,
the Inspector General of the National Science Foundation; and
finally, Ms. Gail Robinson, the Deputy Inspector General of
NASA.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each--if you would please try to contain your
remarks to that five minutes--after which the Members of the
Committee will each have five minutes to ask questions. Your
written testimony will be included in the record of the
hearing. It is the practice of this Subcommittee on
Investigations and Oversight to receive testimony under oath.
Do any of you have any objections to taking an oath?
Let the record reflect that all witnesses shook their head
from side to side indicating in a common way that they do not
have an objection.
Also, you may be represented by counsel. Do any of you have
counsel here today?
Mr. Wood? Okay. Hon. Zinser, do you have--no. Ms. Lerner?
Ms. Lerner. I have an attorney with me.
Chairman Broun. Okay. Let the record reflect that all
except for Ms. Lerner and Mr. Wood have no counsel and that
those two individuals do indeed.
If all of you would now please stand and raise your right
hand. Do you solemnly swear or affirm to tell the whole truth
and nothing but the truth, so help you God?
Nodding, okay. I didn't hear the female voices, though.
Okay. Good. Let the record reflect that all the witnesses
participating have taken the oath.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Rusco. You are
recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. FRANK RUSCO, DIRECTOR,

NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT TEAM,

GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Dr. Rusco. Thank you. Chairman Broun, Ranking Member Tonko,
and Members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today
along with my colleagues in the oversight community to discuss
GAO's oversight of Recovery Act spending on science-related
programs.
This year, the Congressional Budget Office estimated that
the Recovery Act's combined spending and tax provisions would
cost approximately $840 billion. More than $40 billion was
targeted for science-related programs, and the bulk of that
went to DOE. In March 2009, GAO testified before this Committee
about GAO's approach to conducting Recovery Act oversight, and
we highlighted several research and development programs that
deserve special attention from the relevant Inspectors General.
Under the Recovery Act, GAO was tasked with the
responsibility to conduct bimonthly reviews and other reports
on the use of Recovery Act funds, and we have so far--well,
including this testimony--issued 132 reports and testimonies on
Recovery Act-related issues.
My statement today will provide a brief update of the
science-related funds that have been obligated and spent by
DOE, Commerce, NASA, and NSF. I will also provide several
examples of the kinds of challenges that science-related
programs faced in implementing the goals of the Recovery Act.
According to Agency officials, the majority of science-
related Recovery Act funding has been obligated. Specifically,
as of September 30, 2011, DOE had obligated about 98 percent of
its $35 billion. DOE reported that it had spent about $19
billion, or 54 percent, of this funding. Commerce received $1.4
billion in science-related funding, obligated almost all of it
and had spent about $900 million, or 64 percent. NASA received
$1 billion, obligated it all, and had spent 95 percent. And
lastly, NSF received $3 billion, obligated it all, and had
spent about 46 percent as of September 30.
All the programs we audited in the course of our Recovery
Act work faced challenges, especially in the early months. For
example, DOE's Weatherization Program received almost $5
billion, a 20-fold increase over the program's typical annual
appropriation. The Weatherization Program faced problems
adjusting to this greatly increased scale of funding.
Specifically, it took the program time to issue guidance and
force recipient States and territories to establish market
wages for weatherization workers as required under the Davis-
Bacon Act. This delayed the first large dispersal of funds to
States and territories. DOE, the States, and territories also
faced challenges in scaling up the workforce and providing
training for workers new to the weatherization work.
In some cases, the Recovery Act represented the first time
a program received funding. For example, EERE's Energy
Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant Program, which received
$3.2 billion in Recovery Act funds, was essentially starting
from scratch, and some of the challenges it faced reflected
this. Specifically, we found in our April 2011 report that the
EECBG program was not always collecting needed information from
recipients to verify that these recipients were in compliance
with federal oversight and reporting requirements. This program
also faced challenges in measuring the outcomes of EECBG
funding, including measures of reduced energy use.
DOE has also wrestled with calculating and reporting jobs
created, a requirement of the Recovery Act. For example, DOE's
Environmental Management Office, which received almost $6
billion in Recovery Act funding, has publicly reported three
vastly different job creation figures ranging from 5,700 to
20,200 jobs, depending on what methodology was used. Measuring
job creation is inherently difficult from a methodological
perspective because it is not possible to observe what would
have happened in the absence of the Recovery Act. However,
Environmental Management was initially unable to follow
Recovery Act requirements and OMB guidance for reporting job
creation, and it is still unclear if DOE has fixed this
problem.
Overall, the science-related programs we have audited have
responded at least partially to the challenges we identified.
These programs have implemented some of our recommendations and
have improved in their ability to monitor the use of Recovery
Act money.
GAO continues to conduct oversight of science-related
programs that received Recovery Act funding. Within the next
several months, we will issue reports on DOE's Loan Guarantee,
Weatherization, and ARPA-E programs. We also have ongoing
evaluations of federal renewable energy initiatives and of R&D
efforts in areas of solar energy and battery storage
technologies.
This concludes my statement. I will be happy to answer any
questions the Committee may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Rusco follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. Frank Rusco, Director,
Natural Resources and Environment Team,
Government Accountability Office

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Dr. Rusco.
Now, Mr. Wood, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. MICHAEL WOOD,

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,

RECOVERY ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY BOARD

Mr. Wood. Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, I
want to thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today. As the Executive Director of the Recovery Accountability
and Transparency Board, I will be speaking to you about our
role in ensuring the transparency and accountability of the
Recovery funds and also activities that are underway to extend
lessons learned by the Recovery Board to all federal spending.
As you know, the Recovery Board was created in 2009 as a
part of the Recovery Act. It is composed of Inspectors General,
two of whom appear beside me today, Gregory Friedman and Todd
Zinser. The primary mission of the Board is two-fold--first, to
provide transparency for the funds that were expended; and
second, to prevent or detect waste, fraud, and abuse for the
Recovery money.
The Recovery Board achieves transparency of Recovery Act
spending through reporting on the use of funds. Specifically,
the Recovery Act requires recipients of Recovery funds to
report on how they are using those funds and require agencies
to report on spending as well. Every quarter, recipients of
Recovery funds must report centrally into the Board's reporting
Web site, FederalReporting.gov. In addition, on a weekly basis,
agencies provide financial and activity reports, which include
the amounts awarded and paid out.
Recovery.gov is a Web site that was developed to provide
transparency for the spending that was occurring. It is an
attractive, award-winning Web site. It has essentially a
complex technological infrastructure, but it allows us to very
quickly display quality-controlled data in unique ways to
achieve unprecedented levels of transparency.
FederalReporting.gov and Recovery.gov allow a continuing
quality-assurance process that involves the agencies, the
Recovery Board, the Office of Management and Budget, and
recipients. Innovative mapping on our Web site, Recovery.gov,
allows us to display data with an unprecedented level of
transparency, including the ability to search by ZIP codes so
citizens can see what projects are occurring in their local
community. You can also search by Congressional District to see
what is happening in individual Congressional Districts.
In addition to ensuring the transparency of tax dollars,
the Recovery Board also conducts and coordinates oversight of
Recovery funds to prevent and detect fraud, waste, and
mismanagement of those funds. The Recovery Board's
accountability staff uses a suite of analytical tools in our
Recovery Operations Center, or ROC, to find indicators of fraud
among Recovery recipients and sub-recipients.
The Recovery Board's work in promoting transparency and
accountability has garnered much positive attention. On June 13
of this year, both the Executive and Legislative branches took
extraordinary measures to extend the work of the Recovery Board
to the rest of the Federal Government. The President issued an
Executive Order calling for the creation of a new Government
Accountability and Transparency Board, or GAT Board, which is
tasked with ``building on the lessons learned from the
successful implementation of the Recovery Act'' and working
with the Recovery Board to apply those approaches developed by
the Board across government spending.
And in Congress, Congressman Darrell Issa and Senator Mark
Warner have both introduced legislation that, among other
things, would create a new federal agency, the Federal
Accountability and Spending Transparency Board--or FAST Board--
to provide accountability and transparency for all contracts,
grants, and loans funded with federal dollars. We look forward
to working with these officials and other stakeholders to
ensure that the work of the Recovery Board can serve as a
template for tracking all government spending.
Even before the creation of the GAT Board and the pending
legislation, the Recovery Board devoted time to enumerating our
lessons learned and our experiences with transparency and
accountability. One of the key lessons learned over the past
two years has been ``transparency drives accountability.'' The
Board's accountability and transparency tools comprise two
halves of the same fraud-detection operation, reinforcing and
enhancing each other. Accountability works best when you have
transparency; transparency works best when you have
accountability.
A related lesson is that the interrelated transparency and
accountability tools are so useful from both a program and an
oversight perspective that agencies and the IG community should
have equal access to both these pieces. While both pieces can
clearly assist the investigatory and auditing functions of the
IGs, the accountability and transparency data can also help
agencies improve Agency functions and administration.
Typically, when the goal of an initiative is fraud detection,
IGs come to the table with a great deal of enthusiasm while
agencies appear less motivated.
One valuable lesson we have learned is that when the common
goal is fraud prevention, agencies and IGs are equally
enthusiastic, and a remarkable collaborative effort takes place
between the two. As a result of this lesson learned, the
Recovery Board is piloting fraud prevention tools with agency
personnel as well as with IGs. We believe this program, called
FederalAccountability.gov, will assist agencies in performing
their own risk evaluations for those seeking Recovery funds,
just as it will help enforcement officials conduct reviews of
Recovery funds in order to prevent and detect waste, fraud, and
abuse.
Another lesson has been the tremendous inefficiencies
caused by the government's lack of a uniform award ID.
Currently, there is no requirement that awards be standardized
across government, and we are working towards this goal.
Finally, rather than dismantle the Board's dual Web sites
or systems established by the ROC, these three critical
components can be combined into a ``universal one-stop shop''
applied more broadly across the whole spectrum of federal
spending. Such a model is actually put forth by the DATA Act
legislation.
Mr. Chairman, I will submit my full testimony for the
record, and I would be happy to answer any questions you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wood follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. Michael Wood,
Executive Director,
Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Wood.
Mr. Friedman, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. GREGORY FRIEDMAN,

INSPECTOR GENERAL,

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Mr. Friedman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to you and
Members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to
testify today in response to your request on the work of the
Office of Inspector General concerning the Department of
Energy's activities under the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act.
Not to be outdone by at least two of my colleagues, I
should point out in response to your earlier question that my
attorney is here with me today, but I do not expect to have him
testify unless I collapse in place. But I do want to clarify in
my response to your earlier question.
Chairman Broun. The record will reflect that. Thank you.
Mr. Friedman. Thank you.
As you know, the intent of the Recovery Act was to quickly
stimulate the economy, create jobs, and transform the
Department's mission while fostering an unprecedented level of
accountability and transparency. The Department received over
$35 billion in Recovery Act funding for various initiatives,
eclipsing its normal annual budget of approximately $26
billion.
The Department's implementation of the Recovery Act has
been a priority for my office. I have testified on several
occasions as to the Department's progress, including before
this Subcommittee in March of 2009. Most recently, on November
2, 2011, I testified before the House Committee on Oversight
and Government Reform's Subcommittee on Regulatory Affairs,
Stimulus Oversight and Government Spending. Since enactment, my
office has issued 70 reports covering all major program
activities, initiated a number of Recovery Act-related criminal
investigations, and conducted 300 fraud awareness briefings for
nearly 16,000 federal contracts, State, and other officials.
As I have previously testified, while there has been
significant progress, the Department's efforts to use Recovery
Act funds to stimulate the economy has been more challenging
than many had originally envisioned. We found the Department's
programs required extensive advanced planning, organizational
enhancements, and additional staffing and training at federal,
State, and local levels.
A fairly consistent pattern of delays existed in the pace
at which funds have been spent by grantees and other
recipients. According to the Department's records, as of
November 18 of 2011, about 43 percent of its Recovery Act funds
had not been spent, largely by recipients such as State and
local governments.
In addition, our reviews have identified performance issues
that affected the Department's ability to meet its Recovery Act
goals. Specific examples are provided in my full testimony.
In contrast, we found that the Department's Office of
Science and its laboratory system generally complied with
Recovery Act requirements, expended funds in a timely manner,
and employed sound project management practices. The Office of
Science received approximately $1.6 billion in Recovery Act
funds, most of which were used to accelerate ongoing work by
purchasing equipment and completing construction projects which
had already begun.
The Recovery Act established challenging goals. There was
what we considered to be an intense effort to implement and
execute the various aspects of the Department's
responsibilities. These efforts notwithstanding, we had a
number of observations about the Department's implementation
and execution of the Recovery Act. These observations, which I
have described in prior testimony, are:

LFirst, the pressure of achieving expeditious
program implementation and execution placed an enormous strain
on the Department's personnel and infrastructure.

LSecond, dealing with a diverse and complex set of
departmental stakeholders complicated Recovery Act startup and
administration.

LThird, in general, the concept of shovel-ready
projects was not realized.

LFourth, federal, State, and local government
infrastructures were, simply put, overwhelmed. In several
States, the very personnel who were charged with implementing
the Recovery Act's provisions had been furloughed due to local
economic conditions.

LFifth, the pace of actual expenditures was
significantly slowed because of the time needed to understand
and address specific requirements of the Recovery Act.

LSixth, recipients expressed their concern with
what they perceived to be or they described to us as overly
complex and burdensome reporting requirements.

In summary, a combination of massive funding, high
expectations, and inadequate infrastructure resulted at times
in less-than-optimal performance. Given the significant amount
of Recovery Act funds that remain to be spent, we have reviews
planned in a number of high-risk areas. Additionally, we have
identified a series of cost-reduction and efficiency-
enhancement actions for consideration by Department management.
These are provided in our recently issued report on
``Management Challenges at the Department of Energy.''
Finally, we are drafting a summary report to highlight
other lessons learned and best practices related to the
Recovery Act in the areas of risk management, financial
management, accounting and reporting, human capital management,
regulatory compliance, and delivery of public services.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement and I look
forward to your questions and those of the Subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Friedman follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Gregory Friedman,
Inspector General,
U.S. Department of Energy

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Friedman.
I now recognize Mr. Zinser for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. TODD ZINSER,

INSPECTOR GENERAL,

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Mr. Zinser. Thank you, Chairman Broun, Ranking Member
Tonko, Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today about our oversight of the
Department of Commerce's Science, Technology, and other
programs funded through the Recovery Act.
I would like to summarize my testimony by updating the
Subcommittee on the status of Commerce's spending of Recovery
Act funds and informing the Subcommittee of the most
significant challenges remaining for Commerce with respect to
the Recovery Act. The Act appropriated $7.9 billion to five
Commerce agencies in the OIG. As a result of approximately $1.1
billion in rescissions and transfers, that amount was reduced
to $6.8 billion, almost all of which has been obligated.
Approximately $2.9 billion, or 40 percent of those obligations,
has been spent. The 2010 decennial census and the coupon
program that NTIA administered as part of the Nation's
transition to digital TV accounts for $1.3 billion spent so
far.
In all, the Department awarded 467 grants and issued 433
contracts under the Recovery Act. As of September 30, 2011,
nearly $4 billion for Recovery Act programs and operations at
Commerce agencies had not yet been dispersed--including $2.8
billion for infrastructure grants under NTIA's Broadband
Technology Opportunities Program, or BTOP; $300 million for
NIST construction of research facilities and their Science and
Technical Research Programs; and $125 million for NOAA
procurement, acquisition, and construction projects.
By far, BTOP remains the most significant Recovery Act
challenge for Commerce. Aside from BTOP, however, the greatest
challenge lies in completing other projects on time. Given the
constrained budget environment, increased cost or loss of
Recovery Act funding caused by schedule delays could put
projects and the operations they support at serious risk. For
example, our testimony discusses projects that NOAA itself
identified as experiencing schedule challenges--including the
construction of the NOAA ship Reuben Lasker, an $87 million
project which has experienced significant delays and
difficulties meeting performance requirements; and the
construction of the La Jolla Southwest Science Center in
California, an $85 million project which has also experienced
delays (the responsibility for which is currently a matter of
dispute between the government and the contractor).
We are currently auditing the $179 million NIST Recovery
Act program which awarded 16 construction grants, primarily for
university research facilities, and believe there are four
projects that are at some risk of not being completed by the
new September 2013 deadline recently set by OMB.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, based on our ongoing oversight and
close interaction with the Department and its bureaus, we have
seen improved oversight procedures and processes as well as
evidence that the Department is being diligent about its
responsibilities under the Recovery Act. As demonstrated by our
July 2011 findings concerning recipient reporting, the Recovery
Act has resulted in more diligent oversight by program offices
and greater executive-level involvement than we have seen in
the past. In our view, the emphasis on transparency and
accountability has been a significant benefit of the Recovery
Act.
Going forward, a challenge will be to institutionalize that
emphasis on transparency and accountability for all spending
carried out by the Department of Commerce, and we look forward
to working with the Department in doing so.
This concludes my statement, Mr. Chairman. I would be happy
to respond to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Zinser follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Todd Zinser,
Inspector General,
U.S. Department of Commerce

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Zinser.
Now, the Subcommittee recognizes Ms. Lerner for five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF MS. ALLISON LERNER,

INSPECTOR GENERAL,

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION

Ms. Lerner. Thank you.
Chairman Broun, Ranking Member Tonko, and Members of the
Subcommittee, I appreciate this opportunity to provide an
update of my office's continuing efforts to monitor the $3
billion in Recovery Act funds provided to the National Science
Foundation.
Our approach to ARRA oversight has consisted of two phases:
a proactive phase for risk mitigation activities that was
accomplished primarily during the funding stage to help prevent
problems and prepare for more substantive work; and an
operational phase, during which we plan to undertake more
traditional audits, investigations, and other types of reviews.
During the proactive phase, we conducted real-time reviews
of NSF's ARRA-related activities that resulted in several
recommendations to NSF management. Our work during this phase
included identifying potential high-risk ARRA awardees and
recommending ways to make NSF's award process more accountable
and transparent. We also conducted a series of reviews of
universities and nonprofit organizations that received ARRA
funds to determine at an early stage whether those institutions
had the financial capability to manage Recovery Act funding and
how well those organizations were complying with the Act's
quarterly reporting requirements.
With respect to financial capability, we concluded that, in
general, the entities we examined had established adequate
internal controls to ensure that ARRA funds were properly
segregated as required.
With regard to data quality, we found that while the
institutions we reviewed had generally established appropriate
processes, there were several areas in which NSF recipients
were not consistently, accurately, or completely reporting
data. We made recommendations to NSF to promote consistent and
accurate reporting, and the Agency generally agreed with those
recommendations. The ARRA recipients we reviewed also indicated
that they were taking action to improve their reporting.
In the operational phase, among other things, we are
planning to audit specific ARRA awards at recipient
institutions. In determining which awards to audit, we will
conduct a risk assessment, which takes into consideration
variables such as award type, the results of prior audits, and
ARRA-specific issues such as the total number and dollar value
of Recovery Act awards.
Mr. Chairman, because of the large amounts of ARRA funding
they received, the complexity of the projects, and the
management challenges inherent in construction projects, we
have directed significant oversight to NSF's construction of
three major projects: the Alaska Region Research Vessel, the
Ocean Observatory's Initiative (or OOI), and the Advanced
Technology Solar Telescope (or ATST). I will conclude my
testimony by focusing on problems uncovered in audits of OOI
and ATST and the impact of those problems on Recovery Act
funds.
We began this oversight activity with audits of the cost
proposals for OOI, which had total projected costs of $386
million with $106 million in ARRA funds, and for ATST, which
had total projected costs of $298 million with $146 million in
ARRA funds. We reviewed these proposals because they are the
basis on which recipients can draw down funds over the course
of their awards. The resulting audits performed on our behalf
by the Defense Contract Audit Agency disclosed significant
problems with the use and management of contingency funds.
NSF requires awardees to include contingency estimates in
the budgets of construction projects to ensure that actual
costs do not exceed planned costs. The auditors found that the
$150 million in contingencies in the two cost proposals are not
allowable under federal cost principles which state that
``contingencies for events the occurrence of which cannot be
foretold with certainty as to time, intensity, or with an
assurance that they are happening are unallowable.'' The
questioned amount includes $55 million in ARRA funding.
The auditors were also troubled by the lack of controls
over the contingency funds. NSF allows contingency funds to be
held by the awardee's project officer during the construction
phase. The auditors found that the awardees can draw down
contingency funds without prior NSF approval at any point in
the project and that there are no technical barriers to prevent
these funds from being used for purposes other than
contingencies. As a result, there is an increased risk of fraud
or misuse of these funds.
We have recommended that NSF require awardees to remove the
unallowable contingencies from their proposed budgets and that
NSF, not awardees, control the release of contingency funds. We
are working with NSF management to resolve these and other
contingency findings, and because of the large dollar amounts
and the risk posed by NSF's current process of funding
contingencies, we will begin work this year to examine the use
of ARRA funds for contingencies in the construction of the
Alaska Region Research Vessel.
This concludes my statement, and I will be happy to answer
any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lerner follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ms. Allison Lerner,
Inspector General,
National Science Foundation

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Ms. Lerner.
I now recognize Ms. Robinson for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MS. GAIL ROBINSON,

DEPUTY INSPECTOR GENERAL,

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Ms. Robinson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to you
and the Members of the Subcommittee for inviting us here today.
NASA received $1 billion in direct Recovery Act funding,
the bulk of which it dedicated to ongoing projects in Earth
Science, Astrophysics, Exploration, and Aeronautics Research.
For example, the James Webb Space Telescope received an
infusion of $75 million; the Multipurpose Crew Vehicle, $166
million; and the Mobile Launcher, $25 million; while $24.4
million was used to fund contracts in the Small Business
Innovative Research and Small Business Technology Transfer
Programs. In addition, NASA used $50 million to repair
facilities at the Johnson Space Center that had been damaged by
Hurricane Ike in 2008. As was already pointed out in contrast
to some of the other agencies, NASA has obligated and, in fact,
dispersed virtually all of these funds.
Since passage of the Act, the OIG has actively monitored
NASA's Recovery Act efforts through both our audit and
investigative work. On the audit side, we have issued seven
products, including reports examining the Agency's use of funds
for the James Webb Space Telescope, for three Earth science
missions, and for the Johnson hurricane repair work. We also
have five audits currently in progress.
Overall, we have found that NASA generally used Recovery
Act funds in accordance with the requirements and goals of the
Act and OMB's implementing guidance. However, we also made more
than $2 million in monetary findings and identified several
internal control weaknesses in NASA's processes, including
unauthorized persons recommending payment of invoices, poor
negotiation of project oversight costs, and incomplete contract
files. We made eight recommendations to improve NASA's internal
controls. The Agency agreed with all of our recommendations,
and five of them have been closed. The Agency continues to work
to address the remaining three.
In addition to our audit work, we currently have seven open
investigations relating to the Recovery Act. One is a proactive
effort involving SBIR and STTR contracts, three involve
allegations of companies submitting false information, and one
involves a possible conflict of interest and misappropriation
of funds by a former NASA employee. We also have an active
investigation involving procurement irregularities and a case
in which an individual has been indicted for stealing copper
from a project funded with Recovery Act money. In addition to
these ongoing matters, we recently closed two cases as
unsubstantiated, and we referred two other issues to NASA
managers for their disposition.
As NASA's Recovery Act efforts wind down, the OIG will
continue to conduct audits, reviews, and investigations to
ensure compliance with the Act's mandates.
This concludes my oral statement and I would be happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Robinson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ms. Gail Robinson,
Deputy Inspector General,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Ms. Robinson.
I want to thank all of you all. By the way, that is
southern for--it is plural for you all. But I want to thank all
of you all for your testimony.
Reminding Members that Committee rules limit Members'
questions to five minutes per round of questions, the Chair at
this point will open the round of questions. And I will
recognize myself for five minutes.
To Mr. Friedman, a lot of attention has been paid to the
loan guarantees to Solyndra and Beacon Power because of their
bankruptcies. Beacon Power also received funding from DOE's
Energy Delivery and Energy Reliability Program, the Office of
Science, and ARPA-E. What happens to the grant money when
companies go bankrupt? And does the company keep it? Does the
Agency keep it or does it go back to the Treasury?
Mr. Friedman. Well, Mr. Chairman, I frankly am not
personally familiar with the specific terms in the non-loan
guarantee expenditures the Department made with regard to
Beacon, so I can't give you a definitive answer. However, in
general, depending upon the nature of the agreement, there are
either time payments based on completion of various aspects of
goals of the project or there is a payment up front. If, in
fact, the entity is bankrupt and they are cashless, if that is
the case, then obviously, the--if the money has been expended
it can no longer be recovered. If, on the other hand, it has
not been dispersed, my assumption would be there would be a
hold placed on those funds until the bankruptcy is resolved.
Chairman Broun. Well----
Mr. Friedman. But that is an assumption on my part, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Broun. Sure.
Mr. Friedman. I am not positive.
Chairman Broun. Well, assets should have value, though, so
where does the taxpayers' interest fit within the bankruptcy
proceedings?
Mr. Friedman. Well, I----
Chairman Broun. Who would recover those funds?
Mr. Friedman. I am not intimately familiar with the way the
Department is proceeding. I have seen the published reports on
sale of assets and the Department's interest in those assets. I
don't know how that intersects with the funds, other than the
loan guarantee funds that have been expended with Beacon.
Chairman Broun. Okay. To all you all, if a recipient is
unable to spend its ARRA funding prior to the OMB deadline of
September 30, 2013, what happens to that money? Does the Agency
keep it or does it go back to the Treasury?
Mr. Zinser. Mr. Chairman, it is unclear from the OMB
guidance what exactly is going to happen, but one factor of the
Dodd-Frank legislation is that it included some provisions
about unobligated and unspent Recovery Act money. I think our
sense would be that the unspent money would go back to the
Treasury.
Chairman Broun. Anybody else want to weigh in on that? Dr.
Rusco.
Dr. Rusco. I think in general we agree our reading of it is
that it will go back to the Treasury. There may be some
conditions where the OMB guidance is unclear, in which case it
would have to be resolved.
Chairman Broun. All right. Ms. Robinson, in your testimony
you stated that the $75 million in ARRA funding that NASA
received for the beleaguered James Webb Space Telescope enabled
454 jobs to be retained on the JWST project in the fourth
quarter of fiscal year 2009 and 149 jobs in the first quarter
of fiscal year 2010. I am familiar with jobs created and the
attempt to quantify jobs saved. Is jobs enabled mentioned as a
criterion in the Act or in OMB guidelines?
Ms. Robinson. I don't know, Sir, of exactly what they use
in the OMB guidelines. I do know that the James Webb Space
telescope project was going to run out of money in that year,
in fiscal year 2009, and that they used that money to continue
work which enabled the--primarily the contract personnel to
continue that work in that period.
Chairman Broun. All right. JWST was initially expected to
cost $1 billion and to launch in 2008. It has now ballooned to
almost $9 billion and is expected to launch in 2018. Should
cost overruns be considered an economic stimulus?
Ms. Robinson. Again, I don't think cost overruns are an
economic stimulus. As we are all aware, the program has
repeatedly been over schedule and over budget, and Congress and
NASA and the Administration have worked hard to give them the
additional money they need to finally bring it to fruition.
Chairman Broun. Okay. And are these jobs enabled
contractors that flow from project to project? Or are they
federal employees that are part of a standing workforce that
are there at NASA Center?
Ms. Robinson. I believe with regard to the telescope, they
were primarily contractor employees.
Chairman Broun. Okay. My time has expired.
I now recognize my Ranking Member, Mr. Tonko, for five
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
While the Solyndra story has preoccupied many, the real
story on DOE's Loan Guarantee Program is not about one company
going under but about the Department holding tens of billions
of dollars in loans, all of which carry risk.
From my experience in New York State, I can attest that
nuclear projects are among the most expensive and sometimes
most risky. I am not alone in that opinion. In a 2003 study,
CBO put the risk of default for nuclear loans at ``well above
50 percent.'' The key factor they wrote is ``accounting for
this risk is that we expect that the plant would be uneconomic
to operate because of its high construction costs relative to
other electricity generation sources.'' Nothing has changed on
this, of course. In 2003, a new report by CBO cites a study
that found ``of the 117 privately owned plants in the United
States that were started in the '60s and '70s and for which
data are available, 48 were cancelled and almost all of them
experienced significant cost overruns.''
The Solyndra loan is dwarfed by just one of the nuclear
project loans that DOE has approved. The first approved loan is
for over $8 billion to the Southern Company. That single loan
is roughly 16 times the size of the Solyndra loan.
So, Dr. Rusco, I would ask according to the July 2010
report from the Department of Energy which treats--or on the
Department of Energy by GAO treats nuclear loans differently
than other types of applicants. Can you describe the treatment
that these loans--that the loan applicants receive and shed
light for us on why there was that difference?
Dr. Rusco. Well, first of all, there is a difference
between the Recovery Act loans and the 1703 loans and the
nuclear loans were conditionally committed to under the 1703
program. So in that program, the companies themselves will be
paying their credit subsidy cost. But that is just to clarify
that that is not a Recovery Act--those aren't Recovery Act
loans. And that money has not yet gone out the door and is
awaiting licenses.
What we found is that in the application process that the
nuclear loans and some of the larger fossil fuel loans were
able to essentially skip some steps in the application process
and were--reached conditional commitment prior to having
completed all those steps, and we felt that that was
inconsistent with the guidance and the rules as set out by the
program. The explanation by the program for that was that more
is known about these types of projects and therefore they were
able to skip those steps, but we didn't feel the documentation
for that justification was sufficient.
Mr. Tonko. Right. But as I understand it, these loans were
brought under the ARRA in terms of employment-reporting
requirements, were they not? And there is absolutely no
difference in how the Department of Energy handles those loans?
Dr. Rusco. Well, the basic loan process differs in the
sense that for the 1703 programs, the government won't be
picking up the credit subsidy cost, which will be very
significant for the nuclear loans.
Mr. Tonko. Um-hum. Given the favorable way that nuclear
applicants were treated, is there any assurance you can provide
this panel that DOE is being as tough on reexamining the
nuclear loan exposure as they are in looking at everything
else? Perhaps Dr. Rusco or Mr. Friedman, can you give us those
assurances in this case?
Dr. Rusco. GAO has broad concerns about the slow speed at
which the loan program has codified and made consistent its
application review process and its due diligence process. And
so we are concerned about all loans that may or may not have
gone through all the steps of the process, and we think that if
the program will more clearly document what they are doing and
their reasons for deviating from their process, there will be
greater transparency and we will be more comfortable.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Friedman, would you have anything to add to
that or would you agree with that?
Mr. Friedman. I agree. I don't have any information on it.
I can't give you any assurance because obviously that is not
within my purview. But we issued a report in March of this year
concerning the very issues that you have just heard about,
which is basically the level of documentation with regard to
identification of risks and the mitigation of those risks and
how they have been addressed and the lack of documentation and
inadequate documentation. So obviously we agree. And it covers
the entire portfolio of loan guarantees in terms of the ability
of the Department in the event of a crisis to identify why they
took the actions that they took. So we do agree.
Mr. Tonko. Um-hum. And finally, if we can get some info on
the funds that are obligated but uncommitted--spent--what
leverage do the agencies have to push recipients of awards to
spend these funds? Is there anyone on the panel or all of you
that might want to address how we could get those monies spent?
Mr. Zinser. Sir, I think whether guarantees remain on
schedule is a function of the program offices overseeing those
projects. Beyond that, I think you have to strike a balance
between pushing the grantees or contractors to spend the money
quickly and making sure that the money is spent effectively.
Chairman Broun. The gentleman's time has expired.
I would like to remind my friend from New York there is a
huge difference between Southern Company and Solyndra, between
the technology of nuclear energy as well as what Solyndra was
trying to do. So the risk of the loan to Southern Company or
any other nuclear power company is vastly different than
loaning--lending money to a company like Solyndra, particularly
with all the warnings that came from the previous
Administration, as well as this Administration.
Now, I recognize Dr. Bucshon for five minutes.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank all the
panelists here today.
When we passed the stimulus bill, I wasn't here, but it was
promised that the unemployment rate would be below eight
percent and drop down, so my questions are going to be related
to--similar to that process. Because as everyone knows, we now
have a persistent over nine percent unemployment rate, and the
economy is still sluggish.
It appears to me not being in Congress at the time that
everyone that received money had to scramble to find uses for
the money and then retrospectively assess whether or not it was
used properly, or more importantly, has resulted in long-term
improvement and changes that are necessary to decrease our over
nine percent unemployment. It seems to me that that is backward
from the way we should be thinking about this process.
So I will make the assumption that all the departments
represented here would take extra money if it is offered to
them, but the question I have--and I guess I would direct it to
Mr. Friedman first as it relates to the Department of Energy--
did the Department of Energy request the money? Did they need
the money? Or, in your view, did the Department of Energy have
to find ways to spend the money once it was out there?
Mr. Friedman. Well, I am not sure I have good answer to
your question, but I--in March of 2009, we issued a report
concerning lessons learned on our prior work in this regard,
Congressman. And at that point, it was clear that the Recovery
Act, with regard to the Department of Energy, had three
purposes. One is economic stimulus, two is job creation, and
three was transformation of the Department. So I think there
was a clear understanding on the part of both the Congress at
the time and those who voted for the legislation and the
Administration that the funds would be used for that purpose as
well, transforming the Department of Energy, focusing on
green--going green, renewables, and what have you, and the
technology area.
Mr. Bucshon. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Zinser.
Mr. Zinser. We are not part of the inner circle of the
Department, so we do not have a lot of insight on how the
requests were formulated. However, there were two factors
related to agencies that have experienced issues with timely
spending. I think some were older budget requests that had not
been funded in previous years, and then, in the case of the
Department of Commerce, for example, there is an entire $5
billion program thrust upon a small agency not properly staffed
to administer a program of that size and scope. So I think it
is likely a combination of factors.
Mr. Bucshon. Ms. Lerner.
Ms. Lerner. Thank you. And I would echo what Mr. Zinser
said and further it by the fact that I was not at NSF in
February of 2009 when the stimulus act was passed. So I am not
aware of what role the Agency had in determining the $3 billion
that the Agency got, but I do know that NSF has wanted to boost
the acceptance rate for people that they fund over time, and
they were excited that the $3 billion would enable them to fund
more scientific research. Two-thirds of the funding that they
received was used to fund proposals that they had in hand that
had been rated well, so I think they were prepared to move
pretty quickly and execute the funding that they received, and
they were able to build the acceptance rate. And that helps
them, as I said, ensure that more basic scientific research is
done, and that the science and technology workforce of the
future is trained.
Mr. Bucshon. Ms. Robinson.
Ms. Robinson. I also was not at NASA in 2009 when the Act
was passed, so I do not know what role the Agency played in how
much money they were going to get. Again, they did--they got
the smallest amount of the people here. They did do a lot up
front to make sure that they were going to use it appropriately
and that they were going to meet the transparency and other
requirements of the Act.
Mr. Bucshon. I guess my line of questioning is just meant
to establish the fact that it seems to me that a bunch of
federal funding was thrust upon these different agencies and
then they had to scramble to find out how to use it and in many
cases did not even have the infrastructure in place to
appropriately implement whatever programs it was supposed to
benefit. And being a new Member of Congress, that just seems
backwards to me and the way we allocate money at the Federal
Government. And again, I think that the proof is in the
results. We still have an over nine percent unemployment rate,
and now we have almost $800 billion more on the federal deficit
and the entire intent of the stimulus was to get people back to
work.
And I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Broun. Thank you, Dr. Bucshon.
I now recognize Mr. McNerney for five minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One of the things that I really have found useful in this
set of testimonies is that the increase in transparency and
accountability has been caused by the American--by the ARRA.
And that is a good thing.
But moving forward, Dr. Rusco in particular, do you believe
that those checks and balances have made a difference in
reducing waste and abuse and fraud?
Dr. Rusco. Yes, I am certain that the oversight--the extra
oversight that we and the IGs and the other bodies were giving
this have reduced that. There has been fraud, waste, and abuse
found but the added oversight has also made the agencies more
careful and also created better processes for performing their
own oversight.
Mr. McNerney. Well, good. Do you think those processes will
be in place moving forward into non-ARRA expenditures?
Mr. Rusco. I hope so.
Mr. McNerney. I do, too. Well, that is going to be
something we are going to be watching, I guess.
Mr. Wood, I found your testimony very informative, and I
want to congratulate you and the RAT Board for the excellent
work you have done in--toward creating transparency. I am sure
there is room for improvement as we go forward, but there are
costs associated with this improvement in transparency
reporting and so on. Do you have any insights as to whether the
enhanced transparency is worth the cost that went into
developing those processes?
Mr. Wood. My position would be that it was worth the costs.
We established a system where recipients needed to report
information and they did. We tried to establish systems that
were very easy to use. When I built the reporting system, I
basically told people if you can order a book online, you can
use the reporting system, which is fairly true. It is a Web-
based system.
There can be improvements made. We can incorporate things
such as pre-population sums of data so that the recipient
wouldn't have to add that information. I know the DATA Act
includes a provision for providing some administrative
overhead. I think it is .5 percent for recipients to use for
things like reporting and so forth. So there are some things
that could be improved.
We looked at--one of the concerns was reporting burden when
we were getting going in looking at the Recovery Act. We think
the Recovery Act and the Transparency Act--FFATA, its
predecessor--both established that it was sort of floor of
$25,000. So if you received $25,000 or more, you had to report.
That scenario you could look at for--if you were concerned
about reporting burden on small entities and so forth.
Mr. McNerney. Dr. Rusco, again, one of the things that I
was disappointed to hear was that you were unable to assess the
employment impact of the ARRA. Is that--did I understand that
correctly? Was that your position?
Dr. Rusco. Well, not exactly. GAO has not set out to
evaluate ourselves what the job creation effects have been. We
have looked at what has been reported, and we have also looked
at some of the efforts in particular in the Environmental
Management Office of DOE, and we found that the methodologies
used by that office were not conforming to OMB guidance and
they were in some cases clearly overcounting, in some cases
perhaps even undercounting.
Mr. McNerney. Is there anyone on the panel here this
morning that could answer that question about the impact of the
ARRA funding on employment in your particular department?
Mr. Zinser. Sir, I think the goal of calculating and
tracking job creation was very ambitious, but, in the end, it
didn't turn out to be very feasible. Jobs might be temporary or
term positions; as a result, from one reporting period to
another, the jobs are created in a particular quarter but
aren't cumulative. So when the Recovery.gov Web site reports
jobs created, it is just for that most current quarter.
Mr. McNerney. Well, you know, the improvement in
accountability and transparency is terrific. It would be good
to have an improvement in terms of being able to assess the
impact of this funding on employment.
And with that I yield back.
Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. McNerney.
I now recognize Mrs. Adams for five minutes.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Rusco, your testimony notes that DOE has only
implemented two of your eight recommendations concerning
weatherization programs that received $5 billion in stimulus
funds. Have any independently verified studies been conducted
to see what energy savings have occurred as a result of this
program?
Dr. Rusco. There is a study being done by Oakridge National
Lab, and they have some preliminary results, but they are also,
I think, in two years going to have more definitive results of
that study.
Mrs. Adams. So there is one independent to your knowledge?
Dr. Rusco. Yes.
Mrs. Adams. And the five billion dollars in stimulus funds
given to weatherization programs is more than 20 times as much
as programs was previously appropriated. Such huge increases
can lead to a number of challenges for any agency that sees
such an increase. Can you discuss some of the challenges faced
by DOE due to the increase? And what lessons can be learned
from this experience, and how can they be applied to other
programs?
Dr. Rusco. Well, I think some of the main challenges were
related to ramping up both at the Department but also at the
recipient level. So the recipients were not used to receiving
as much funds as were available under the Recovery Act. And
some recipients received hardly any funds in the past, and so
for them to set up the accountability structure and to set up
the training systems and the reporting systems and to get
guidance from DOE took time. And those are sort of just the
basic challenges of setting up something that was--that ran at
a much smaller scale.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you.
Mr. Zinser, your testimony notes a referral from the
Recovery Board that led to an investigation about a company
that had previously pled guilty to a criminal charge concerning
export regulations. This company then falsely certified that it
had not been convicted of a crime in order to receive the
stimulus funding. Which company is this, and why did it even--
why did they even receive the stimulus funds in the first place
with the Recovery Board's DATA system in place?
Mr. Zinser. Congresswoman, I believe the name of the
company is MTS, and it does do a lot of work with the
government. I think what happened is that when it was convicted
in 2008, nobody made the effort to get it onto the government's
excluded list. And so, when the company started competing for
contracts, there is some ambiguity whether that particular
conviction met the government's criteria for exclusion. So it
said no based on advice of their counsel.
Mrs. Adams. So that ambiguity from their side--what about
your side?
Mr. Zinser. We referred the company for suspension and
debarment from government contracting. And it has entered into
an agreement with the government to have its operations
monitored by an independent third party. Further, we are
investigating its conduct for any potential judicial action.
Mrs. Adams. So instead of being disbarred, they have
entered into a corporate compliance agreement and therefore
continuing to operate. Would you support disbarring them?
Mr. Zinser. We did support disbarring them, yes.
Mrs. Adams. Ms. Robinson, your testimony mentions inflated
overhead costs for hurricane damage repair at the Johnson Space
Center. Is NASA making any effort to recoup this money from the
contractor?
Ms. Robinson. NASA could not recoup the money from the
contractor. It was a fixed-price contract and amounts that they
had agreed to pay.
Mrs. Adams. Your testimony, you know, is generally positive
concerning NASA's stimulus expenditures. Is that because these
funds were primarily directed towards existing programs? Or was
NASA better able to manage the funding increase over other
agencies?
Ms. Robinson. I think it was probably a combination of the
fact that it was existing programs and that the Agency took
steps proactively to make sure that they had set up systems to
ensure the proper use of the money.
Mrs. Adams. Mr. Zinser, you said in an answer earlier that
it was an ambitious goal to track the employment or lack of
employment based on these funds. Do you think it is possible at
all to truly know if it did or did not help unemployment?
Because the numbers show that we are well over eight percent,
so if I am going by what I see every day in my communities, I
would say no, it did not help.
Mr. Zinser. In the beginning of the Recovery Act, there
were two different tracks that were set up. One was set up by
the Council of Economic Advisors where they were going to
determine what the impact of the Act had been on employment.
The other track was for award recipients reporting the jobs
created. My previous answer dealt with that second track.
Trying to count the number of jobs created and the problems you
run into.
Mrs. Adams. Well, let me ask you this. Would you agree that
unemployment is higher today than it was when this was passed?
Mr. Zinser. Based on my reading of the economic statistics,
I would say that the unemployment rate is higher today than it
was then.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mrs. Adams.
I now recognize Mr. Hultgren for five minutes.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all
very much.
This is important for us to be discussing, and the American
people want accountability. They want results that really make
a difference and get things rolling again, so I think this is
an important discussion to be having today. So thank you for
the work that you are doing and for your role being here today.
It appears to me that money spent on and channeled through
the national labs was money that was much better spent than
these apparently rushed loan guarantees and economic
interventions that we saw. Mr. Friedman, I wanted to address a
question to you and wondered if you could speak to what efforts
and formal studies DOE has conducted to assess and properly
weigh the relative merits of funding to the labs versus other
recipients. Fermilab is located in my district, and they do
cutting-edge work that really is important. Given how hard it
has been for DOE to find even modest additional funding for the
lab, this question is very important to me, so I wonder if you
could shed some light on that for me.
Mr. Friedman. Well, if you are asking whether the
Department has done such a study, I am not aware of one. And
they may well have. But what we have found, both in terms of
the science funds and in terms of the environmental remediation
funds that the Department received which were significant, the
work done in preexisting programs and advancing preexisting
programs at the national laboratories actually worked quite
well. The requirements of the Recovery Act appear to have been
followed. There was a fairly expeditious expenditure of the
funds. They did hire people in fact and they have completed
the--they have applied reasonably good project management
skills to those funds.
Mr. Hultgren. Okay. Well, again, thank you all for being
here. I appreciate the work that you are doing in this
important discussion.
I yield back.
Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Hultgren.
We will endeavor to do a second round of questioning. I now
recognize myself for five minutes.
Ms. Lerner and Ms. Robinson, are there lessons learned from
the Recovery Act SBIR funding that can be translated to overall
SBIR programs and agencies that are so troubled by waste,
fraud, and abuse? Whichever one wants to start.
Ms. Robinson. We believe there are. We are actually doing
an ongoing audit at the moment that is looking at the Agency's
Recovery Act SBIR/STTR work and we haven't quite completed it
yet. But we do believe that there will be some actions that the
Agency took during--before the Recovery Act that would be
applicable and recommended to apply to their other programs as
well, non-Recovery Act.
Chairman Broun. Ms. Lerner.
Ms. Lerner. I would note that the greater access to data
about SBIR and STTR programs that is provided through the
reported data and the stimulus act was useful in trying to work
those types of cases. One of the challenges agencies have had
has been the quality of data about SBIR and STTR, projects that
have been funded. There have been improvements made to
databases that the SBIR program is intended to maintain, but
the additional data that is available from the Recovery Act is
useful as well and it makes it easier for our agencies,
particularly in cases where there is duplicate funding, to find
opportunities to work together and to combat fraud in those
programs.
Chairman Broun. Very good.
Dr. Rusco, in GAO's 2009 testimony, they mentioned that the
Recovery Act made a $2.32 billion available to energy to
jointly fund private sector projects demonstrating clean coal
and carbon capture and sequestration technologies. FutureGen
was the subject of considerable attention by this committee
after the Bush Administration decided to cancel the program
citing cost overruns. Various reports and testimony, GAO found
that DOE did not base its decision to restructure FutureGen on
a comprehensive analysis of factors such as associated cost
benefits and risks. Did DOE ever conduct the recommended
analysis prior to awarding over $1 billion in stimulus funding
to the project?
Dr. Rusco. Beyond the point at which we last testified and
reported, we have not looked at that program, but I am unaware
of such a study at this point.
Chairman Broun. So the answer is no.
Recently, Ameren, the owner of the power plant, announced
their intent to close down the site to comply with EPA
regulations leaving the restructured FutureGen project once
more in limbo. What implications did this announcement have on
the future of the project?
Dr. Rusco. Again, we haven't looked at it recently but, you
know, obviously they--that program has been troubled by a
number of things, including the fact that in our view they
haven't really reconciled the purpose of the program with what
industry is willing and able to do, and I think that that needs
to be looked into further.
Chairman Broun. Okay. What is the current status of the
billion dollars in stimulus funding? What impact do you
anticipate the future announcement will have on the overall
cost to FutureGen? And if FutureGen does not move forward, what
will happen to that obligated funding?
Dr. Rusco. Yeah, I am sorry I can't answer that at this
point, but I could look into that and see if I can answer it
for the record.
Chairman Broun. Okay. Mr. Friedman, do you have any
comment? Can you answer that?
Mr. Friedman. No, I can't elaborate on what has been said
already, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Broun. Okay. To all you all, start with RATB, Mr.
Wood, what oversight body is responsible for ensuring that the
goals of the stimulus bill were met, and who is looking whether
outcome-based metrics are being evaluated?
Mr. Wood. The Recovery Board does coordination of the
accountability mainly for waste, fraud, and abuse and passes
out if we find information such as was discussed earlier, we
will refer it to the Inspectors General for investigation. I
think on the performance metrics, that is an area that was not
stressed in the Recovery Act. We did publish program plans for
each agency that OMB required, but if you look at performance
metrics per se, it is probably one of the weaker areas of the
Act. We can track the dollars. We do collect information on the
jobs, but the performance metrics is probably not an area where
we specifically collect information.
Chairman Broun. Anybody else want to weigh in?
Mr. Zinser. Yeah, Mr. Chairman, in the case of NOAA, for
example, they received about $150 million for habitat
restoration. They have actually established a Web site,
Restoration.NOAA.gov, that identifies where those projects are
located, and you go to that Web site and you can click on the
map and it will actually give you the performance of grant
recipients associated with those projects.
Chairman Broun. You cited one instance but we are spending
billions of dollars here. Is this just one instance out of all
of the stimulus funding, or is it pretty pervasive across the
whole gamut of stimulus expenditures?
Mr. Zinser. Recovery.gov does provide for analysis a lot of
information about individual projects. Whether they are all
outcome measures or not, I am not sure. Many are output
measures, but for many, the key outcome is economic stimulus.
And I think I have testified about the difficulties in
calculating job creation.
Chairman Broun. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mr. Tonko, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Let me congratulate all of you for the work that you have
done to enhance the public's ability to see where its money
goes. It also is important I think to thank you for all the
work done to raise your own effort to bring accountability to
the ARRA program. The transparency of ARRA is wonderful, but it
does come at a cost, as was earlier stated by Representative
McNerney. I would like to delve into that a little deeper.
Agencies have obviously more burdens associated with
working with fund recipients and collecting data. And the IGs
and the RAT Board have burdens for spot-checking reporting
compliance and in aggregating data before making them available
to the public. Perhaps most importantly, recipients of funds
have costs in complying with reporting requirements and
tracking where those funds specifically go. Now, members and
staff have heard complaints over the last two years from
colleges, from universities, from small businesses that that
reporting is indeed onerous and confusing. Now, I am very
supportive of making government funding as transparent as
possible for our public. However, it should be stated that we
don't want it to see--to have it serve as an unnecessary burden
onto agencies or small businesses and universities.
So to our witnesses, I would like you to share your
thoughts about how we can apply the lessons learned with ARRA
to make government funding more transparent while not
overburdening funding agencies and recipients. Just like--could
you address what you believe is the right balance and should we
perhaps establish a dollar value which would then kick in for
further scrutiny or reporting requirements? Perhaps, Mr. Wood,
we can start with you and then have the entire panel address
that.
Mr. Wood. Yeah, I think I mentioned earlier this is an
excellent question. We tried to build our reporting systems to
be as least burdensome as possible. There are some things I
think we could do. You have mentioned some of them. One thing
you could look at is raising the floor from $25,000 to a higher
level. You would lose some granularity in the information you
collect, but you would probably alleviate some of the small
business concerns and so forth.
There are some things we could do technologically and we
have done. For instance, we installed data checks and so forth
to prevent people from making common mistakes, putting in the
wrong ZIP code where putting a New Hampshire ZIP code with
Nevada and so forth. So there are things we can do along those
lines.
I think the other thing we did in the Recovery Act that was
effective is we actually limited it to 99 data elements. That
sounds like a lot, but that is a limited data set for some of
the things the Federal Government does. I think you could even
look at reducing the number of data elements some, making sure
that you really were collecting exactly what you wanted. And
you could do some pre-population of those data elements. You
could use existing government systems that might have
information in them to pre-populate it. So, even though there
were data elements that needed to be reported, it wasn't
burdensome for the person filing the report.
Mr. Tonko. Um-hum. Dr. Rusco.
Dr. Rusco. I think improved guidance from programming
agencies would help and that was one of the big challenges.
Getting that guidance to be clear and timely was a challenge,
and hopefully that is also a lesson learned going forward.
Mr. Tonko. Um-hum. Mr. Friedman.
Mr. Friedman. Well, of course you have hit, Mr. Tonko, on
one of the really important questions that have come out of
this, and I appreciate that.
Look, I think we need a risk-based strategy, we need
thresholds that make sense, and that is one of the lessons that
I think we have learned. We heard the same thing from
recipients that you are alluding to, which is that they felt
the reporting requirements were overly burdensome and not
necessarily productive, and we agree with that.
I would just--one note of caution, though, that if the body
politic is prepared to accept the thresholds and understand the
risks associated with accepting those thresholds and no
reporting below the threshold or limited reporting, that would
be okay. But if, on the other hand, at the end of the day we
are going to adopt such a mechanism and then have people
criticize the fact that there wasn't reporting and there wasn't
adequate oversight below those thresholds, we will have
actually ended up, I think, moving a ball backwards rather than
moving the ball forward. I don't know if that makes any sense.
I hope that addresses your question.
I think the--several Members of the Subcommittee have hit
on some extremely important points with regard to lessons
learned and best practices, and if we spent 3/4 of a billion
dollars or $800 million on the Stimulus Act and if we haven't
learned both in the IG community, in the program part of our
agencies, and frankly the Congress if I may say so, if we
haven't learned a lot, then shame on all of us.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Mr. Zinser.
Mr. Zinser. Well, Mr. Wood knows better than anybody about
the development of FederalReporting.gov. Early on I think the
RAT Board thought that it would just use existing financial
systems to access grantee and contractor information. To
navigate those labyrinthine systems, however, would take years.
So the RAT Board came up with this FederalReporting.gov system,
and I think the legislation that Mike referred to is intended
to institutionalize that for all government spending, and we
think that would be a good idea.
One of the problems the system encountered was that it was
layered over existing reporting systems. There were a lot of
complaints early on. We have been through nine quarters of
reporting now, and the complaints have subsided. The recipient
data now have a high quality. All the OIGs have done audits of
the data quality, so the data is better, and I think if we were
able to get rid of some of the legacy systems in place of this
FederalReporting.gov that would be an improvement.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Ms. Lerner.
Ms. Lerner. I would concur with what Mr. Zinser said. I
certainly have heard a lot of complaints about the burden,
especially in the early days from NSF recipients. And I have
some sympathy with that. But, I think part of the reason people
feel overburdened is because they have to report data not just
to the Recovery Board but to multiple other sources for the
Federal Government. And I think, moving forward, if we could
get to a point where we could combine many of those sources
which often require overlapping data, we would achieve some
cost-savings because we wouldn't be separately maintaining
dozens of different reporting systems, just the single one. We
would have improved accountability because it would be one-stop
shopping for data, and hopefully in a situation like that we
could expand on the data collected in a way that would provide
more useful information to people like me and people like you
for oversight purposes at a lesser burden on the recipients.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And finally, Ms. Robinson.
Ms. Robinson. I don't really have anything to add to that.
I think it is pretty much all done by the panel.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you very much to all of you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Broun. The gentleman's time has expired.
Well, I have a lot of leeway here, and I am not going to
run things real tight, particularly when we are looking into an
issue such as oversight, transparency, and accountability.
To me, the good thing that has come out of the stimulus act
is that I do think we have more transparency and accountability
for federal spending. We have certainly identified some
problems in regard to trying to pour a massive amount of money,
almost a trillion dollars, and I respectfully disagree with my
friend from New York about the success of the Stimulus Act.
I think it has been--you can't pour almost a trillion
dollars into the economy without having some positive effects,
but I think overall it has been an abject failure and the
metrics I use for determining that is we were promised by the
President that if we passed this stimulus bill--and you and I
both were here during that period of time, Mr. Tonko, that our
unemployment rate would not go above eight percent and it has
steadily risen to over 10 percent. In my district it is over 10
percent; in my State it is over 10 percent today. So there are
other ways, I think, that are better of stimulating the economy
and that is getting the tax burden and regulatory burden off
the private sector so that we can start creating jobs and start
creating a strong economy.
Having said that, I want to thank the witnesses for all
being here and for you all's valuable testimony. It has been
very enlightening and I appreciate you all's hard work. In that
regard, I thank members for their very insightful questions,
too.
Members of the Subcommittee may have additional questions
for you all, and we ask that you respond in writing to those
questions that will be submitted. The record will remain open
for two additional weeks for additional comments or questions
from the Members.
The witnesses are excused. Again, thank you all so much for
being here and for you all's hard work on this issue.
The hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:36 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Frank Rusco, Director,
Natural Resources and Environment Team,
Government Accountability Office

Questions Submitted by Chairman Paul C. Broun

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. Michael Wood,
Executive Director,
Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board

Questions Submitted by Chairman Paul C. Broun

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Hon. Gregory Friedman,
Inspector General,
U.S. Department of Energy

Questions Submitted by Chairman Paul C. Broun

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Hon. Todd Zinser,
Inspector General,
U.S. Department of Commerce

Questions Submitted by Chairman Paul C. Broun

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Ms. Allison Lerner,
Inspector General,
National Science Foundation

Questions Submitted by Chairman Paul C. Broun

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Ms. Gail Robinson,
Deputy Inspector General,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Questions Submitted by Chairman Paul C. Broun

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


