- DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY USER FACILITIES: UTILIZING THE TOOLS OF SCIENCE TO DRIVE INNOVATION THROUGH FUNDAMENTAL RESEARCH

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY USER FACILITIES:
UTILIZING THE TOOLS OF SCIENCE TO DRIVE
INNOVATION THROUGH FUNDAMENTAL RESEARCH

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
ENVIRONMENT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, JUNE 21, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-92

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-729 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              PAUL D. TONKO, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    SUZANNE BONAMICI,Oregon
Tennessee                        VACANCY
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Energy and Environment

HON. ANDY HARRIS, Maryland, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               ZOE LOFGREN, California
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Thursday, June 21, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Andy Harris, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    17
Written Statement............................................    18

Statement by Representative Brad Miller, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    18
Written Statement............................................    20

Witnesses:

Dr. Antonio Lanzirotti, Chairman, National User Facility
Organization
Oral Statement...............................................    22
Written Statement............................................    25

Dr. Persis Drell, Director, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Oral Statement...............................................    61
Written Statement............................................    63

Dr. Stephen Wasserman, Senior Research Fellow, Translational
Scientist and Technologies, Ely Lilly and Company
Oral Statement...............................................    71
Written Statement............................................    73

Ms. Suzy Tichenor, Director, Industrial Partnerships Program,
Computing and Computational Sciences, Oak Ridge National
Laboratory
Oral Statement...............................................    87
Written Statement............................................    89

Dr. Ernest Hall, Chief Scientist, Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering/Materials Characterization, GE Global Research
Oral Statement...............................................    95
Written Statement............................................    98

Discussion                                                          106

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Antonio Lanzirotti, Chairman, National User Facility
Organization...................................................   121

Dr. Persis Drell, Director, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory.   135

Dr. Stephen Wasserman, Senior Research Fellow, Translational
Scientist and Technologies, Ely Lilly and Company..............   138

Ms. Suzy Tichenor, Director, Industrial Partnerships Program,
Computing and Computational Sciences, Oak Ridge National
Laboratory.....................................................   140

Dr. Ernest Hall, Chief Scientist, Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering/Materials Characterization, GE Global Research.....   144

Appendix 2: Additional Material for the Record

Proprietary User Agreement, UChicago Argonne, LLC, Operator of
Argonne National Laboratory....................................   148

DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY USER FACILITIES:
UTILIZING THE TOOLS OF SCIENCE TO DRIVE
INNOVATION THROUGH FUNDAMENTAL RESEARCH

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 21, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:31 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy
Harris [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. The Subcommittee on Energy and Environment
will come to order.
Good morning. Welcome to today's hearing entitled
``Department of Energy User Facilities: Utilizing the Tools of
Science to Drive Innovation through Fundamental Research.'' In
front of you are packets containing the written testimony,
biographies and Truth in Testimony disclosures for today's
witness panel. I now recognize myself for five minutes for an
opening statement.
Good morning, and welcome to today's hearing. The purpose
of the hearing is to examine the role DOE scientific user
facilities play in enabling the fundamental research that
advances basic understanding of the physical world while also
driving innovation and economic growth.
Approximately half of the Office of Science's $5 billion
budget is dedicated to the design, construction and operation
of these major scientific user facilities. They can perhaps
best be described as the most powerful machines of modern
science: X-ray light sources, supercomputers, neutron sources,
particle accelerators and similar tools that allow study of the
most complex properties of matter and energy. For example, the
Linac Coherent Light Source, LCLS, which we will hear about
today, can capture images of atoms and molecules in motion with
an incredible shutter speed of less than 100 femtoseconds,
approximately the time it takes for light to travel the width
of a human hair.
The science undertaken at LCLS and similar facilities has a
direct and significant impact on innovation, driving
discoveries with potential to advance and transform
applications from medicine to materials to computing and
semiconductors. Today's hearing will focus particularly on
these innovation-enabling facilities and their relevance and
importance to U.S. industry and the economy.
As with nearly every energy R&D issue this Subcommittee
oversees, budget prioritization is key and only of growing
importance as we continue to confront record debts and
deficits.
The President has been clear that his priority within the
DOE is development and commercialization of green energy
technologies. For example, his budget calls for over $1.5
billion in new spending by the Office of Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy, an 84 percent year-over-year increase. By
comparison, the Administration is only requesting a 2.4
percent, or $118 million, increase for the Office of Science. I
believe the President's priorities are misplaced.
His record of massive spending increases on green energy
programs has come under widespread criticism, with government
intervention in the clean energy marketplace tending to pick
winners and losers while distorting the allocation of capital
and resulting in numerous examples of troubling political
cronyism.
By contrast, DOE construction and operation of major
scientific user facilities is generally well regarded and
represents a key component of the scientific enterprise that is
central to American innovation and economic competitiveness. It
cannot be met by individual companies or entities.
While funding increases for any program will be hard to
come by as we work to address the fiscal crisis facing the
country, the basic research supported by the Office of Science
and DOE user facilities should remain a high priority.
I thank the witnesses for being here and look forward to a
productive discussion regarding potential opportunities to
improve planning, management and operation of DOE user
facilities to better leverage these important scientific
resources.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harris follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Chairman Andy Harris

Good morning and welcome to today's hearing on ``Department of
Energy User Facilities: Utilizing the Tools of Science to Drive
Innovation Through Fundamental Research.''
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the role DOE scientific
user facilities plays in enabling the fundamental research that
advances basic understanding of the physical world while also driving
innovation and economic growth.
Approximately half of the Office of Science's $5 billion budget is
dedicated to the design, construction and operation of these major
scientific user facilities. They can perhaps best be described as the
most powerful machines of modern science--X-ray light sources,
supercomputers, neutron sources, particle accelerators and similar
tools that allow study of the most complex properties of matter and
energy. For example, the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS), which we
will hear about today, can capture images of atoms and molecules in
motion with an incredible ``shutter speed'' of less than 100
femtoseconds--approximately the time it takes for light to travel the
width of a human hair.
The science undertaken at LCLS and similar facilities has a direct
and significant impact on innovation, driving discoveries with
potential to advance and transform applications from medicine to
materials to computing and semiconductors. Today's hearing will focus
particularly on these innovation-enabling facilities and their
relevance and importance to U.S. industry and the economy.
As with nearly every energy R&D issue this Subcommittee oversees,
budget prioritization is key, and only of growing importance as we
continue to confront record debt and deficits.
The President has been very clear that his priority within the
Department of Energy is development and commercialization of green
energy technologies. For example, his budget calls for over $1.5
billion in new spending by the Office of Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy--an 84 percent year-over-year increase. By comparison,
the Administration is requesting a 2.4 percent ($118 million) increase
for the Office of Science.
I believe the President's priorities are misplaced. His record of
massive spending increases on green energy programs has come under
widespread criticism, with government intervention in the clean energy
marketplace tending to ``pick winners and losers'' while distorting the
allocation of capital and resulting in numerous examples of troubling
political cronyism.
By contrast, DOE construction and operation of major scientific
user facilities is generally well regarded and represents a key
component of the scientific enterprise that is central to American
innovation and economic competitiveness yet cannot be met by individual
companies or entities.
While funding increases for any program will be hard to come by as
we work to address the fiscal crisis facing the country, the basic
research supported by the Office of Science and DOE user facilities
should be a high priority.
I thank the witnesses for being here and look forward to a
productive discussion regarding potential opportunities to improve
planning, management, and operations of DOE user facilities to better
leverage these important scientific resources.
I now recognize Ranking Member Miller for his opening statement.

Chairman Harris. I now recognize Ranking Member Miller for
his opening statement.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Department of Energy user facilities are and should be
a core focus of this Committee's jurisdiction. This hearing
gives Committee members and the public an opportunity to better
understand the indispensable role that the Department of Energy
user facilities plays in our Nation's innovation enterprise.
The taxpayer has billions of dollars invested in these
facilities, and we should examine just what we get for that
investment.
In short, we get scientific capabilities that do not exist
elsewhere either in the private sector or in academia. Academic
and industry researchers are able to break new scientific
ground, as well as accelerate the process for translating
scientific discovery into marketable products. At user
facilities, federal funds support more efficient cars and
trucks; more effective drugs; lighter and stronger materials;
cheaper and more durable batteries; cleaner power plants;
reduced reliance on foreign energy; a clearer picture of our
changing climate; and even a better understanding of the
origins of the universe and the nature of space and time.
Perhaps most important, we get the talent and technologies
that provide for stronger and more competitive high-tech and
manufacturing sectors in the United States. We get jobs.
I don't see much distance between Republicans and Democrats
in terms of supporting the Office of Science and sustaining
these facilities at a level where they can truly contribute to
our Nation's competitiveness. I hope my Republican colleagues
do not use this hearing to justify an arbitrary and unrealistic
line around the appropriate role of government in the energy
technology space. We have seen a dangerous and misguided effort
to label DOE activities beyond basic research, as if that is
clearly defined concept, as picking winners and losers and
crowding out private investment for the purpose of cutting
research in clean energy technologies and slashing budgets of
EERE and ARPA-E, in other words, picking losers.
This perspective assumes that technology always develops in
a linear way, that there are no market failures or valleys of
death, and that the private sector and the market have the
capacity and incentive to support real innovation fully on its
own--on their own.
On the contrary, the testimony from this panel of experts
shows the complexity and difficulty that technology developers
face in moving from idea to marketable product. It is dogma,
and not market reality, that dictates that we draw a line
around what resources we provide to our Nation's innovators to
be competitive.
The Office of Science user facilities are an essential tool
for helping many academics and industry researchers get beyond
otherwise daunting scientific or technological problems, and I
expect that they will always be a shared priority of both
Democrats and Republicans.
But we would be well served to remember that these user
facilities are by no means the only tools that we have at our
disposal. What we have come to regard as the applied programs
at DOE, such as EERE and ARPA-E, can play an equally important
role in moving concepts and technologies through research
barriers that a light source or a computer alone couldn't
solve. Far from picking winners, these programs identify the
other gaps, the white spaces, where some extra resources and
guidance might help the developer get beyond some technological
risk and accelerate the development. If you want to see what
picking a winner looks like, check out what our competitors in
Europe and Asia are doing to support innovation and domestic
companies there.
And if you truly want to make government work for people,
facilitate our domestic industrial sector's race for global
technological leadership, and bring real jobs to the United
States, we will drop the stale, dogmatic and often illogical
constraints that keep us from taking advantage of our
government resources. Our economy was built on science, much of
it government-supported science. From achievements in the human
genome to sending a man to the Moon, the Federal Government has
effectively supported a strong innovation backbone for a
century of economic success. Why stop now? Why limit ourselves
when the stakes are so high?
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Ranking Member Brad Miller

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Department of Energy user facilities
are a core focus of this Committee's jurisdiction. This hearing gives
Committee Members and the public an opportunity to better understand
the indispensible role that the Department of Energy user facilities
plays in our Nation's innovation enterprise. The taxpayer has billions
of dollars invested in these facilities, and we should examine just
what we get for that investment.
In short, we get scientific capabilities that do not exist anywhere
else in the private sector or academia. Academic and industry
researchers are able to break new scientific ground, as well as
accelerate the process for translating scientific discovery into
marketable products. At user facilities, federal funds support more
efficient cars and trucks; more effective drugs; lighter and stronger
metals; cheaper and more durable batteries; cleaner power plants;
reduced reliance on foreign energy; a clearer picture of our changing
climate; and even a better understanding of the origins of the universe
and the nature of space and time.
Perhaps most important, we get the talent and technologies that
provide for stronger and more competittive high-tech and manufacturing
sectors in the U.S. We get jobs.
I don't see much distance between Republicans and Democrats in
terms of supporting the Office of Science and sustaining these
facilities at a level where they can truly contribute to our Nation's
competitiveness.
I hope my Republican colleagues will not use this hearing to
justify drawing an arbitrary and unrealistic line around the
appropriate role of government in the energy technology space. We have
seen a dangerous and misguided effort to label DOE activities beyond
basic research as ``picking winners and losers'' and ``crowding out
private investment'' for the purpose of cutting research in clean
energy technologies and slashing budgets of EERE and ARPA-E.
This perspective assumes that technology always develops in a
linear fashion, that there are no market failures or ``valleys of
death,'' and that the private sector and the market have the capcity
and incentive to support real innovation fully on their own.
On the contrary, the testimony from this panel of experts shows the
complexity and difficulty that technology developers face in moving
from idea to marketable products. It is dogma, and not market reality,
that dictates where we draw a line in providing government resources to
help our Nation's innovators to be competitive.
The Office of Science user facilities is an essential tool for
helping many academics and industry researchers get beyond otherwise
daunting scientific or technological problems, and I expect that they
will always be a shared priority of both Democrats and Republicans.
But we would be well served to remember that these user facilities
are by no means the only tools we have at our disposal. What have come
to be regarded as the ``applied'' programs at DOE, such as EERE and
ARPA-E, can play an equally important role in moving concepts and
technologies through research barriers that a light source or
supercomputer can't solve.
Far from picking winners, these programs identify the other gaps,
or ``white spaces,'' where some extra resources and guidance might help
the developer get beyond some technological risk and accelerate the
development process. If you want to see what picking a winner looks
like, just check out what our counterparts in Europe and Asia are
willing to do to support innovation and domestic companies.
If we truly want to make government work for the people, facilitate
our domestic industrial sector's race for global technological
leadership, and bring real jobs back to the U.S., then we will drop the
stale, dogmatic, and often illogical constraints that keep us from
fully taking advantage of our government's resources. Our economy was
built on science. From achievements in the human genome to sending a
man to the Moon, the Federal Government has effectively supported a
strong innovation backbone for a century of economic success. Why stop
now when the stakes are so high? Why limit ourselves?

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Miller.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time, I would like to introduce our witnesses. The
first witness is Dr. Tony Lanzirotti, Chairman of the National
User Facility Organization. He is a Senior Research Associate
at the University of Chicago's Center for Advanced Radiation
Sources. He has been a research scientist with the University
of Chicago since 1999 and helped develop and operate X-ray beam
lines for the user community at multiple DOE facilities.
Our next witness is Dr. Persis Drell, the Director of the
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. Dr. Drell is an expert in
particle astrophysics research. Prior to being named the
director, Dr. Drell served as a Professor and Director of
Research at the laboratory. Previously, Dr. Drell held
positions at Cornell University's Laboratory of Nuclear Studies
and Physics Department.
I now yield to Mrs. Biggert to introduce our third witness,
Dr. Wasserman.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Our third witness today is Dr. Stephen Wasserman, Senior
Research Fellow in the Translational Science and Technologies
Department at Eli Whitney--I mean Ely Lilly and Company. He is
the Director of the Lilly Research Laboratory's Collaborative
Access Team at the Advanced Photon Source located at Argonne
National Laboratory in my district. Prior to joining Ely Lilly,
Dr. Wasserman was a Senior Director of SGX Pharmaceuticals and
he has also served as a Senior Director for DC. Genetics. Thank
you, and welcome, Dr. Wasserman.
Chairman Harris. Thank you, Mrs. Biggert.
Our fourth witness today will be Ms. Suzy Tichenor,
Director of Industrial Partnerships Program for Computing and
Computational Sciences at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Ms.
Tichenor has more than 20 years of experience in creating
partnerships and programs at all levels of the government,
private sector and not-for-profit organizations. Prior to
joining Oak Ridge, she was Vice President of the Council on
Competitiveness and directed the council's High-Performance
Computing Initiative where she served as the Principal
Investigator for high-performance computing-related grants.
I now yield to the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko, to
introduce our fifth witness.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am very pleased to introduce Dr. Ernest Hall, the Chief
Scientist for Materials Characterization in the chemicals and
chemical engineering domain at General Electric's Global
Research Center in Niskayuna, New York. Dr. Hall, for whom I
have great respect, has been with GE since 1979 and was
promoted to Chief Scientist in 2008. He serves on a number of
scientific advisory boards to the Department of Energy and is
an author of over 175 technical papers. He recently was elected
President of the Microscopy Society of America. Dr. Hall has a
great deal of experience working at our DOE facilities. We are
very fortunate to have him with us to testify this morning.
Welcome and thank you for being here and to offer us your
expert testimony on the importance of these DOE user
facilities. So welcome, Dr. Hall.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Tonko.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each, after which the Members of the Committee
will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Lanzirotti, to
present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. ANTONIO LANZIROTTI,

CHAIRMAN, NATIONAL USER FACILITY ORGANIZATION

Mr. Lanzirotti. Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller and
distinguished Members of the Committee, I thank you for this
opportunity to testify. My name is Antonio Lanzirotti. I am a
Senior Research Associate with the University of Chicago's
Center for Advanced Radiation Sources, and it has also been an
honor for me to serve this past year as the elected Chair of
the National User Facility Organization. It is in that capacity
that I am here testifying before you today.
Our organization was established to facilitate
communication among researchers that utilize our Nation's
scientific user facilities and facility administrators and
stakeholders. We are a volunteer, nonprofit group, and it is
our hope that through these efforts we can educate our
scientific peers and the American public of the availability,
benefits and significance of research conducted at these
facilities and provide a conduit for the user community to
disseminate recommendations of what we perceive are their
operational needs.
Today, our organization represents the almost 45,000
scientists who conduct research at the 46 largest federally
funded facilities in the United States. Of these, 36 facilities
are managed by DOE, representing almost 37,000 scientists each
year. These users reside in all 50 states, in the District of
Columbia, in our U.S. territories, and many are international
scientists that travel here to conduct their research using
these tools. These scientists come from close to 600
universities in the United States. Roughly 7,000 of them are
students and postdoctoral researchers who depend on access to
facilities to complete their education and train to be future
scientists and engineers.
Our community includes scientists from 400 unique
companies, including 45 Fortune 500 companies, who often use
multiple facilities in their research. These facilities allow
us to study our world and our universe with efficiencies orders
of magnitude higher than what is possible with smaller-scale
instruments at our home institutions. It would simply be too
costly and complex today for facilities such as these to be
constructed and operated by universities or industry on their
own.
These thousands of researchers also leverage their access
to DOE user facilities to maximize their productivity, research
funded not only by DOE but NSF, NIH, NASA, DOD and private
industry, to name only a few.
The tremendously broad scope of science these facilities
have allowed us to address is often underappreciated, impacting
virtually every scientific field of study both in fundamental
and applied sciences. For example, synchrotron X-ray facilities
have revolutionized the way that diffraction data is being
collected. Macromolecular protein crystallography using these
sources has allowed researchers to study biological molecules
such as proteins, viruses and nucleic acids to a resolution
higher than five angstroms. This high resolution has allowed
life scientists to elucidate the detailed mechanisms by which
these molecules carry out their functions in living cells, and
the societal benefits of this research are tangible. As an
example, scientists from Plexxikon, a Berkeley-based drug
discovery company, used this technique to cocrystallize a
mutated protein involved in the development of malignant
melanoma along with molecular lead compounds for candidate
drugs. Identifying the most promising lead allowed them to
identify potential drug candidates that could stop the
disease's spread. This led to the development of a new drug
that has been demonstrated to successfully treat patients with
late-stage or inoperable forms of the disease, receiving FDA
approval in August of 2011.
Material scientists are using these facilities to improve
integrated circuit designs for chip verification. Engine
designers are using facilities to design catalysts for
improving engine efficiency and reducing emissions. Companies
such as GE are using DOE computing facilities to model complex
flow in developing quieter, more fuel-efficient wind turbines
and jet engines, and scientists have used these facilities for
fundamental research, for example, investigating the sources of
dark matter and dark energy in our universe.
In the last 10 years, we have entirely new classes of
facilities that are transforming our research such as the Nano
Science Centers and the LCLS. New facilities under
construction, such as NSLS-II at Brookhaven and vital upgrades
such as the planned LCLS-II upgrade in SLAC and the APS upgrade
at Argonne, are necessary for improving efficiency and capacity
and for delivering new capabilities to keep U.S. facilities
world leading.
Yet in building capacity and improving efficiency,
facilities have experienced funding shortfalls that often
prevent them from operating at optimum levels, keeping
instruments upgraded and providing adequate number of staff to
support user research to maintain our Nation's leadership
position. Providing operating budgets that allow these
facilities to achieve their designed-for capacity and to hire
and retain top scientific and technical talent should be a high
priority.
National user facilities provide a broad research
infrastructure that enables researchers to access specialized
instrumentation and capabilities as well as technical expertise
from experienced scientists and engineers. Access to these
facilities enables scientists to pursue frontier research leads
to fundamental scientific discoveries and enables downstream
technological developments for real-world industrial
applications. The United States is unique in having such a
large array of user facilities. Many countries have some
subset, but no other country provides access to such a diverse
group of facilities covering so many areas, giving the United
States academic and industrial researchers unequaled
opportunities.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lanzirotti follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Dr. Drell for five minutes to present her
testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. PERSIS DRELL, DIRECTOR,

SLAC NATIONAL ACCELERATOR LABORATORY

Ms. Drell. Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller and
Members of the Subcommittee, I am very pleased to be here today
to talk about SLAC National Accelerator Lab and the Linac
Coherent Light Source.
As you are going to be hearing from other witnesses, DOE
user facilities producing intense beams of X-rays have been
doing research with tremendous societal impact for several
decades. X-rays are particularly sensitive scientific tools,
powerful scientific tools because they see through matter and
they tell us where atoms are. At SLAC, we have just turned on
the newest X-ray facility, the Linac Coherent Light Source, or
LCLS, whose ultra-bright, ultra-short pulses of X-rays are
revolutionizing our ability to look at matter by letting us for
the first time see motion on the atomic time scale.
So I want to illustrate the power of LCLS with an analogy.
In the late 1800s, there was a lot of interest in the mechanics
of how a horse galloped. There was a famous bet involving
Senator Leland Stanford, and the bet was about whether all four
hooves of the horse left the ground. Eadweard Muybridge devised
a camera with a very fast shutter speed to resolve the bet by
taking a series of crisp stop-action pictures, putting them
together into a movie, which you see shown here. As you can
see, this movie resolved the question, and we know as a result
that a galloping horse does, in fact, take all of its four feet
off the ground when it gallops.
Now, just imagine if we could do this at the atomic scale.
Imagine if we could take a series of crisp stop-action pictures
of chemistry in motion and watch a reaction atom by atom and
step by step, and this is the new scientific frontier that has
been opened by the Linac Coherent Light Source.
Right now, as I speak, experimenters at SLAC, users at our
facility, are trying to understand photosynthesis, that very
basic life process, by taking a series of stop-action pictures
in much the way that Muybridge took a series of stop-action
pictures of the galloping horse.
We have long known that in photosynthesis, we take CO
2

and water, put it together with sunlight and we make oxygen and
sugars, but with a multi-step process we don't know the
details. With an understanding of how it works, we can start to
re-engineer it and exploit it in new ways. I think it will be a
decade or more, just to manage expectation, before society
directly benefits or an industrial application emerges, but I
am also confident that with time, this will be game-changing.
More speculative applications of the LCLS but maybe even
more revolutionary have to do with LCLS's ability to image
viruses and perhaps some day even selected cells. This is in
the early technology development stage but the potential is
enormous as it might offer revolutionary new insights into the
workings of the living cell.
So the LCLS is unique in the world in its ability to
deliver these ultra-fast, ultra-bright X-rays, but there is
significant worldwide competition coming as Japan, Germany,
China and Switzerland are all moving to catch up, particularly
now that we have demonstrated that this works.
To stay competitive, we are already working to expand the
capability and capacity of this discovery-class machine with
the LCLS-II. The LCLS-II is supported in the President's budget
request and is included in the House energy and water bill as
part of the BES budget, for which we are very appreciative.
User facilities like the LCLS are expensive to build and
operate. No one industry or research enterprise can afford to
build one for itself. The Federal Government through the Office
of Science and DOE, funds the building and operations of the
facilities at the national labs, and scientists from around the
world compete for beam time with peer-review proposals. We are
currently preeminent in many areas of science with our user
facilities. We will need continued stable funding for the DOE
Office of Science to keep our world-leading position.
Mr. Chairman, Members of the Subcommittee, let me end with
a somewhat philosophical statement. Over 400 years ago, Flemish
spectacle makers invented a spyglass, and the reason they
invented the spyglass was to be able to see ships far from
harbor to tell if they were friend or foe. Galileo took that
spyglass, made it better by a factor of 10, turned it on the
heavens, and revolutionized our view of the cosmos. The LCLS
was built because we knew that tudying materials on the atomic
time and distance scales would open new frontiers in drug
discovery, materials and chemistry research. But all of us
believe that with this new X-ray source, a billion times
brighter than anyone has had before, the biggest scientific
surprises are yet to come.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide my perspective as
SLAC's Director, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Drell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Dr. Wasserman to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. STEPHEN WASSERMAN,

SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW, TRANSLATIONAL

SCIENTIST AND TECHNOLOGIES,

ELY LILLY AND COMPANY

Mr. Wasserman. Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, and
Members of the Subcommittee, my name is Stephen Wasserman. I am
a Senior Research Fellow in the Translational Science and
Technologies Department of Lilly Research Laboratories, the
research arm of Ely Lilly and Company. It is a pleasure to be
here this morning to describe our company's work at the
Advanced Photon Source of Argonne National Laboratory, one of
the four X-ray synchrotron user facilities operated by the
United States Department of Energy. The partnership between our
company and the APS is an important part of our effort to
deliver innovative new medicines to the patients who need them.
Lilly has been a continual user of the Advanced Photon
Source since the first days of the facility. Today we operate
our own X-ray beam line for protein crystallography, the Lilly
Research Laboratory's Collaborative Access Team, LRLCAT, of
which I am the Director. Each year, we analyze more than 10,000
crystalline samples. Most of these crystals contain both
proteins that are targets for the treatment of disease and
small chemical compounds of interest in the development of
potential new medicines.
The experiments at the APS permit us to examine the
interaction between the protein and small molecule atom by atom
and to develop innovative new ways to optimize that
interaction. Through this detailed microscopic view, we seek to
maximize the efficacy of new pharmaceuticals and minimize side
effects.
Today our company has more than 10 experimental compounds
in phase I and phase II clinical trials that were developed
with the aid of the Advanced Photon Source. In addition,
experiments at the APS support research on more than one-third
of the protein targets in Lilly's early-stage drug discovery
portfolio. The therapeutic research areas that benefit from the
APS are diverse including cancer, diabetes, autoimmune,
psychiatric disorders and neurological conditions such as
neurodegeneration and pain.
Our work on the protein known as beta secretase, a
potential target for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease, is
illustrative of the interface between experiments at the APS
and Lilly's drug discovery research. The crystallographic
effort that included the APS has to date resulted in the
determination of the three-dimensional structures of more than
400 different compounds bound to the protein. The total effort
in developing a molecule that can be tested in clinical trials
extends far beyond our experiments in crystallography.
Considerable work was required to design candidate molecules
and evaluate their properties involving our colleagues in
biology, chemistry, data analysis and medicine. This endeavor
has resulted in an investigational new drug whose phase II
clinical testing will soon commence.
We urge Congress to continue to support our country's
national user facilities and the national laboratories in which
many are located. The Advanced Photon Source and other U.S.
synchrotron sources need a reliable funding stream. The quality
of the data obtained at the APS cannot be duplicated elsewhere
in the United States. If the light sources were not available
or their operating schedule substantially reduced, we at Lilly
would be forced to consider moving our experiments to other
countries. We have performed recently, or are scheduled to
perform in the near future, experiments in Canada, the United
Kingdom, France and China. Reliance on facilities outside the
United States, however, would slow the pace of our research and
impact how soon new treatments become available to patients.
The relationship between the national user facilities and
their users is strong. This relationship can be enhanced by
further development of the technical and organizational
environment the facilities provide. Potential enhancements
include modifications to the agreements between user and
facility, especially for industrial and proprietary users and
operators of individual beam lines from outside the Department
of Energy.
The addition of automation to speed the execution of
experiments and reduce future costs would maximize scientific
value for the facilities. Implementation of upgrades for the
core machines and, where present, ancillary experimental
stations is necessary. We at Lilly have seen how with time
operations can be held hostage to deprecated and aging
equipment. Indeed, that was one of the motivations for our own
recent upgrade at LRLCAT. The APS and its sister facilities
have similar issues though on a much larger scale.
As Drs. Drell and Lanzirotti have already noted, the
national user facilities are too large for any one
organization, corporate or academic, to consider building on
its own. The United States Government had foresight to
recognize that it alone could construct this scientific
infrastructure. By creating and running such facilities, it
provides an essential service for the country's technological
development. The result is a collection of scientific resources
of which the Nation should be justly proud.
In conclusion, I would like to return to a statement we
made at the exhibitions on national user facilities that the
NUFO organization presented for Congress at the end of March.
Recently in meetings on Capitol Hill, a colleague echoing the
opening of Charles Dickens' A Tale of Two Cities described the
current environment for science as the best of times and the
worst of times. Dickens' worst, best and worst, are, however,
absolute; science is rarely so. It continually builds on what
is already known. That is why science must always move forward
rather than being executed intermittently. A better descriptor
of the promise of national user facilities for our future can
be found in a slight modification of the end of Dickens' novel.
Provided the federal budget for national user facilities
remains intact, the research and innovation at these facilities
will be a far, far better thing that we do than we have ever
done.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wasserman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Ms. Tichenor for five minutes to present
her testimony.

STATEMENT OF MS. SUZY TICHENOR,

DIRECTOR, INDUSTRIAL PARTNERSHIPS PROGRAM,

COMPUTING AND COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCES,

OAK RIDGE NATIONAL LABORATORY

Ms. Tichenor. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Miller and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today. My name is Suzy Tichenor and I am
Director of the High-Performance Computing Partnership Program
at Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Oak Ridge, Tennessee. It is
an honor to provide this testimony on the role of the Oak Ridge
leadership computing user facility and our HPC partnership
program in strengthening the U.S. scientific enterprise.
As a DOE lab, Oak Ridge actually manages nine national
scientific user facilities including the Oak Ridge Leadership
Computing Facility, which I will refer to as OLCF from here on.
These distinctive experimental and computational facilities
enable research essential to accomplishing DOE missions. In
addition, the DOE user facilities are open to all interested
and potential users and are allocated on the basis of rigorous
merit review of the proposed work. The OLCF is home to one of
DOE's most powerful supercomputers for open science research, a
Cray XK6 called Jaguar. It is also home to a rare team of some
of the most experienced computational scientists in the world.
As we like to say, it is the people, and we are very blessed to
have some of the very best. This combination of leadership
computing systems and world-class expertise gives researchers
and opportunity to tackle challenges that are well beyond the
capabilities of their internal resources.
In 2009, we established an industrial HPC partnership
program to make the OLCF more accessible to industry, and we
consider the program to be a triple win. Oak Ridge and DOE
benefit from the opportunity to engage with some of the best
thinking in corporate America as companies pursue scientific
challenges in their quest to develop innovative products and
services, and often these science challenges are very
complementary to research that is underway at the lab. U.S.
industry benefits through the reduction in time to insight and
time to solution that it gains from access to the OLCF
resources, and as industry, Oak Ridge and DOE advance in their
science understanding, they are strengthening the Nation's
innovation infrastructure and creating competitive advantage
for the country through new discoveries enabled by these
partnerships. After only three years, we are seeing very
encouraging evidence that our industry program is helping to
expand and accelerate U.S. industrial use of large-scale
modeling and simulation for competitive gain with real results.
GE Global Research and United Technologies Research are
each using Jaguar to tackle different problems relating to more
energy-efficient jet engines. A one percent reduction in the
specific fuel consumption can save billions of dollars over the
life of a fleet of airplanes, so UTRC, for example, is using
Jaguar to better understand the air-fuel interaction in
combustors, a critical component of aircraft engines, and
access to Jaguar enabled UTRC to run simulations that were 64
times larger than what they could do in-house. GE used Jaguar
to study for the very first time the unsteady air flows in the
blade rows of turbo machines such as the very large-diameter
fans that are used in modern jet engines. Unsteady simulations
are orders of magnitude more complex than simulations of steady
flows, and GE simply was not able to do these on their in-house
systems.
But GE realized another benefit from access to our user
facility. The insights that they gained from their project at
OLCF provided the substantial return on investment
justification they needed for significant upgrade to their own
HPC capabilities in-house, and they made those upgrades after
the project was completed.
Small companies, the backbone of the economy, also benefit
from the user facility. Ramgen Power Systems, a small, Seattle-
based energy R&D firm, is using our HPC tools and expertise to
accelerate the development of a novel compression system for
carbon sequestration, and in the process, they have really
become the poster child for dramatic advances that a company
can make in its own modeling and simulation abilities. When
they began their project, they were only able to really use
successfully several hundred processors and now they are
successfully running ensembles of simulations using over
120,000 processors. This has reduced what used to be months of
work and research to a mere eight hours. These are the game-
changing advances that companies can achieve and the return on
investment that the country receives from this particular user
facility.
The industrial HPC partnership program is also providing a
gateway for companies to tap into other resources and
facilities at the lab that they may not have been aware of if
they had not been working with us. For example, one firm that
used Jaguar is now expanding its work to include more detailed
modeling and simulation of materials with researchers at our
center for Nanophase Materials Science user facility and are
coupling that with experimental analysis that tapes into the
neutron-scattering research capabilities at our Spallation
Neutron Source user facility. So this is really very exciting
to see a firm integrate the capabilities of multiple user
facilities at the lab to tackle much more complex scientific
problems.
In summary, by enabling companies to realize the benefits
of high-performance computing through access to the OLCF, Oak
Ridge is helping companies make progress on important
scientific challenges with strategic business implications and,
in so doing, is strengthening the Nation's innovation
infrastructure for national security and economic strength.
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Tichenor follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you.
I now recognize our final witness, Dr. Hall, for five
minutes to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. ERNEST HALL,

CHIEF SCIENTIST, CHEMISTRY AND CHEMICAL

ENGINEERING/MATERIALS CHARACTERIZATION,

GE GLOBAL RESEARCH

Mr. Hall. Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller,
Congressman Tonko and Members of the Committee, I am pleased to
share with you General Electric's perspective on how the
Department of Energy programs and processes can be strengthened
to better serve the needs of industrial partners and the
demands of the energy marketplace. I commend the Committee for
focusing on a topic that has far-reaching implications for
ensuring the future competitiveness and growth of our Nation's
economy.
As you have heard, I represent GE Global Research in
upstate New York, where we have 2,000 research employees
working every day to develop and deliver critical technologies
to our businesses. We support a global company with interests
that span several industries from energy, aviation and
transportation to water, health care and finance.
Today, America's companies are facing increasing global
competition and environments that require us to innovate
differently. With materials in shorter supply, manufacturing
becoming more complex, and pressure rising to get new products
to market faster, it is clear that a strong commitment to
innovation and the ability to rapidly commercialize new
technology will be a key factor in who succeeds.
Fortunately for the United States, our innovation remains
the world's best. We have a wealth of world-class universities,
federally funded research and development centers, and
industrial research labs producing great technology. To fulfill
the promise of these investments in these institutions, we must
update our innovation model by increasing collaborations across
this network, working more in parallel between the domains of
design innovation, manufacturing innovation and materials
innovation, and making sure science and technology objectives
are in concert with industrial needs.
Our work with various DOE scientific user facilities serves
as a good example of these collaborative models. The Basic
Energy Sciences facility for synchrotron, neutron and electron
studies of the structure and chemistry of materials provides a
compelling illustration.
Later this summer, GE will open its new $100 million high-
tech battery business in Schenectady, New York, creating 350
manufacturing jobs at full capacity.
One of the key technical challenges in developing our
battery was improved fundamental understanding of the battery
chemistry. At the National Synchrotron Light Source at
Brookhaven National Lab, GE scientists were able to work with
scientists from Rutgers and Brookhaven to measure the chemical
processes on full operating commercial battery cells. This
synchrotron provided access to the most advanced
characterization capabilities that no one institution,
university or industry could afford to construct or fully
utilize. It allowed us to gain a greater understanding of our
battery's materials and systems than we could using our own
instrumentation in-house and shows what can result when you
match the world-class research capabilities of these facilities
and our universities with an industry need.
In my written testimony, I cite other examples including
work at Argonne National Lab and other BES facilities where we
are working on 3D microscopy techniques to improve the
materials of aircraft engines and gas turbines and conducting
fundamental studies on photovoltaic devices.
As you have heard, another truly great asset America has is
our network of high-performance computing resources at the
national labs. As in many other industries, computational
modeling and simulation plays a critical role in addressing
many of the research problems we face at GE. The ability to
carry out experiments in a faster, more robust way, high-
performance computing provides an invaluable tool in
accelerating innovation, leading to new product development,
particularly in the energy sector.
You have heard about the work that we have been doing with
GE's newest cutting-edge aircraft engine, the GEnx, powering
Boeing's new 787 Dreamliner and incorporating capabilities that
were enabled through high-performance computing. We believe, as
Ms. Tichenor said, that another one to two percent in fuel
reduction in fuel consumption can be achieved, which would
translate into hundreds of millions of dollars in annual fuel
savings to the aviation industry, increasing the competitive
posture of U.S. manufactured aircraft engines and retaining
more jobs in our U.S.-based aircraft engine factories,
achieving those reductions through high-performance computing.
We have also recently been selected by Lawrence Livermore
National Lab to participate in an incubator program,
hpc4energy, which will focus on next-generation fuel injectors,
and we also have ongoing programs with Argonne and Oak Ridge
national labs in advanced turbo machinery design.
I hope these brief examples illustrate the great value of
DOE's scientific user facilities.
I would like to conclude, very briefly, with a few
recommendations on how DOE programs and facilities could be
strengthened and made more effective. We encourage continued
investment in major scientific user facilities and in
particular funding to staff and optimally operate and utilize
these very complex facilities. U.S. industry and scientists
would be at a clear disadvantage with respect to their global
counterparts without access to these cutting-edge capabilities.
Most important, policies need to be enacted that expand
industrial access to these facilities.
Second, DOE lab and user facility investment need to be
prioritized to focus on the key challenges associated with
energy technologies from basic science through applied research
leading to scale and commercialization.
Finally, we need new collaborative models that allow
different stakeholders--government, university and large and
small companies--to come together and advance science and
technology programs in new ways. In our written testimony, we
point to the SEMATECH model, which brought together many
parties within the semiconductor industry to help reestablish
American leadership in this area of technology.
Chairman Harris, I want to thank you again for the
opportunity for GE to testify. It is an important and timely
conversation as we look to ways to enhance America's future
economic competitiveness and capacity for new growth and jobs.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hall follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. I want to thank the
witnesses for being available for questioning today, reminding
Members the Committee rules limit questioning to five minutes.
I will open the round of questions, and I am first going to
recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Rohrabacher, for
five minutes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and let
me compliment the panel. You crammed so much information into
so little time. You must have had some computers helping you
out to develop that strategy because it was just amazing.
Let me just touch on some points here. We are going through
this period of time in Washington, D.C., where we have got this
budget deficit hanging over our head. All right. It is hanging
there, and there was a quote from some New York politician who
said the sword of Damocles is hanging right over Pandora's Box
or something like that. We have got a major challenge before
us. How can we actually--and you very well explained the value
of what your facilities provide this country and provide the
world in terms of scientific exploration and development of new
ideas, making them real. What percentage of that work that is
done is done on scientific research specifically for the DOE
and how much is done with private-sector groups and is there a
way--and who then owns the actual intellectual property that is
being developed by this great investment? Is there a way that
we can in some way tap into that as a means to help finance
your operations? All the way down, whoever is the most expert
on that.
Dr. Lanzirotti. One of the things that is often
underappreciated for many of the Office of Science facilities
is that access to the facilities is done through a peer-review
process. In fact, it is varied by the different facilities but,
you know, from what we have done in terms of looking at metrics
for the industrial community utilization is seven percent, 10
percent. The vast majority is actually from the research
university community done through peer review, you know, from
different organizations. So the benefit is really in terms of
the research that they do, the fundamental research. You know,
the industry users take that information and make it more into
an applied research component, and it is that access to the
facilities that we can't get in terms of what we do at our home
institutions that lets us produce, you know, the fundamental
science for the country.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, take the engines, the jet engines we
were talking about. It was a good point. If we can make these
jet engines with the equipment that we have one percent more
efficient, we have saved hundreds of millions of dollars for
somebody. Is that possible? Number one, do Boeing and these
companies, how much do they pay, and should they then if they
achieve something, should you--how much of that is owned by
your research facilities and by your institutions, by the
government?
Dr. Hall. So I would just make the point that our use of
the scientific user facilities is part of a very large
technology development program that is taking place in-house in
which, for example, GE is investing millions, in some cases
billions, of dollars to bring a technology to marketplace,
particularly a technology as complicated as a new aircraft
engine platform, a new engine. And so that is our investment,
our stake in this. As part of that development, we will use the
national user facilities in a non-proprietary way doing
research that is open to the world to see and to benefit from,
and we will use those results as part of our technology
development.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Is that paid for? Is there a fee involved
to this facility to the Federal Government?
Dr. Hall. The vast amount of what we do is actually done
open through the proposal process and so it is non-proprietary,
publishable research. There is a fee structure for any
proprietary research, for any research we want to do where we
do not want to reveal the results of those.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So you only pay for that you are going to
fence off, but there is no fee just to go in and utilize the
facility?
Dr. Hall. With the caveat that we need to pass the usual
scientific quality screens. This is done----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Oh, yeah, sure. I understand that.
Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Miller, for five
minutes.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Hall, we do hear a lot about government picking winners
and losers in this Committee, crowding out private investment,
particularly in energy, by sponsoring applied research and
later stage, any kind of later stage activity. But is there
really that little space to invest that what the government
does is going to crowd out private investment? And what does it
really take to pick a winner? Could you give us an example
showing the steps that have to go, that really go into moving
an idea from research to the marketplace and how much
investment is involved?
Dr. Hall. Well, I can speak to my experience, and that is
that today's technologies are incredibly complex and very
difficult to move from the area of idea through discovery,
feasibility, pre-product, product and finally into the
marketplace. In my testimony, I talked a lot about the need for
collaboration across university and government lab and industry
in order to accelerate those innovations and enhance America's
competitiveness. The investments that the Department of Energy
make in technologies are at the--in the area of discovery and
initial feasibility, and these are extremely useful to explore
very high risk but potentially very high reward concepts.
Further, there is, as you know, great difficulty in that
area of funding that moves beyond feasibility into, you know,
building a plant, perhaps a many-hundred-dollar plant in order
to produce a technology. And so broad partnerships such as the
SEMATECH model, I think, are very important in order to
accelerate this technology development and make America most
competitive in this rapidly changing world.
Mr. Miller. And how do our efforts compare with what our
competitors in Europe and Asia are doing to accelerate
technologies? Dr. Hall again, yes.
Dr. Hall. Well, if we look specifically at the scientific
user facilities, we know that for other parts of the world such
as the E.U. and Asia and even Canada, their scientific user
facilities are much more aggressive in seeking industrial users
with the encouragement of their governments. We see that in
many cases targets such as 20 percent of the utilization of the
scientific user facilities by industry are set where in the
United States--and perhaps other members of the panel have more
information on that. My understanding is the numbers are around
five to seven percent.
But it is important to understand that in addition to
simply setting targets, one needs to put in the structures and
policies that make the use of the scientific user facilities
and the government labs more inviting to industry. One needs to
have these facilities fully staffed. One needs to have the
policies to provide particular help for small businesses, for
example. One needs to continue to do the outreach and education
about what our government labs can bring to private industry in
order to enhance their technology development. It is our
observation, I think, that other parts of the world, the
governments realize clearly that they need to assist their
industry in order to be globally competitive and we see this in
many cases.
Mr. Miller. We do--there is a debate within this Committee
and within Congress on the distinction between applied versus
basic research, and curiously, it seems to justify lavish
funding for nuclear and fossil fuel research, which appear to
be mature industries that are already well funded, and to
justify cutting research for vulnerable new technologies,
emerging technologies. How would you define applied versus--Dr.
Hall again--applied versus basic research and how useful is
that distinction?
Dr. Hall. In my world, that is not a distinction that we
use very much. We think about, you know, going from idea to
feasibility to sort of pre-product demonstration to product
development to commercialization, and where you make that
distinction between basic and applied is difficult to see. At
my lab at Global Research, we are primarily working in the
discovery part, which you might call basic research, but what
we always have is an eye on how do we commercialize this, how
do we pull in the ideas of manufacturing and design and
materials availability into the process even at the discovery
phase. So technology development these days is, I think, much
more complicated than just a simple description of basic and
applied.
Mr. Miller. My time has expired.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I would like to remind the Members, we would like to limit
it to five minutes. We have a very long series of votes coming
up on the Floor, and I would like to complete the hearing and
adjourn before we leave for the votes. So again, just reminding
the Members, try to keep the questions to five minutes.
I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Neugebauer, for
five minutes.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you for
calling this hearing.
I want to kind of go back with the line of questioning that
Mr. Rohrabacher was talking about, and I think all of us are
trying to figure out with the limited resources that we are
going to have if we are going to leave any kind of future for
our children and grandchildren, we are going to have to look at
prioritizing the way we spend the American taxpayers' hard-
earned money, and I think, Dr. Lanzirotti, you said that only
12 percent of the research going on at the laboratories is
really applied research, and I guess that would mean that 88
percent of it is then fundamental research. Is that correct?
Dr. Lanzirotti. More specifically, I think when we look
across the user facilities that at least we represent that
those would be classified as industrial researchers, people
that come from industry tends to average around seven percent,
10 percent. It really depends on the type of facility.
Computing facilities, for example, may attract more industrial
users than light sources, for example. But it does mean that
the vast majority of the researchers in many of the facilities
that we see are from research universities, from other
laboratories, but much of the research they do may be
fundamental or what you call basic research but they are also
doing applied research at the university level as well.
At the Advanced Photon Source, for example, we talked a
little bit today about some of the work that we are doing in
drug discovery through macromolecular crystallography. Many of
the consortia that we see at the Advanced Photon Source are
university laboratories that are doing, you know, drug
discovery and looking at macromolecular crystals for next-
generation drugs. So you can classify that as applied science
but it comes from the university environment.
Mr. Neugebauer. So here is a follow-up question then. If
GE, for example, Dr. Hall said, you know, when they go in and
they are going to do non-proprietary research, they don't pay
any user fee because they are going to share whatever findings
that they have. When they are doing proprietary, then they are
paying for that. I think the question is, are the universities
like when they are using the labs, are they paying--because
they are getting grants to do certain research but then they
come over to a national lab, do they bring that research money?
Are they paying fees to the laboratory to support the overhead
there?
Dr. Lanzirotti. No.
Mr. Neugebauer. They are not?
Dr. Lanzirotti. No.
Mr. Neugebauer. So I guess the question, it is kind of
twofold, is, if there is great value to these national
laboratories, and I think the panel has expressed that, do we
really kind of need to look at then the possibility of changing
that funding model some where, you know, GE and other companies
say, you know, there is value here even when we are doing
proprietary or non-proprietary research there, we are going to
make sure, we want to contribute to that? Because I was at a
fairly major electronic company not too long ago, and we were
talking about, you know, this very issue, and we were talking
about, you know, one, of lowering the corporate tax rates and
leaving more investable money in the economy to create jobs,
and one of the questions I asked is, you know, would you then
be willing and open then to, for example, in the funding of
laboratories and some of the research, since we are going to
let the corporation keep more of that money, would you be
willing to contribute to that, and I think the answer was yes.
What I like about that is that it is another part of the
review process. I know you said you do peer review when you are
looking at who gets to use the laboratory. I mean, I just can't
walk in there and say I would like to work on an experiment.
You probably wouldn't let me, and when you look at my science
grades, you for sure probably wouldn't let me. But the other
token of that is, I think that the private sector also, you
know, is another review of that where they are willing to
invest their dollars. Dr. Hall, what would be your response to
something like that?
Dr. Hall. So as I understand the question, you were talking
about the tradeoff between, say, lowering corporate tax rates
and then increasing costs for using government facilities. Is
that correct?
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes.
Dr. Hall. One aspect of that that one has to realize is
again for a global company like GE, we will look globally at
where we can do research at the lowest possible cost because we
have to worry about our competitiveness as well. You know, we
have facilities near our research facilities in Europe and in
Asia and we would need to look at that overall cost. But, you
know, I don't think I can speak to the tradeoff between tax
rates and cost of facilities at this time.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I recognize the gentlelady from California, Ms. Lofgren,
for five minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be quick
because I know that we are going to have votes called.
This has been wonderful to hear you, and Dr. Drell, it is
great to see you. I see you all the time at home.
You know, one of the things I didn't hear today was any
concern or objection to the Department of Energy management of
the use of these facilities. That is being done really through
the peer-review process, and it is such a contrast to what I am
hearing for those national labs that are being managed by NNSA.
I am wondering, Dr. Lanzirotti, as the chief of the users
group, have you had an opportunity to take a look at the
National Academy report on the NNSA management of the national
security labs?
Dr. Lanzirotti. I actually haven't had an opportunity.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I am going to do this. I am going to
give you a copy of this, and I am going to ask a favor of you
to take a look at it and whatever insights you have, I would
very much appreciate receiving and I am sure other Members of
the Committee would as well.
Dr. Lanzirotti. I would be very pleased to discuss that
with the community and----
Ms. Lofgren. The other thing I would like to mention, I
just received a copy of a letter from April from Oxford
University from the head of the user group for the national
ignition facility talking about the micromanagement of the
science from the user groups trying to use that facility. It is
a two-page letter. It asks that we make it available to other
Members of the Committee, but I would like you, if you wouldn't
mind, to take a look at this letter as well and to give
whatever insights you might have on how to correct this
concern.
[The information may be found in Appendix 2.]
Ms. Lofgren. The other question I have, and maybe I will
ask Dr. Drell because I visit her lab all the time; you know,
when I go to the lab, I see scientists from all over the world,
really smart people who are coming here, inventing things, and
it makes me remember that those postdocs, if they are from
Britain, we make them go home and start their companies there.
Do you think our immigration policies of forcing the smartest
people in the world who want to become Americans with us is a
positive thing for the advance of science here in the United
States?
Dr. Drell. Let me say I am not an expert on immigration
policy, but I will say that the healthy flow of international
scientists to our facility, because our beam time is allocated
on a peer-review basis and the best science gets the beam time,
that is the lifeblood of the institution and so being able to
have outstanding scientists from around the world, many of whom
eventually do either stay or find a reason to come back, is
essential for science in this country.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you.
I am going to yield back so that other Members can have a
chance to ask. Thank you very much.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I recognize the gentlelady from Illinois, Mrs. Biggert.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Maybe, Dr. Wasserman, you can talk a little bit about the
user agreements that you have with Argonne National Lab and how
Ely Lilly is working with the lab to update agreements but how,
you know, what you do with the proprietary.
Dr. Wasserman. So, for background, all the experiments that
we do at Ely Lilly at the Advanced Photon Source come under
proprietary user agreements so the DOE calculates what full
cost recovery for providing the X-rays at the facilities takes
and we reimburse at that rate to the government for every
experiment that we do. So all of our work is done in a
proprietary mode.
That said, much of the intellectual property provisions
within the user agreements under proprietary mode give much of
the rights to the user to develop as we do with
pharmaceuticals. There are a few ambiguities that are not--that
remain, particularly in what rights does the government to
inventions that may come from the facility, etc. This contrasts
with other facilities that we use outside the United States
where they basically have if you pay, you own. And so it is a
little bit more complicated in the United States in order to
maintain a proprietary footprint.
Mrs. Biggert. And you say in your testimony that you pay
the fees for all the proprietary but that sometimes you provide
available time on that to non-proprietary users from the
universities so that they have the ability to do that without
fees?
Dr. Wasserman. Right. So the Department of Energy, at least
for the facilities at the synchrotrons, requires that 25
percent of each beam line--some give more--provide time for
academic users on each facility. So even if you built it
yourself, you are providing time for outside users. We actually
do those experiments for people. They send us the samples and
we do the experiments for them with our own staff, finding that
is a particularly efficient way to operate.
Mrs. Biggert. Then obviously everybody has been talking
about the upgrade that is needed at the Advanced Photon Source.
How would that help you to accelerate the drug
characterization?
Dr. Wasserman. There are two aspects to that. One is the
basic age of the machine. The APS will be 20 years old in three
years, and anything of this complexity needs a checkup once in
awhile, probably more often than 20 years, and that is one of
the things that is planned within the Department of Energy
Office of Science. The other is what the enhanced capabilities
of the upgrade will give. For example, a class of targets known
as membrane proteins gives very small crystals. They are very
hard to grow larger and the enhanced capabilities that would
come from the upgrade of the APS would allow us to get much
better quality information that we are able to do even today
with a state-of-the-art facility.
Mrs. Biggert. There is a question that NIH has a budget of
over $30 billion to work on health and enhance life. Because of
the great contributions of the light sources to advancing NIH's
mission, do you think that some of their budget might go to the
Department of Energy to work on this?
Dr. Wasserman. Well, in the sense, it already has. NIH
contributed to the upgrade of the Stanford Synchrotron
Radiation Laboratory when that was done a number of years ago.
They fund the majority of the beam lines for protein
crystallography that are currently at the APS. So the DOE
facilities do have input, both scientific and financial, from
the National Institutes of Health even today.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you. And I will yield back.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, and if we keep going
at about four minutes a question, we will do just fine.
I am going to recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and let me thank our
panelists. I think you have underscored the value added of our
user facilities and should motivate and inspire us.
You have all discussed how these user facilities have been
invoked by industry and academia to advance an array of clean-
energy technologies, but listening to the talk around
Washington, one might conclude that such things are a pipe
dream and destined to fail unless propped up by government
programs. If run time at the user facilities is awarded based
on competitive solicitations, how is it that there are so many
clean-energy projects and why would you suggest are there so
many industrial partners focused on clean-energy technologies
if there isn't real potential for profit? Any of you want to
address that?
Ms. Tichenor. I am not from the business side, obviously,
but the companies that make applications for time at our user
facility are doing it because there is a business driver. They
are pursuing this research because they believe that ultimately
it makes good business sense. It is going to somehow drive new
products, new services and drive their profitability in the
end. It could be--maybe it is a regulatory demand, maybe it is
a customer demand. Most of the time it is customer demands that
are driving this,, and so I would say that is why they are
coming in and pursuing those kinds of projects and that kind of
research. But I am going to defer to the private-sector people
on the panel here.
Dr. Hall. So I just wanted to stress that at General
Electric, we are investing huge sums of money in renewable-
energy areas. You heard me speak of a few examples. I did not
speak about wind, but that has been a tremendous success story
for our company and I hope for the world. You heard the story
about battery. We are creating jobs. We are creating large
factories. We are investing a large amount of money. We are
also looking at solar technologies and trying to solve the
critical technical problems associated with increasing the
efficiency and making those products commercially viable, and
when we use the user facilities, the reason we get time at
those facilities is we are looking at the key science questions
around these technologies, and it is critical that we solve,
American industry and America solves these key questions, both
for the future of renewable energy in the United States and
also for the global competitiveness of our companies, and to
solve these problems, as I have stressed before, we need to
continue to have a collaborative model. We work with
universities. We work with these government labs. We invest a
huge amount of our own resources, and that is really what has
pushed these technologies forward and enabled us to do things
such as build a new high-tech battery plant in Schenectady, New
York.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Dr. Wasserman, were you going to add to that or----
Dr. Wasserman. Since most of our work is not in the energy
area, I think I will defer to Dr. Hall.
Dr. Lanzirotti. I would make one point. From our
perspective in the user community, the American public and you
as their representatives are going to dictate through the
funding that you make available, you know, what the national
needs are. Those of us in the scientific community, based on
what funding is available, you know, where industry sees that
there are economic initiatives, we will take those and we will
use the national laboratories and the tools that we have to
address them, and that's one of the things that is really
unique about these instruments is that regardless of what you
task us to do in science, we are going to use these facilities
to try to address them.
Mr. Tonko. That is wonderful.
With a minute remaining then, Mr. Chair, I will yield back.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I am going to reserve my time and I will yield to the
gentleman from California, Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I certainly enjoyed listening to your testimonies so far,
but you are putting your best foot forward. I understand that.
Dr. Drell, I have a little technical question here
concerning the LCLS. Now, you said it called the Linac Coherent
Light Source. Is it also monochromatic? So in other words, is
it a laser?
Dr. Drell. Yes, it is an X-ray laser.
Mr. McNerney. Wow.
Dr. Drell. It is a free-electron laser so it is not like
your normal laser. I don't know how technical you would like me
to get here. I would be happy to get as technical as you would
like. But we take a beam out of our electron Linac, very small
emittance beam, a billion electrons and a 30-micron sphere, put
it in 100 meters of undulator magnets that have been aligned to
better than a tenth of the width of a human hair and we get
lasing radiation out. We have actually just recently been able
to make that nearly transform limited pulses.
Mr. McNerney. Very good.
Dr. Drell. It is a spectacular instrument.
Mr. McNerney. It is. Wow. I didn't know that was going to
happen in my lifetime.
Dr. Drell. Please come visit us and let me show you for
yourself.
Mr. McNerney. I will do that.
Dr. Lanzirotti, about the Joint Genome Institute, how has
that JGI contributed to bringing genomic-based solutions and
products to the marketplace?
Dr. Lanzirotti. Well, we don't have anyone here from
Lawrence Berkeley today, who would probably be better able to
speak to that directly, but let me speak a little bit for the
user community of JGI, and again, it is an opportunity to make
available to the broader user community advanced sequencing
tools. That is something that at the level that JGI provides it
to the scientific community, it is something we don't have
available, and it is a very vibrant community. JGI today hosts
about 1,800 users a year. Last year, they published 188
publications. They looked at sequencing the genome of microbes
that were found at the bottom of the Deepwater Horizon well to
understand, you know, how we can use what microbes are doing to
actually clean up hydrocarbons in the future. They published
the first publicly available sequence for soybean, which gives
us insight, for example, into how nitrogen is fixed in
organisms so, you know, for crop rotation, and if you look at
it in terms of what they can accomplish, JGI produced 40
trillion bases of sequence data last year using their advanced
sequencing tools. That is amazing, and it takes us as users
from not just collecting genome data but actually to understand
what the function of individual genes is.
Mr. McNerney. It sure would be interesting to see a sort of
return on investment in terms of federal money invested and
commercial value generated, but I think that is a pretty
complicated question.
Dr. Wasserman, I heard some proposals to cut funding for
user facilities that are not energy related. Would that affect
your work?
Dr. Wasserman. It depends on whether one considers the
Advanced Photon Source an energy-related facility or not. At
the moment, half of its work is the traditional realm of the
Office of Science of the DOE, chemistry, physics and materials.
The other half is the biological side. So we clearly benefit
from the investment the DOE has done and that is why we have
built our own beam line, our own research facility at the
place. But if the emphasis on energy work continues, we presume
that the APS will continue to function and therefore we will
benefit as well.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
I think I will yield back.
Chairman Harris. If the gentleman would like another
minute, if you have questions. We were just notified that the
votes will be at 11:00, so if you want to--do you have another
question?
Mr. McNerney. I do. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Tichenor, you mentioned that the industrial benefits
from partnering with the national user facilities. Can you
elaborate a little bit on how the partnerships help advance and
develop our national interests?
Ms. Tichenor. Well, I think they help from multiple
perspectives. First, I think it is in the national interest to
have companies that are strong and the companies that are
coming and doing research are doing that research there to
strengthen their own firms, to make them competitive, and
competitive companies here are going to contribute to the
economy, and I am not the economist here at the table--I don't
know if we have one--but I think that is a good thing.
But, you know, there is a lot of intellectual sharing that
goes on with the users that come to the user facilities and the
lab researchers that are there. We learn a tremendous amount.
The labs don't have a lock on all the intellectual capital in
the country. There is a tremendous amount of very, very good
science that goes on in the companies, and when you provide
these user facilities, and I can only speak, of course, about
our own leadership computing facility, it is like a brain
magnet. I mean, it attracts really, really smart people, and we
want to be surrounded by smart people. We learn. And a lot of
the work that is being done in industry, the scientific work,
is very complementary often to work that is underway at the
labs and so it becomes a meeting place where the ideas can be
shared.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
This is an excellent example of how very well-targeted
money from the government can benefit the society at large, so
thank you for your testimony this morning.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. I am going to
continue to reserve my time.
The gentlelady from California is recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I am going to
just follow my colleague, Mr. McNerney, in the benefits to
everybody of the federal investment in science, technology.
Where in the process when it is federally funded is this
research made available to whoever would be interested?
Example: I have heard that in medicine, it isn't until the
final paper comes out that then it becomes public but the
studies and the results of those studies step by step by step
are not published, and the medical scientists have said to me,
we start over and over many times in our research because those
basic research finds that might not even have anything to do
with that original research was going to be about is not made
available. So am I talking about something that works that you
can help me with?
Dr. Wasserman. In the biological field, there are two types
of publication. There is the standard paper, which to our
academic colleagues is their product of their scientific work,
and we do that as well when we have reached a completion stage
of the science that we do on a proprietary basis out of the
APS. There is a second level of publication, which is supported
through the National Institutes of Health known as the Protein
Data Bank, which is a collaboration within the United States
and with other protein data banks operated in Asia and Europe,
and together these data banks allow you to deposit structures
of proteins that other people can use, possibly ourselves in
development of medicines, other university researchers who may
be working in a related area, and so that can be made quite
quickly. It is a requirement of publication to put your data
into the Protein Data Bank, but there are many other structures
that are available there for the general researcher that are
put there well before publication occurs.
Ms. Lofgren. Dr. Hall.
Dr. Hall. And I think one way of thinking about these user
facilities is that they are tools. They are tools that we use
to build amazing technology products and tools that we use to
build American competitiveness. And those tools, as Ms.
Tichenor indicated, are constantly being developed, and if I
can again use the battery technology development as an example,
we saw that Rutgers and Brookhaven had developed a tool to do a
certain thing. We saw how it could be adapted to help us
understand the chemistry that was happening in batteries and
improve our product. We did that. The world saw what we were
doing with batteries. Other people working on batteries came
from other companies and universities and used the tools that
we had developed and the methods that we had developed. So
everyone benefits. Other researchers will use that tool in a
slightly different way. So the key is that we all work together
to continue to improve these tools. That will accelerate the
technology development in the country, and that just happens
all the time.
Ms. Lofgren. But it is preventable that we don't hold back
in our government facilities in sharing----
Dr. Hall. All the work that we did was done in a completely
non-proprietary, open way, and Brookhaven has publicized that,
trying to build a very large consortium around being a center
for battery research.
Ms. Lofgren. I will yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
very much.
Chairman Harris. Well, thank you very much, and I will
recognize myself, I guess, to close the round of questioning.
And I am going to just follow up a little bit, I think,
some of the things that the gentleman from Texas had asked. You
know, since they are government facilities, obviously political
issues arise, and I frequently get asked in town hall meetings
and by constituents, look, why don't we keep, you know,
American investments in America, you know, why do have what
amounts to foreign aid, and so I am going to delve a little bit
into the idea that we are letting foreign entities use these
facilities, which are in the end funded by American tax
dollars.
So first of all, and I guess, Dr. Drell, listen, thanks for
coming and not talking about more fascinating technology which
I will never understand, but is it true that foreign applicants
have access on an equal basis with American applicants to your
facility, for instance?
Dr. Drell. That is true. The peer-review process does not
look at where a proposal comes from. It looks at the quality of
the science, and that is reciprocated at facilities around the
world.
Chairman Harris. Okay. And that was my other question, is
it in fact reciprocated because it is a different model. For
instance, the NIH, which I am much more familiar with, you
know, as far I know, I think you have to be an American, you
know, the principal investigators, that they have to be
American or American entities.
Dr. Drell. To get a grant----
Chairman Harris. Yes.
Dr. Drell [continuing]. A specific grant, you would need to
be--to fund your research group, to fund your postdocs, to fund
your graduate students.
Chairman Harris. Sure, but my----
Dr. Drell. But beam time----
Chairman Harris. Right, but those are--both flow from
American taxpayer dollars. You know what I mean?
Dr. Drell. Yes.
Chairman Harris. So the average American looking at it is
going wait a minute, you know, we are kind of subsidizing this
foreign entity, but it is, as far as what you are saying, we
have access, our scientists have access to their instruments.
We probably just have better and wider variety of instruments,
we would like to think.
Dr. Drell. At the moment, certainly, in that realm. I would
also like to emphasize that most--many of the teams, let me
say, that have international participation also have U.S.
participation. It is rare to have a team that is exclusively--
--
Chairman Harris. Sure. It is part of a collaborative
effort.
Ms. Tichenor, is that true at your facility also?
Ms. Tichenor. Basically, it is. I mean, DOE does not
distinguish in their peer-review proposal process between
different countries. They are looking for the most cutting-edge
science, and in fact, that is what the facility was funded to
do, right, is to support the most cutting-edge science and so
the peer-review process winnows through all of those applicants
to do that. Another way to think about it is, when you have
foreign researchers there, we are not paying for those
researchers. We don't fund them, right. Their own countries
are. So their own countries are making an enormous investment
in that research, and we get the benefit of it. We provide the
tool but we get the benefit of all that investment that they
have made and those people and that time and then we get access
to all the results.
Chairman Harris. Again, believe me, I get it. I mean, I get
that science shouldn't have boundaries but again, once you ask
the government to participate, politics, which is----
Ms. Tichenor. Understood.
Chairman Harris. Are there equivalent facilities overseas,
facilities, supercomputing facilities, for instance, that our--
or do we really have the best in the world so really it is kind
of a one-way street?
Ms. Tichenor. Well, we are pretty fortunate right now that
we have got some of the top systems. Now, this fluctuates, you
know, because systems constantly are being upgraded. But there
are certainly very similar, maybe not at any point in time one
country has the most powerful system than another but they do
leapfrog each other, and many of those are in university and
national laboratory environments where, again, those countries
have made a similar determination. We want to attract the best
brains and so they make them available.
Chairman Harris. At your two facilities, what is the
estimate of the percent of foreign use, Dr. Drell?
Dr. Drell. At the LCLS, it is 50 percent right now.
Chairman Harris. Fifty percent?
Dr. Drell. Right.
Chairman Harris. Ms. Tichenor?
Ms. Tichenor. You know, I would have to get back to you and
get----
Chairman Harris. Ballpark?
Ms. Tichenor. I don't know. I wouldn't even want to--it is
highly collaborative. It is highly collaborative.
Chairman Harris. No, I understand that.
And I am just going to close with just a kind of rhetorical
question, I guess, for Dr. Wasserman and Dr. Hall, because you
are the two private entities. You know, what is floated around
here on Capitol Hill is that for some reason if a company is
successful and profitable, they should pay a little bit more,
and, you know, that is floated around now for small businesses.
Should we go to a sliding scale for fees for user facilities?
You know, if you are a profitable company, you pay more? What
do you think? Do you think that is a good idea, you are more
profitable, you pay a higher fee to the government? You can
call it a tax to use the facility if you want.
Dr. Hall. Well----
Chairman Harris. It is a rhetorical question. You don't
have to answer.
Listen, I want to thank all the witnesses for their
valuable testimony and the Members for their questions. The
Members of the Committee may have additional questions for you,
and we will ask you to respond to those in writing. The record
will remain open for two weeks for additional comments from the
Members.
The witnesses are excused. Thank you all for coming. The
hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:57 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix 2

----------

Additional Material for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Proprietary User Agreement, UChicago Argonne, LLC, Operator of Argonne
National Laboratory

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


