- AVOIDING THE SPECTRUM CRUNCH: GROWING THE WIRELESS ECONOMY THROUGH INNOVATION

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AVOIDING THE SPECTRUM CRUNCH:
GROWING THE WIRELESS ECONOMY
THROUGH INNOVATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 18, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-77

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-057PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              PAUL D. TONKO, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Tennessee
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation

HON. BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona, Chair
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Tennessee                        VACANCY
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             VACANCY
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
RALPH M. HALL, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, April 18, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Benjamin Quayle, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    11
Written Statement............................................    12

Statement by Representative Donna F. Edwards, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    12
Written Statement............................................    14

Witnesses:

Dr. James Olthoff, Deputy Director, Physical Measurement
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    18

Mr. Richard Bennett, Senior Research Fellow, Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    27
Written Statement............................................    29

Mr. Christopher Guttman-Mccabe, Vice President, Regulatory
Affairs, CTIA-The Wireless Association
Oral Statement...............................................    47
Written Statement............................................    49

Ms. Mary Brown, Director, Technology and Spectrum Policy, Cisco
Systems, Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    57
Written Statement............................................    59

Dr. Rangam Subramanian, Chief Wireless and Technology Strategist,
Idaho National Laboratory
Oral Statement...............................................    70
Written Statement............................................    73

Discussion.......................................................    80

Appendix 1: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

James Olthoff, Deputy Director, Physical Measurement Laboratory,
National Institute of Standards and Technology.................    95

Richard Bennett, Senior Research Fellow, Information Technology
and Innovation Foundation......................................    98

Christopher Guttman-Mccabe, Vice President, Regulatory Affairs,
CTIA-The Wireless Association..................................   103

Mary Brown, Director, Technology and Spectrum Policy, Cisco
Systems, Inc...................................................   106

Rangam Subramanian, Chief Wireless and Technology Strategist,
Idaho National Laboratory......................................   110

Appendix 2: Additional Material for the Record

Carriers Warn of Crisis in Mobile Spectrum: Reprint from the New
York Times.....................................................   116

AVOIDING THE SPECTRUM CRUNCH:
GROWING THE WIRELESS ECONOMY THROUGH INNOVATION

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 18, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:10 p.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Benjamin
Quayle [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Quayle. The Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation will come to order. Good afternoon. Welcome to
today's hearing entitled, ``Avoiding the Spectrum Crunch:
Growing the Wireless Economy through Innovation.'' In front of
you are packets containing the written testimony, biographies,
and truth in testimony disclosures for today's witnesses.
I now recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement.
In today's hearing, we are going to be reviewing efforts to
ensure the innovative use of spectrum and the continued
expansion of the wireless economy. This Subcommittee is
uniquely positioned to address issues facing high-growth
industries, and today's hearing is a continuation of our series
focused on advancing U.S. innovation.
The U.S. wireless industry has been experiencing
exponential growth. There are entirely new jobs and sectors of
our economy, like the app market, that we never envisioned a
few years ago. Our wireless industry is the most competitive
and innovative in the world, in part because it has been able
to operate under flexible, market-driven policies unfettered
from excessive government intervention. These policies
encourage mobile companies to compete by providing innovative,
user-friendly services and offering consumers the best possible
experience. Thanks to a cycle of innovation and competition,
U.S. consumers win.
In recent years the number of active spectrum frequency
authorizations at both the Federal Communications Commission
and the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration, has dramatically increased. In fact, at both
agencies there are twice as many spectrum assignments now as
there were in 1980.
As spectrums become more crowded, it is necessary to ensure
that it is being used as efficiently as possible and that we
have the policies in place to encourage industry's continued
investment in growth. Maximizing the yield and availability
from this essential resource will continue to help create jobs
and encourage innovation.
The U.S. wireless economy has experienced tremendous
growth. The subscriber connections growing from 38.2 million in
2006, to 322.9 million in 2011. Growth in data traffic has been
even greater as modern devices such as smartphones and tablets
are much more data intensive. This massive data growth
exacerbates the strain on spectrum availability.
Advances in technology have always kept ahead of the demand
for spectrum, but now as demand for spectrum is growing more
rapidly, the technical advances needed may be pushing the
envelope of practicality, at least in the short term.
To ensure the future growth of this dynamic sector, it is
imperative that research and development efforts continue to
identify more effective ways to utilize spectrum. We also need
to ensure that government policies are not creating impediments
and that we are creating an environment where companies will
continue to invest in new technologies.
Our hearing today should highlight specific efforts by both
the Federal Government and industry to address the spectrum
challenges within our Subcommittee's jurisdiction and to enable
the continued growth of the wireless economy through
innovation.
We thank our witnesses for being here today, and we look
forward to your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Quayle follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommitte Chairman Dan Quayle

Good afternoon. I would like to welcome everyone to today's
hearing, which is being held to review efforts to ensure the innovative
use of spectrum and the continued expansion of the wireless economy.
This Subcommittee is uniquely positioned to address issues facing high-
growth industries, and today's hearing is a continuation of our series
focused on advancing U.S. innovation.
The U.S. wireless industry has been experiencing exponential
growth. There are entirely new jobs and sectors of our economy, like
the ``app'' market that we never envisioned a few years ago. Our
wireless industry is the most competitive and innovative in the world,
in part because it has been able to operate under flexible, market-
driven policies, unfettered from excessive government intervention.
These policies encourage mobile companies to compete by providing
innovative, user-friendly services and offering consumers the best
possible experience. Thanks to a cycle of innovation and competition,
U.S. consumers win.
In recent years the number of active spectrum frequency
authorizations at both the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and
the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA)
has dramatically increased. In fact, at both agencies, there are twice
as many spectrum assignments now as there were in 1980.
As spectrum has become more crowded, it is necessary to ensure that
it is being used as efficiently as possible, and that we have the
policies in place to encourage industry's continued investment and
growth. Maximizing the yield and availability from this essential
resource will continue to help create jobs and encourage innovation.
The U.S. wireless economy has experienced tremendous growth, with
subscriber connections growing from 38.2 million in 2006 to 322.9
million in 2011. Growth in data traffic has been even greater as modern
devices, such as smartphones and tablets, are much more data intensive.
This massive data growth exacerbates the strain on spectrum
availability.
Advances in technology have always kept ahead of the demand for
spectrum--but, now, as demand for spectrum is growing more rapidly, the
technical advances needed may be ``pushing the envelope'' of
practicality, at least in the short term.
To ensure the future growth of this dynamic sector, it is
imperative that research and development efforts continue to identify
more effective ways to utilize spectrum. We also need to ensure that
government policies are not creating impediments and that we are
creating an environment where companies will continue to invest in new
technologies.
Our hearing today should highlight specific efforts by both the
Federal Government and industry to address the spectrum challenges
within our Subcommittee's jurisdiction, and to enable the continued
growth of the wireless economy through innovation.
We thank our witnesses for being here today and we look forward to
your testimony.

Chairman Quayle. I now recognize the gentlelady from
Maryland, the Ranking Member, Ms. Edwards, for her opening
statement.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
calling this hearing on the ways that we can address the
impending spectrum crunch. I want to thank the witnesses in
advance for your testimony today.
The United States has long been a leader in information and
communications technologies, with the majority of the top firms
being American companies. However, in a sector that is all
about the next big innovation, we can't afford to rest on our
past accomplishments. Wireless broadband is expected to trigger
the next wave of innovation and holds enormous potential to
create high-quality jobs and economic growth.
For example, one estimate shows that providing an
additional 300 megahertz of spectrum to wireless broadband uses
will generate 300,000 new jobs and $230 billion in GDP within
five years. Advances in wireless technologies also hold the
promise to benefit the public. For example, the use of mobile
technologies for patient monitoring is expected to vastly
improve the quality of patient care and reduce health care
costs by as much as $6 billion by 2014.
Smartphones, tablets, and other mobile devices are already
part of our everyday lives. Consumers and businesses have
learned to expect access to information at anytime from
anywhere. This demand has resulted in the rapid growth of
wireless data flowing across our networks. In fact, the amount
of wireless traffic has increased by more than 100 percent in
the last year alone, and that demand is expected to rise by a
factor of 20 by 2015.
The only way to accommodate this growing demand is to
increase the amount of spectrum available for wireless
services. The incentive auctions authorized in the Middle Class
Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 will help to free up
some of this valuable spectrum.
However, if the United States wants to continue to lead the
wireless revolution, then we have to make more efficient use of
our spectrum. Advances in research and development are central
to the goal of freeing up spectrum for wireless broadband.
Spectrum is a finite resource, and in order to improve its use,
we need to develop innovative spectrum-sharing technologies
that allow multiple users to share the same slice of spectrum
without interference or degradation of services.
Imagine a mobile device that has the ability to scan across
a spectrum, identify frequencies that are currently available
or not in use, and send its communication without delay.
Spectrum could be fully and effectively utilized under this
type of dynamic system, but it is only possible through
advances in research, development, and testing.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about
the Nation's wireless test bed capabilities, our current
research and development needs, and what the Federal Government
is or can be doing to accelerate the efficient use of spectrum
and the development of innovative wireless technologies.
I am also interested in hearing more about NIST's plans for
the development of a nationwide interoperable Public Safety
Broadband Network. I am pleased to see that the role for NIST
that Ranking Member Johnson and I supported and advocated for
in the creation of an advanced wireless communication system
for our first responders in H.R. 3642 was included in the
Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act.
I look forward to working with NIST and to make sure that
this effort is successful and that our first responders have
the broadband network they need to keep us safe.
We need to ensure that the United States remains a leader
in information technology, and wireless broadband is key to
making this happen. The United States ranked ninth out of the
OECD countries in relation to wireless broadband access. We
need to do all that we can to ensure that the global wireless
revolution grows from American innovations and benefits
American companies and the American people.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this hearing, and I
yield the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Edwards follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Ranking Member Donna F. Edwards

Mr. Chairman, thank you for calling this hearing on ways to address
the impending spectrum crunch. And thank you to the witnesses for being
here today.
The U.S. has long been a leader in information and communication
technologies, with the majority of the top firms being American
companies. However, in a sector where it is all about the next big
innovation, we can't afford to rest on our past accomplishments.
Wireless broadband is expected to trigger the next wave of innovation
and holds enormous potential to create high-quality jobs and economic
growth. For example, one estimate shows that providing an additional
300 megahertz of spectrum to wireless broadband uses will generate
300,000 new jobs and $230 billion in GDP within five years.
Advances in wireless technologies also hold the promise to benefit
the public. For example, the use of mobile technologies for patient
monitoring is expected to vastly improve the quality of patient care
and reduce health care costs by as much as $6 billion by 2014.
Smartphones, tablets, and other mobile devices are already a part
of our everyday lives. Consumers and businesses have learned to expect
access to information at anytime from anywhere. This demand has
resulted in the rapid growth of wireless data flowing across our
networks. In fact, the amount of ``wireless traffic'' has increased by
more than 100 percent in the last year alone and that demand is
expected to rise by a factor of 20 by 2015. The only way to accommodate
this growing demand is to increase the amount of spectrum available for
wireless services.
The incentive auctions authorized in the Middle Class Tax Relief
and Job Creation Act of 2012 will help to free up some of this valuable
spectrum. However, if the U.S. wants to continue to lead the ``wireless
revolution,'' then we have to make more efficient use of our spectrum.
Advances in research and development are central to the goal of
freeing up spectrum for wireless broadband. Spectrum is a finite
resource and, in order to improve its use, we need to develop
innovative spectrum-sharing technologies that allow multiple users to
share the same slice of spectrum without interference or degradation of
services.
Imagine a mobile device that has the ability to scan across the
spectrum, identify frequencies that are currently available or not in
use, and send its communication without delay. Spectrum could be fully
and effectively utilized under this type of dynamic system, but it is
only possible through advances in research, development and testing.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about the
Nation's wireless testbed capabilities, our current research and
development needs, and what the Federal Government is, or can be, doing
to accelerate the efficient use of spectrum and the development of
innovative wireless technologies.
I am also interested in hearing more about NIST's plans for the
development of a nationwide, interoperable public safety broadband
network. I am pleased to see that the role for NIST that Ranking Member
Johnson and I supported and advocated for in the creation of an
advanced wireless communications system for our first responders in
H.R. 3642 was included in the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation
Act. I look forward to working with NIST to make sure that this effort
is successful and that our first responders have the broadband network
they need to keep us all safe.
We need to ensure that the U.S. remains a leader in information
technology, and wireless broadband is the key to making this happen.
The U.S. is ranked ninth out of the OECD countries in relation to
wireless broadband access. We need to do all that we can to ensure that
the global ``wireless revolution'' grows from American innovations and
benefits American companies.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman for calling this important hearing. I yield
back the balance of my time.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Ms. Edwards.
At this time, I would like to introduce our witnesses, and
then we will proceed to hear from each of them in order. Our
first witness is Dr. James Olthoff, Deputy Director of the
Physical Measurement Laboratory at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology. Dr. Olthoff has been with NIST for
over 20 years, and as deputy director he is responsible for the
oversight of all calibration services at NIST.
Next we will hear from Mr. Richard Bennett, who is a Senior
Research Fellow at the Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation. Mr. Bennett has extensive experience in network
engineering and is the inventor of four networking patents.
Our third witness is Mr. Christopher Guttman-McCabe, Vice
President of Regulatory Affairs at CTIA-The Wireless
Association. Mr. Guttman-McCabe's experience in the
telecommunication field comes from work in regulatory mandates,
licensing, compliance, and general policy matters.
Our fourth witness is Ms. Mary Brown, Director of
Technology and Spectrum Policy for Cisco Systems. Ms. Brown
handles Cisco's policies surrounding IP-based technologies,
wireless, and networking, and she has expertise in
telecommunications issues and Internet law and policy.
Our final witness is Dr. Rangam Subramanian. Did I get that
close? Chief Wireless and Technology Strategist at Idaho
National Laboratory. Dr. Subramanian also serves on the
National Information Technology Research and Development Senior
Steering Group on wireless spectrum sharing research and
development.
Thank you again to all of our witnesses for being here this
morning. As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is
limited to five minutes each. After all witnesses have spoken,
Members of the Committee will have five minutes each to ask
questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. James Olthoff, for
five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES OLTHOFF, DEPUTY DIRECTOR,

PHYSICAL MEASUREMENT LABORATORY,

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY

Dr. Olthoff. Thank you. Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member
Edwards, Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Dr. James
Olthoff. I am the Deputy Director of the Physical Measurement
Laboratory at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology. Thank you for the invitation to testify before you
today on what has come to be called the ``spectrum crunch,''
and what NIST is doing to advance innovation in wireless
communications.
Mr. Chairman, the Administration understands the critical
need to ensure that sufficient spectrum is available for
wireless services. In 2010, the President directed the
Department of Commerce, through NTIA and working with the FCC
and affected federal agencies, to make available for commercial
wireless use an additional 500 megahertz of federal and non-
federal spectrum at frequencies near current cell phones bands.
Let me briefly discuss some of the research activities
underway at NIST related to the spectrum crunch issue.
NIST recently launched a five-year program to provide
industry with the new, sufficiently precise measurement methods
and the channel measurement data it needs to lead
internationally in the development of innovative millimeter-
wave wireless technologies.
While the technical challenges to mobile communications at
millimeter-wave frequencies are great, the benefits of
utilizing this large bandwidth at millimeter-wave frequencies
cannot be ignored. This new program will support industry with
new tools for use in developing mobile millimeter-wave wireless
systems. NIST innovation and expertise applied to the
challenges of higher-speed wireless will offer new metrology so
that U.S. industry can realize effective utilization of the
entire millimeter-wave region.
NIST is familiar with the needs of current U.S.
telecommunications industry through its interactions with the
Cellular Telecommunication Industry Association Certification
Programs. Additionally, NIST is leveraging recent funding from
DARPA, with whom we are developing improved oscilloscope-based
techniques to characterize millimeter-wave receivers and also
investigating the use of reverberation chambers for the testing
of radiated power.
We are also leveraging our interactions with the IEEE on
standards for 60 gigahertz systems. This work will accelerate
the modeling, design, verification, standardization, and
interoperability of mobile millimeter-wave wireless systems of
the future, positioning the United States at the forefront of
the competitive telecommunications industry.
The ability to measure and also model components, circuits,
and entire systems at higher frequencies and bandwidths will
provide tools for more economical wireless system development
that can take advantage of this new spectrum.
In addition to more precise high-frequency measurements,
NIST is also looking at challenges related to radio frequency
measurements and the spectrum crunch, particularly
electromagnetic compatibility and interference issues. Work at
NIST develops and promotes electromagnetic measurements,
standards, and technology to support a broad range of technical
needs. NIST programs focus on accurate and reliable
measurements throughout the radio spectrum, in particular,
radio and microwave frequencies.
We carry out these programs in close coordination with our
colleagues in industry, academia, and other government
agencies, such as NTIA, the Departments of Defense, Energy, and
Homeland Security to ensure that we are responsive to their
most pressing measurement needs. One of our primary goals is to
extend new measurement tools and theories to higher operating
frequencies, wider signal bandwidth, and smaller length scales.
These are required for next-generation applications in
microelectronics, high-speed communications, computing, and
data storage.
The President has recognized the need for further
investments in this area. In the fiscal year 2013 budget
request for NIST, the President proposed a $10 million Advanced
Telecommunications Initiative that would accelerate innovation
in advanced telecommunications. This request would provide
funds for NIST modeling and measurement science that would
address key areas to enable significant innovation and
communications in both the commercial and public safety
sectors.
Finally, the recently-enacted Middle Class Tax Relief and
Job Creation Act of 2012 contains a provision very similar to
that envisioned by the President's National Wireless Initiative
that would provide NIST with up to $300 million to help develop
cutting-edge technology for public safety users.
The overriding objective of this anticipated funding is to
build a broadband system to allow first responders and other
public safety personnel anywhere in the Nation to send and
receive data, voice, and other communications to save lives,
prevent casualties, and avert acts of terror. Such improvements
depend upon advances in measurement science, modeling
standards, and testing.
The technological challenges that stand in the way are
significant. Public safety considerations impose demanding
specifications, including mission-critical voice services,
enhanced security requirements, unique applications, and
specialized testing needs.
In conclusion, NIST is leveraging its expertise in
measurement science and standards in a number of areas to help
improve the effectiveness of wireless communications in the
United States. NIST will continue to work with partners across
the Federal Government, academia, and industry to drive
technological innovations that will enable U.S. manufacturers
to maintain their leadership in wireless telecommunications.
Thank you. I would be happy to answer any questions you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Olthoff follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Dr. Olthoff.
I now recognize Mr. Richard Bennett to present his
testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. RICHARD BENNETT,

SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW,

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION FOUNDATION

Mr. Bennett. Good afternoon, Chairman Quayle, Ranking
Member Edwards, and Members. I am Richard Bennett, Senior
Research Fellow at the Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation and a former network engineer and inventor.
Spectrum policy is important right now because computing is
undergoing a dramatic, some would say revolutionary, shift from
fixed location systems to mobile devices and applications.
Smartphones outsold PCs last year for the first time, and that
is a trend that is not going to reverse anytime soon. And last
week Facebook bought Instagram for $1 billion, a little photo-
sharing service with only 13 employees, and this jaw-dropping
price, $76 million per employee, was justified in Facebook's
point of view because Instagram had already acquired 40 million
users in only 16 months of operation, roughly as many as
Netflix and Comcast have combined, or will be by the end of
next week; they are adding a million a day.
So the mobile revolution marks a new era in computing, and
it is powered by spectrum primarily, also microelectronics and
software. Another application category that we haven't heard
much about yet is, ``Mobile Augmented Reality,'' a category of
application that actually interchanges video streams from the
user to the Cloud in both directions to enhance the user's
experience as he moves around, he or she moved around in the
world. In this picture here, you are actually seeing images
projected from contact lenses that embedded electronics. This
is a technology that actually had been demonstrated, although
only for a one-pixel display right now, but, you know, more and
more of that is coming.
All of these applications require spectrum, the more the
better, and because they are truly mobile, there are limited
opportunities to offload their spectrum needs to short distance
Wi-Fi networks.
I am a little lost here. Spectrum assignments by regulators
around the world have produced this fragmented system of small
assignments for a large number of applications like you see in
this spectrum chart from NTIA. It reflects what--from the
modern perspective it is sort of like the government's attempt
to operate an app store. I mean, this is really what this looks
like to me, because every one of these tiny little allocations
is actually for a particular application. You try to think
about how that would work in the kind of app store at the scale
that Android and Apple run them today, it is completely--you
can't even imagine it.
But there is a technology that is embedded behind this
allocation system, and that is frequency division multiplexing,
and you know, we don't use that as--we don't rely on that so
much anymore. We have packet switching now and networks and
technologies that go beyond that.
So one of the tasks of regulators is to put Humpty Dumpty
back together again, to take this spectrum map and to realign
it so that we have a smaller number of allocations per larger
contiguous chunks that we can use for more diverse purposes by
running packet switching, you know, on top of them.
There are, of course, a number of technical tools to enable
us to make this transition and to get better use. As the
Ranking Member pointed out, dynamic spectrum access is one of
those tools, authorized shared access is a more, kind of a
third-way approach as we characterize it between fully dynamic
or fully unlicensed and fully licensed. It is kind of licensed
to a limited number of players who can cooperate.
But the holy grail ultimately that is going to resolve this
problem in the long run is something that we call simultaneous
shared access. Examples of that are CMA that is actually built
into all the smartphones of today, SDMA, which is Space-
Division Multiple Access and then multiuser. These exist in
nascent form. They are not fully developed in today's networks,
and we expect to see more research, making those technologies
more robust.
Many government applications are critical for first
responders, as has been pointed out. I am not going to go into
much detail on that. Our position on the Public Safety Network
is it actually would be best for everyone if for the most part
that application were recognized to be an application that
should run on commercial networks. That position has the
advantage of being disapproved of by both the commercial
network operators and public safety. So I feel reasonably
impartial in, you know, making that.
But the point is that focusing on technologies we now can
actually through the lever of government and how investment and
research is channeled can actually use the development of
technology as a way to resolve apparently intractable policy
disputes. The policy dispute behind FirstNet was, you know, who
gets access to that spectrum during times of crisis because
both the commercial and the public safety users, you know, want
it and have, you know, good arguments for it.
So to more or less conclude, one of the topics that is, I
think, going to be central and is certainly in the larger
public debate about this issue, there is already some
questioning about whether the spectrum crunch is real. Well, it
is both real and an illusion, and it is simply a matter of the
timeline. In 20 or 30 years there won't be a spectrum crunch
because we will be able to use spectrum so efficiently that
multiple streams of data will actually be able to move over the
same frequencies at the same time, but we are literally not
there yet. And the research agenda is going to help us to get
there.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bennett follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Bennett.
I now recognize Mr. Guttman-McCabe for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. CHRISTOPHER GUTTMAN-MCCABE,

VICE PRESIDENT, REGULATORY AFFAIRS,

CTIA-THE WIRELESS ASSOCIATION

Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman
Quayle, Ranking Member Edwards, and Members of the
Subcommittee. Thank you for including me on today's panel. I am
here on behalf of CTIA-The Wireless Association, which
represents the wireless carriers, equipment vendors, and
software developers that are driving America's leadership in
wireless broadband.
I am pleased to tell you that the United States leads the
world in the deployment of fourth-generation wireless
technologies. While the U.S. is home to less than five percent
of the world's population, we have almost 90 percent of the
world's LTE subscribers and over 50 percent of the world's
WiMAC subscribers. The U.S. wireless ecosystem is setting the
pace for innovation with ubiquitous high-speed networks,
cutting-edge devices launched here first, and epicenter of the
applications world.
Five years ago, for the most part these capabilities didn't
exist, yet today we are increasingly using wireless devices,
applications, and wireless networks to shop, pay bills, read
the news, stay in touch, reduce energy consumption, manage
fleets of trucks, control inventory, address health care
issues, and teach our children. Not surprisingly, mobile data
service demand is exploding. Wireless data traffic grew 123
percent from 2010 to 2011, on top of a doubling the year before
and the year before that. The pace of growth actually is
accelerating as the last six months of 2011 were 132 percent
greater than the last six months of 2010.
To stay ahead of this demand, CTI's members invest more
than $20 billion annually, including more than $25 billion each
of the past two years to extend and upgrade the capabilities of
wireless networks. In these difficult economic times, our
members actually are increasing their capital investments.
But even at these impressive levels, network investment
alone will not allow us to stay ahead of the exploding demand.
Conservative estimates project U.S. mobile data traffic will
grow by more than a factor of 10 over the next five years. If
vehicle traffic in your Congressional district was predicted to
grow by a factor of 10 over the next five years, you would want
to know that the transportation authorities had a plan and were
implementing it. The same should be true of spectrum.
For this reason, and to maintain the advantages that flow
from our world-leading position, CTI believes it is imperative
that our government embrace policies that will make additional
spectrum available on a predictable, near-term basis. CTI urges
Congress to ensure that the FCC and NTIA faithfully and
expeditiously implement the spectrum legislation enacted by
Congress just this past February.
While we believe that the incentive auction process will
bring a substantial amount of spectrum to market, that will
only be a down payment towards the 500 megahertz that the FCC
called for in its National Broadband Plan and that the
President embraced in his memorandum on unleashing the wireless
broadband revolution.
In order to progress towards that 500 megahertz target as
well as to keep pace with the hundreds of megahertz being freed
for commercial use in a number of European and Asian countries,
additional spectrum will need to be made available. CTI
recommends that the 1755 to 1780 megahertz band be reallocated
and paired with the available 2155 to 2180 megahertz band.
Making this spectrum available in the short term for commercial
use will not only benefit consumers, it will also add billions
to the U.S. Treasury.
CTI recognizes that reallocation is challenging, but
spectrum clearing represents a substantially better path than a
full default to spectrum sharing. While spectrum sharing may
have a place as a complement to fully cleared spectrum, dynamic
or opportunistically shared spectrum currently is not suitable
as a substitute for large blocks of cleared, licensed spectrum.
It is important to note that carriers and manufacturers are
aggressively using many tools to try and meet this increasing
demand, including the deployment of smaller cells and the use
of Wi-Fi offload. Notwithstanding these efforts, the release of
additional spectrum into the marketplace remains the single
most important thing that can be done to ensure the continued
vibrancy of the wireless ecosystem.
While spectrum policy obviously is paramount, there
certainly are other factors that can affect the industry's
continued success. In particular, CTI urges Congress to be
mindful that regulatory and tax policies have a substantial
impact on the ability and incentive for our members to invest
in new facilities and the development of new technologies.
In sum, while I believe the wireless future is bright,
there is a great deal to be done to ensure that we maximize
that opportunity and continue U.S. leadership in this vital
industry. CTI looks forward to working with you and your
colleagues on these important matters. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear at today's hearing, and I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guttman-McCabe follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Quayle. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Ms. Brown for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MS. MARY BROWN, DIRECTOR,

TECHNOLOGY AND SPECTRUM POLICY,

CISCO SYSTEMS, INC.

Ms. Brown. Good afternoon, Chairman Quayle and Ranking
Member Edwards and Committee Members. Thank you for the
opportunity to talk with you about the dynamic changes Cisco is
seeing in the wireless economy.
Today's topic is the spectrum crunch. ``Crunch'' is a term
intended to convey a shortage or scarcity of spectrum where
demand exceeds supply. More poetically, crunch is the sound of
your teeth gnashing when the Internet fails to launch from your
mobile device or you can't send that important email.
Cisco as a technology vendor sees evidence of the spectrum
crunch all around us, from our analysis of traffic data and
consumer usage to the technologies our service provider
customers are asking us to develop to the activity we observe
in the spectrum market.
Where is this crunch coming from? Simply put, from all of
us. More and more powerful smartphones, tablets, laptops, and
other mobile devices accessing rich data, such as video, are
sending more and more information wirelessly to the Internet.
Cisco's U.S. mobile data forecast projects that the volume of
data traffic on mobile service provider networks will increase
16 times from 2011 to 2016. That is just stunning.
So, confronted with the exponential growth in mobile
traffic, we believe that action must be taken. Additional
spectrum must be found. Congress made a solid down payment
earlier this year when it increased spectrum for broadband by
authorizing voluntary incentive auctions in H.R. 3630, but more
action is needed. Otherwise it could limit and constrain the
innovation, job creation, and the economic growth that we all
want to see.
So what is causing mobile data demand to rise so steeply?
First, consumers' use of mobile data is growing, and there is
no end in sight. In 2011, four percent of users were generating
more than one gigabyte of mobile data per month, the equivalent
of downloading about six TV shows, but by 2016, 74 percent of
users will be in the gigabyte club.
Second, the data transmitted with be video in many forms,
from YouTube, TV shows, video calls. By 2016, over two-thirds
of mobile traffic in the U.S. will be video.
Third, many more people will use multiple devices. In 2011,
eight percent of U.S. subscribers used multiple mobile devices,
and by 2016, it is 25 percent. In addition, mobile networks
will also support machine-to-machine connections. So what do I
mean by machine by machine? I mean, smart meters to conserve
energy, sensor networks to make our roads and communities
safer, and home health care monitoring to reduce health care
costs and improve outcomes. By 2016, there will be 726 million
mobile connections for just 348 million people in the U.S. That
illustrates the power and the impact of machine to machine.
Fourth, mobile devices themselves are changing and driving
new traffic demands on networks. For example, by 2013,
smartphones will become the most dominant device type
responsible for mobile data traffic. From 2011 to 2016, the
smartphone evolves from an email device to a fully capable
hand-held computer. In 2016, there will be many more things
consumers do with their smartphones than we do today.
Policymakers, I believe, understand these challenges and
are taking them seriously. In addition to congressional action,
the National Telecommunications and Information Administration
has just released its report on the 1755 to 1850 megahertz
band, evaluating the cost and challenges of relocating federal
users in that band. Clearing as much of this spectrum as
possible is important to meet consumer demand for mobile
broadband and keep the U.S. in the forefront of technology
leadership.
The technology sector, for its part, is also innovating
quickly to try to help our service provider customers meet
consumer demand and tell additional spectrum can be placed in
service. New chipset designs, base stations, and antenna
technology and network management tools are a few of the
offerings designed to bring more efficiency from available
spectrum. Carriers are aggressively deploying Wi-Fi and Femto
cells in an effort to offload mobile traffic to fixed networks
where possible. AT&T and Verizon Wireless are deploying LTE or
4G networks, which are more efficient than the prior 3G
technology, and carriers continue to deploy additional cell
sites to reuse existing spectrum.
But even with all these efforts, we cannot expect
technology alone to solve the spectrum crunch. So what are the
next steps? I encourage Congress to investigate specific
spectrum bands that can be repurposed for mobile broadband and
to realize that additional legislative action will be
necessary.
We look forward to working with you, the Administration,
and the commercial sector to identify spectrum opportunities,
including in bands now used by federal agencies. Thank you,
again, for the opportunity to appear today, and I look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Brown follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Quayle. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Dr. Subramanian for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. RANGAM SUBRAMANIAN,

CHIEF WIRELESS AND TECHNOLOGY STRATEGIST,

IDAHO NATIONAL LABORATORY

Dr. Subramanian. Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Edwards--
--
Chairman Quayle. Is your mic on?
Dr. Subramanian. Sorry. Let us try again. Chairman Quayle,
Ranking Member Edwards, and Members of the Subcommittee, I want
to thank you for the opportunity to testify before the House
Science, Space, and Technology Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation.
I realize the importance of this topic, ``Avoiding the
Spectrum Crunch: Growing the Wireless Economy through
Innovation.'' I understand there is so much at stake for the
future of the national economy and national security of this
great Nation based on how we can handle this spectrum crunch
today.
My name is Dr. Rangam Subramanian. I am the Chief Wireless
Strategist at the Idaho National Laboratory.
In the interest of time I will discuss the key points in my
written testimony.
As everyone said here, wireless spectrum is a limited
natural resource just like gasoline. There is exceptionally
high demand on this low supply, and there is little unallocated
spectrum available for exclusive allocations.
However, wireless communication is a critical common
technology track for all the key economic sectors in the
future. It influences national security, emergency and first
responder communications, smart grid energy infrastructure,
electric vehicles and transportation systems, advanced
manufacturing systems, medical devices, and so on.
So the demand for additional spectrum is not just
restricted to the United States. Globally the European Union,
Singapore, and China are all experiencing same issues, but they
are also aggressively seeking innovative solutions and have
established research testbeds that can be used by many people
and innovations and patenting is rapidly growing there, which
means is the United States behind in initiating this effort in
a larger way. Perhaps is this an opportunistic moment for
gaining global spectrum leadership and impacting the global
economy?
Now, there are three key challenges to this solving the
spectrum crisis and gaining global leadership in this country.
Number one, there is a need for a national approach. It is
important for the different national spectrum stakeholders to
appreciate the crunch is for real and sharing primarily or
repurposing in specific cases, especially with an emphasis on
securing national security.
It is extremely important, both on the government side and
on the industry side, and everyone has to work with the
national agencies to identify spectrum bands for initiating
research and experimentation in support of repurposing or
sharing. Collaboration is needed to build trustable, secure
spectrum sharing technologies--including technologies for high-
frequency operations.
The government has initiated some important efforts. The
NTIA and FCC have been trying to work, identify suitable banks
for spectrum repurposing or sharing and are also coordinating
with several agencies. The recent Middle Class Tax Relief and
Job Creation Act of 2012, H.R. 3630, has also identified
specific bands for sharing and repurposing.
There are critical national efforts. For example, by the
National Wireless Spectrum R&D Senior Group facilitating
collaboration across the government agencies to develop an
inventory of the research initiatives in the Nation, as well as
the testing facilities. However, there is a long way to go in
terms of realizing all the spectrum needed for the industry.
Challenge two, a strategy for accelerated spectrum-sharing
technology development. Technology development is pretty much
in infancy stage right now. There are research reports going
around, but that is not in a deployable form. Stakeholders both
from the government side and the industry need trust and
security in spectrum sharing. Secure technologies,
standardization, experimentation, and business models are
extremely critical if sharing is to become successful.
The wireless carriers, equipment manufacturers, devices,
and application vendors are not showing very keen interest in
developing sharing technologies because it is not showing
immediate return on investment.
Now, entrepreneurs have--the DOD labs have a limited
portfolio of research other national laboratories have a lack
of funding,. The academic institutions have a lot of research
going on but more on a theoretical basis. They do not have the
necessary funding; for example, the NSF EARS program is lacking
funding, and they do not have realistic national testbeds where
they can go and really test it.
So this is a widespread problem across different research
segments in developing the technologies right now.
Also, research on wireless cybersecurity is extremely
critical. We have done this mistake with wireless security, and
we cannot afford to do this going forward.
Now, secondly, standardization of the spectrum-sharing
technology is in its infancy. There are limited efforts going
on, one with the lack of technology, second with the
understanding of the technology that experimentation and data
sets are really important before you can standardize. So--that
is a major problem. There are efforts by the International
Telecommunications Union as well as by the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, IEEE. In fact, I was at a
standards meeting yesterday talking on this topic. So we need
this standardization effort to keep going on. It is extremely
critical.
And one of the major impediments to spectrum-sharing
technology innovation is the identification and creation of
realistic outdoor testbeds where experimentation can be done.
This is very clearly stated by the industry and academia during
the second national workshop conducted by the Wireless Spectrum
R&D Senior Group in January 2012, which I also happen to co-
chair.
There are multiple Department of Defense wireless testing
ranges that are primarily focused on operational testing and
classification requirements. There are also smaller, non-DOD
ranges, which are limited in their ability to enable real-world
experimentation. And there are others in academia that are
basically performing experimentation in unlicensed spectral
bands using Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and Zigby, which is not real
life. We are talking about so many different bands and so many
different kinds of applications which need to share the
spectrum.
Now, since I was specifically asked by the Subcommittee to
provide some details on the Idaho National Lab, I would like to
provide a quick brief. Idaho National Lab has an 890-mile
wireless range facility for supporting this national effort. In
April 2011, after visiting the INL wireless experimentation
facility, the National Wireless Spectrum R&D Senior Steering
Group commented that, ``The Idaho National Laboratory
represents a unique opportunity for unfettered development and
testing of advanced spectrum-using technologies in that
Nation.''
Chairman Quayle. Doctor, if you could wrap it up in 30
seconds, that would be great. Thank you.
Dr. Subramanian. I will. Thank you.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you.
Dr. Subramanian. I particularly note the existence of the
wireless range of--and a strong research team working on
related research, executing our nationally important
experimentation. INL is making research investments on
spectrum-related research, how a comprehensive national plan
will help laboratories like INL.
Now, the third challenge, funding and collaboration
support. The Nation is faced with the spectrum crunch, yet
there is currently insufficient funding to accelerate
development as well as experimentation. Without technologies to
validate spectrum sharing trust and security, it is not
possible to build the required government-industry support for
collaboration.
The recently enacted H.R. 3630 bill has recommended
specific spectral bands, but it also needs to be augmented with
sufficient funding or proper funding to conduct research and
experimentation.
In summary, the responsiveness of the Nation to the
spectrum crunch challenge will have a significant bearing on
economy growth and national security. The government has taken
some important steps, but there is a long way to go in terms of
a comprehensive national approach to spectrum sharing,
accelerated technology development, and testing.
Thank you for the opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Subramanian follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Quayle. Thank you very much, and I want to thank
all of our witnesses for their testimony.
Reminding Members that Committee rules limit questioning to
five minutes.
The Chair will at this point open the round of questioning,
and I recognize myself for five minutes.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe, in your testimony, you discuss how
regulatory policies have a substantial impact on the ability
for CTIA members to invest in new facilities and development of
new technologies. Can you give us a sense of how these policies
affect business decisions in the wireless industry, and also if
you could, could you share specific examples of regulatory
policies that could be particularly harmful to your industry's
research and development?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Certainly, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, the way we look at regulatory reform and
regulatory issues is to sort of take a step back and take a
25,000-foot approach and say, you know, regulatory bodies
should apply the physician's motto of first do no harm. There
has been a lot of focus in the last couple of years about
removing outdated or no-longer-applied regulations, and while
that is beneficial, if you overlay then, you know, a half dozen
new regulations and you take away regulations that weren't
being in any way implemented or enforced, they are still is a
net negative. And, you know, we represent carriers large and
small, and when you look at, particularly from some of our
smaller carriers' perspectives, when they have a dollar from a
cap X budget, and it has to go towards implementing an FCC
regulation or on the other hand it can go to moving towards LTE
or upgrading their networks, you know, they have a finite
budget. I mean, all of our members have finite budgets.
So when we look at regulations, we look at the cumulative
impact of all of them, and there was an interesting memorandum
that just came out from Cass Sunstein that actually said
exactly that, that said you can't, while a regulation on its
face may look logical, when you look at the cumulative impact
of all of the regulations, that new regulation may, in and of
itself, may not be logical.
And that is part of what we hope sort of Congress
provides--a little oversight to the regulatory bodies is--is it
is not just each individual regulation that at times may seem
logical. It is the cumulative impact when you have finite
capital resources. I think that is key.
And then from our perspective another one is just providing
the environment for research and development investments,
extending the R&D tax credit. It is a constant fight each year
to try to extend it. We used to be number one in the world. We
are 27th now.
Chairman Quayle. Okay.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. So that is an area where there could be
great help.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. Thank you very much, and Ms. Brown,
you state that without the market opportunity presented by
additional radio spectrum for broadband, our country's
technological leadership is going to really stagnate, and we
could have huge economic and social benefits not fully
realized.
How are the other regions dealing with this? How is the EEU
and the Asia Pacific RIM, making spectrum available?
Ms. Brown. Well, they had, in Europe, for example, they had
the advantage of not having allocated spectrum, large swap of
spectrum at 2.5 and have recently opened that more than 100
megahertz of spectrum, which given the timing by which they
have released it is going to become immediately available for
advanced mobile broadband technologies.
And similarly, there are similar sorts of actions in Asia
Pact. Now, the reason I made that statement in my testimony is
that because we have continually had radio spectrum in our
pipeline for advancing technologies here in the U.S. This has
become the locust. This country has become the place where
these technologies are developed. Even global companies that
are headquartered in Europe or elsewhere, they come here to do
the development because this has been the center of mobile
broadband and mobile technologies.
If we no longer have those market opportunities, our
carriers are not able to advance, there are now plenty of
spectrum opportunities in Europe and Asia Pact, and these
development centers could migrate over time outside of the
U.S., which would be a shame.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, and with Cisco's Virtual
Networking Index, the projects that the volume--projects that
the volume of traffic on mobile service provider networks will
increase 16 times----
Ms. Brown. Uh-huh.
Chairman Quayle [continuing]. From now until 2016. How have
Cisco and other technology companies increased deficiencies,
improved technologies, and addressed rising demand through
innovative research and development?
Ms. Brown. So let me speak to Cisco and the tech sector
generally. Through every layer and every corner of service
provider networks, there are new technologies being deployed to
try to address this right now. So from Cisco's perspective,
network management technologies that enable to carriers to
better balance their traffic loads so that they can spread the
traffic out among cell sites. Cisco has also been at the
forefront of Wi-Fi and Femto cell offloading that many of the
carriers are aggressively moving to try to get the traffic off
the mobile spectrum and onto unlicensed spectrum.
But you can go on and on. The chips that manufacturers are
producing, more efficient chip sets, the base station and
antenna people are producing ever-more-efficient equipment. LTE
itself is an example of a much more efficient technology than
the 3G technologies that preceded it.
So it is going on at every level in every tech company that
services service providers, mobile service providers.
Chairman Quayle. So we are making great progress, but as
Mr. Bennett stated in his testimony, we are just not there yet
in terms of being able to use overlapping spectrum for
different communications.
Ms. Brown. Right.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. Well, thank you very much, and
before I recognize Ms. Edwards, I am in the middle of two other
mark-ups just like many other people, so I apologize if I have
to leave, and I want to thank you all for your testimony.
And now I recognize Ms. Edwards for five minutes.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to the witnesses.
I just have one question because you all seem to indicate
that we need to repurpose or reallocate spectrum for commercial
use, and just as I was sitting here, I am a big Turner Classic
Movie fan, and one of my favorites is ``Pillow Talk'' with
Doris Day, the party line, Rock Hudson on the other end. And I
can recall probably showing my age, recall us having a party
line when I was growing up, and clearly we don't want to live
in an age where if we are forced to share, then it means that
it disrupts our ability to use and have broadband access when
we want it and when we need it. We have become too accustomed
to that kind of rapid access.
But what I am curious about and Dr. Subramanian notes in
your testimony that repurposing is only going to be a short-
term solution. It is not a long-term solution, and the risk of
having to share a spectrum in the long run still remains.
And so my question is what is it that both the government
and industry can do to ramp up technology and innovation in the
sector so that, you know, in the meantime while we are
reallocating and repurposing, which we have to do, that in the
long run we are not going to find ourselves not just in a
crunch anymore because we will have reallocated ad nauseam, but
without the ability to meet the needs that all of us will have
to expect rapid, up-to-the-moment information.
And so I wonder if you have some comments about that, about
what the Federal Government can do and what the private sector
needs to do to step up research and development around sharing
technologies.
Maybe start with Dr. Bennett. Mr. Bennett.
Mr. Bennett. Just Mr. Bennett.
Ms. Edwards. Okay. Well, we will make you a doctor later
on, but we will start with Mr. Bennett.
Mr. Bennett. Honorary degree. One of the first things that
the government can do is actually focus on repurposing or
redesigning government applications where government is
actually an operator of networks as often in the case with the
defense networks and several others. Those applications can be
reconfigured to use commercial networks and also commercial
networking technologies. In the Public Safety Network, we go
part of the way there that we embrace a commercial technology,
but we still retain the government's role as the network
operator.
One of the things that is important to realize about this
whole repurposing issue is that there is really no downside.
Say we could all be completely wrong and there is no spectrum
crunch, but there is no downside to acting on the assumption
that it is real and updating the applications and replacing the
equipment that was installed 20 years ago to run these
applications a certain way with more modern equipment that
takes more--better advantage of the technologies that we have
right now.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, and perhaps we can hear from Dr.
Subramanian.
Dr. Subramanian. First of all, I guess, in my personal
opinion, we have started a little bit late on this whole
spectrum crunch issue. Now, what this has led to is that there
is hardly any spectrum to allocate now. So this means we need
to devise methods for either repurposing or sharing before it
can be a lucrative industry. And there are efforts going on as
we talked about.
Now, on the industry front, carriers, the leading carriers
as you all might know, they are already moving to unlimited
data plans. If you are getting a new plan now, you've got to
pay $50 to get five gigabytes a month, and potentially because
of this crunch. This has been very clearly stated by one of the
CEOs of the carriers, that they don't have spectrum and are
going to keep on increasing the cost of this. So the cost of
the spectrum usage is going to increase. That is one thing.
The other thing they are also trying to do is using Wi-Fi
or using Femto cell-like technologies to offload the traffic to
landlines. So that is--it can go only so much, so far.
Now, if you look at the OEMs or the industry that is
supporting the carriers, they are trying to build new advance
or the next generation technology to optimize the efficiency of
spectrum usage. So these things have to go on in parallel, and
in my guestimate it takes at least about, you know, four to
five years before technologies can be formed, tested, and
deployed. So somehow the next four to five years the industry
has to keep on making the small increments.
Ms. Edwards. So could we hear from, maybe, Ms. Brown? I
mean, what is it that we could do that would, you know, sort of
spur Cisco and, you know, others in the industry to ramp up
their R&D capacity?
Ms. Brown. Well, I think from the perspective of a
manufacturer, there are already very strong profit motives in
the private sector to engage in R&D in this area. Our customers
are basically demanding that we create technologies that are
going to enable them to be more efficient from a spectrum
capacity. So I am not sure, from a private sector perspective,
there is a stronger motive than that.
But there are things and there are, I think, things that
the Federal Government can do, and there is a role for
government here. So things like basic research of the type we
heard from from NIST on cognitive radio, improving, as Richard
Bennett said, improving federal radio systems, which were
designed, many of them decades ago in a siloed environment
where there was no thought given to being good neighbors from a
spectrum perspective. And then as Dr. Subramanian said, test
beds are important. One of the things we have learned from the
very limited experience so far we have had in Wi-Fi sharing
with federal radar systems, it is very important to develop a
level of trust if you are going to have commercial and federal
sharing spectrum. Both sides need to know that the investments
they make and the services that they are offering are going to
continue to happen when sharing starts. And it is things like
test beds that enable you to build that level of trust.
So funding those sorts of activities as well is important.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you. My time has run out.
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. [Presiding] The Chair recognizes Mrs.
Biggert, the gentlelady from Illinois, for five years--five
minutes.
Mrs. Biggert. I don't know if I have got five years of
questions. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. I made a mistake yesterday and cut a
gentleman short and now I am overly generous.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, I have got an iPad, I mean, whatever you call it,
and a smartphone and an iPad and a Kindle. What is bothering me
is particularly with this one, the Blackberry, I see everybody
on the House Floor with them standing in the back, and I always
ask them if they are talking to each other because nobody is
talking anymore. I am really worried that the art of
conversation is going to be gone. But we will see what happens
with that.
And Dr. Subramanian, could you describe your work on NITRD?
I am particularly interested in the Steering Group's role in
coordinating and informing ongoing spectrum R&D activities
across the government as well as identification of the
shortcomings in the government's R&D portfolio with respect to
the technologies that allow more efficient use of the spectrum.
Dr. Subramanian. Yes. Thank you. Essentially, I think the
first and foremost is to understand where is the national R&D
money being spent, especially by the government agencies. And
then to understand are there any national testing facilities
that really exist that both the government and the industry can
really collaborate and work together.
So on the first thing, we went to all the agencies--there
are 16 agencies that are a part of the NITRD group--we went to
all of them and said, hey, you know, where is your money going,
including DARPA, NSF, DOD, DHS, all those, and where is your
R&D portfolio going on, and they came up with a list of
portfolio and a list of research that is happening. We did the
same thing for testbeds, what are the testbed values, what are
the features.
Then we coordinated two national working group meetings,
one in Boulder last year in June and then one in Berkeley in
January 2012. The first meeting we discussed the R&D areas that
the government has been working on. We asked Industry, what are
you working on? Is this all useful? And are there gaps that you
want to do?
And then apparently it so happens that, you know, as I kind
of alluded to in the testimony, that the industry is very
focused on the near-term return on investments, especially on
the spectrum sharing perspective.
So there are efforts going on on the government side, but
there is a significant amount of research that needs to happen
on sensing, policy, data processing, spectrum databases, and
stuff--there is an extensive amount of research that needs to
happen. And as Ms. Brown also mentioned, everyone said we
needed a large-scale experimentation facility.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay. Thank you. Then what--and this is
whoever wants to answer this question or all, what is the best
strategy to ensure U.S. leadership in spectrum technology
development and innovation?
Mr. Bennett.
Mr. Bennett. Yeah. I think the best way we can win that
race is to beat the other countries in investing and research,
and basic research is one of--is the thing that really
ultimately drives all of this, and the United States used to
have a wonderful position in basic research because we had Bell
Labs, an institution that wasn't, had no parallel anywhere else
in the world, and that is--Bell Labs, I mean, still exists in
name, but it is not what it was.
And that gap in basic research funding really can only be
filled by the government. The commercial sector is doing a
great job on the applied research side, although they could use
some help there, too, but fundamentally it is from the basic
research we got to the standards committees, and from the
standards committees we go to the commercial products. And so
it really all begins with the research.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you. Mr. Guttman-McCabe.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Congressman, if I may, I would also
add, you know, I had the privilege of going to Dallas last week
and met with six of our members, all who have R&D facilities in
the Dallas area, and if we went back and looked, our members
have about 87 labs in the United States doing R&D. So Ms. Brown
talked about it. I mean, there is a lot of incentive on the
private sector side to do this, but we do need to make sure
that we make bringing spectrum to market a priority. If we do
that, this will continue to be the hub for those R&D
facilities. Almost every one of those companies is a multi-
national company that has chosen to locate their R&D facilities
here to bring those jobs, to bring those revenues here.
But it is sort of chicken and egg. Part of it is because we
have led the spectrum position for quite some time, and we have
managed to get the networks out there first, but there does
need to be--we understand that sharing is a significant part of
the equation, but there are other very developed countries like
Germany and the UK and Italy and France, Japan that have
standing armies and similar sort of environments that we do
that are bringing hundreds and hundreds of megahertz of
spectrum to market.
So our argument is we can't fall behind them or we will
lose a lot, including the R&D test bed facilities that we have.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you. Dr. Subramanian.
Dr. Subramanian. There are two things I want to point out.
If you look at the first generation and second generation of
the wireless technology patents, the United States had more
than 80 percent, which means we were really controlling the
global supply chain.
But when you come to LTE, the United States has less than
40 percent of the patents and then there are an increasing
number of patents in China as well as in Europe. So that is
caution number one. There is a lot to be done.
The second thing is we asked the same question to the
industry in Berkeley, hey, you know, what do you want to do,
how can we help. The first thing they said was, identify the
spectrum bands. This needs to happen. Second thing is bring
those government agencies who are deploying the applications
currently to the table so that we can collaborate and test in a
common place.
So this needs to happen immediately, and I think the H.R.
bill that has recently been released will definitely help in
the right direction to go there.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay. Thank you, and I know this Committee
always stresses basic science and research and continues to do
that. I wish all of our Members would get the joke. Thank you.
Yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady yields back.
I recognize Ms. Bonamici from the State of Oregon for five
minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you, all of you, for your fascinating and important testimony,
and I think I want to perhaps emphasize the importance.
I know, Ms. Brown, in your testimony you mention that Cisco
did not even consider tablets to be a device category a couple
of years ago, and I think that is pretty staggering now as we
look around us, and it just shows how dynamic and ever changing
the sector is.
So, and I understand that the future, even the near future,
is pretty hard to predict, but a couple of you have mentioned
in your testimony some emerging technologies that are on the
horizon, and I know, Ms. Brown, you mentioned the machine
communications. I had the pleasure of seeing a demonstration
and hearing a discussion out at a fairly large Intel facility
in my district, and some of the work that they are doing with
medical technology is very, very promising, but really raises,
I think, the issue of the need for more spectrum.
So can you talk a little bit more about, I know you
mentioned that one example, other technologies and what that is
going to mean for consumer demand just so we can figure out how
much teeth gnashing there is going to be.
Ms. Brown. Yeah. So our study that we release every year,
the Visual Networking Index, is basically our attempt to look
five years ahead and figure out what is going to happen on
service provider networks from a traffic standpoint, what types
of traffic are going to flow, what are the demands, and so on.
And the purpose of that is so that Cisco can understand what we
need to build, because it takes time to construct everything,
and meet that demand three, four, five years out.
So as we get beyond the five-year time frame it becomes a
little murky in terms of trying to project what is going to
happen, but it is very clear from the evidence that we see
today, which is from existing measurements of traffic of
carrier networks today from analyst reports and from the kinds
of things that are sort of on the cusp in the standards
organizations and what is happening, that we are about to see a
transformation of the mobile Internet from people to people to
machine to machine, as well as people to machine and people to
people.
So it is a huge transformation and a pivot point for the
industry, and it is going to start happening over the next five
years. So it is putting incredible demands on spectrum.
Ms. Bonamici. Anybody else care to opine about looking into
the future; what we can expect?
Dr. Subramanian. Yeah. You know, if I may add to what you
have been telling and Ms. Brown has been telling, let us take
every economic sector, every key economic sector which is going
to define the economic growth of this Nation. Let us talk about
the energy sector, advanced manufacturing systems and all
systems. The whole energy grid for a significant time is going
to be dependent on wireless.
Ms. Bonamici. Right.
Dr. Subramanian. Now, look at advanced transportation
systems, electric charging, entertainment, safety--everything
is going to become wireless. So now you can talk about advanced
manufacturing systems and the Wall Street and the financial
industry is going to be hit.
Now, you are talking about every economic sector, then you
see the whole dependence of the economy, a significant
technology dependence I should say, on wireless technologies.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, and I wanted to follow
up on the last set of questions and ask about--I know, Dr.
Subramanian, that you mentioned the need, the demand is
increasing not just here but in the EU and Singapore, China,
and that they are aggressively seeking some innovative
solutions. And I wonder if you could describe how our efforts
compare, as we are attempting to address this crunch, and can
we learn any lessons? I know that Mr. Bennett, you talked about
the investment in R&D, but how do we compare, and can we learn
anything from the, you said innovative solutions that are being
pursued in other areas?
Dr. Subramanian. Okay. Now, let us talk about the European
Union. Now, the European Union has created a large-scale test
bed where all the countries and all the vendors can have a
common place. Now, you think about so many of these vendors
supporting the ecosystem, having a common place where they are
able to work and develop new technologies.
There are also efforts going on to measure the spectrum at
different places and create a common database which can be used
to deploy certain kind of architectures for spectrum sharing.
Similar efforts are on in Singapore. Singapore is trying to
aggregate all the needs of the neighboring countries as well as
its own. Now, what happens is they get the patents. So the more
and more patents go out to the world, American economy starts
paying a premium on these technologies, and you don't want that
to happen. So that is the critical issue we are in right now.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. I am going to yield back my time.
Thank you.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. Thank you for yielding back.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Hultgren from Illinois for five
minutes.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all. I
apologize. I have a busy afternoon. I have several different
committees meeting and then other things, so I apologize I
haven't been able to be a part of all this discussion but
definitely appreciate you being here. This is a very important
topic that we need to be talking about.
I just have a couple of questions.
First of all, I would ask if any of you have some thoughts
on this. I know in Dr. Olthoff's testimony you described some
of the work that NIST is conducting to improve emergency
responder communications such as wireless systems, metrology
program to measure distortions in difficult radio environments.
This technology certainly will be very beneficial to public
safety community.
I am curious as to whether you think this research would
also be helpful in other commercial applications of wireless
communication, and I just wondered if any of you have any
thoughts about how this research could be used to help
commercial communications.
Mr. Bennett. If I could, there is a direct tie between any
sort of test bed that we use to verify the validity or the
robustness of an emergency communications system like that
actually produces immediate benefits for the consumer, because
we no longer really have--these technologies are no longer
stove-piped the way they used to be.
In one of the comments that was made in connection with the
White House's inquiry into the Public Safety Network, one of
the public, one of the police chiefs I believe it was, made the
comment that the average 16-year-old in the United States has
better communications capability than the average policeman
does. Well, there is a reason for that. The 16-year-old is
using a system that was--that is the product of hundreds of
billions of dollars of investment in basic research and R&D and
chip development, as well as testing, whereas the average
policeman today is using a system that was custom built for a
relatively small market, you know, some time ago when the
technology was just not as well developed as it is.
So there is a great benefit to standardization, which is
why, you know, the standards bodies that developed, you know,
the Wi-Fi standards and the 4G and LTE standards, that is where
all the research comes together. So people all over the world
are doing research. Everyone wants to be the next Qualcomm that
has the patents on CDMA that have, you know, proved to be so
valuable because they are universally deployed, and the test
beds are part of the process to sort through the competing
proposals and decide what the standard is going to be. I mean,
we can't, we are not really in a position in the United States
in commercial or government sector or anywhere else to really
make our own decisions about technology.
Now, we pretty much have to go with the standards, because
the arguments are so compelling.
Dr. Olthoff. The requirements for the Public Safety Network
are so demanding, the ability to operate under the most severe
environmental conditions, under conditions where the data load
will be intense under really serious circumstances, the ability
to be ultra-secure, the ability for literally thousands and
tens of thousands of disparate organizations to utilize the
same network, all of those are pushing us towards newer
technologies and newer solutions, and all of those will
inevitably lead to solutions perhaps unforeseen at this time
that will be useful to the commercial sector.
Mr. Hultgren. Mr. Bennett, if I can ask a quick question
and get your thoughts with the expected massive increase in
internet data transmission in the near future and also
anticipated reliance on wireless technology, is it possible
that broadband spectrum availability will constrain other
computing technologies such as cloud computing, and what
potential solutions are there to this problem?
Mr. Bennett. Well, we need to solve the spectrum crunch,
you know, once and for all, and I think the way that we do that
is by--and I alluded to this in my oral testimony. It is also
in my written statement. Development of technologies like
spatial division, multiple access, and multiuser MIMO that
allow multiple people multiple data strains to actually occupy
the same frequency at the same time, and that pretty well, when
those are fully developed, you know, there is no more spectrum
crunch.
But it certainly is the case that the--by constraining the
bandwidth that we have available for emerging applications like
augmented mobile reality, which is directly related to the
cloud, then the cloud can't really develop until the users of
augmented mobile reality can exchange video streams with the
cloud processing systems, and so, yeah, it is a crucial
building block. I mean, application developers would use
whatever spectrum is available, whatever bandwidth is available
to them, they will use it. And if it is only enough for narrow
band, fairly unimaginative applications, then that is what we
will have.
Mr. Hultgren. My time is up, but real quickly, just
following up, Mr. Bennett, when do you think some of that might
happen, some of that next advancement of technology? Any guess?
I mean, is that in the next few years, is that the next
decades?
Mr. Bennett. I think we are going to start to see really
dramatic changes probably within the next 10 years. It could be
sooner than that. Network affects, it is really always
difficult to take a revolutionary new technology and introduce
it into the marketplace because there is so much momentum
around the existing systems, but I would say as soon as five
years and as--at worst case probably 20 to 30.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you all very much. I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes Ms. Edwards for whatever time she
wants to consume.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. He promised me five
years, so you all will be here for awhile.
Just one question here, and it goes to a reference in Dr.
Subramanian's testimony where he mentioned that the industry's
focus on supporting the deployment of 4G technology and isn't
ready to invest in spectrum sharing research and development,
and I am curious as to what can be done to encourage more
active involvement by industry in this area.
And it goes to another point that was made. I think Mr.
Guttman, in your testimony, where you talked about focusing on
repurposing and reallocation as opposed to other newer
technologies around spectrum sharing, and I am just trying to
get a handle on this question of what it means for the
consumer, because if we reallocate and use as much spectrum as
there is available and it is a finite resource, then at some
point or other the consumer is like paying through the nose for
data.
And that may not happen right now, but it is increasingly,
and so I am trying to figure out what the incentive is for the
industry to make investments in this existing technology,
because it isn't just about the consumer demand, because I
could imagine an environment where when none of the big
carriers moves to invest, where you would just say, well, you
know, consumer demand, they pay more for what is available.
What is then the incentive for the industry?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Sure.
Ms. Edwards. And so, Mr. Guttman, can you----
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Yeah.
Ms. Edwards [continuing]. Help me with that?
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Yeah. I think the clearest way to
address this is almost to bifurcate the effort, to look at what
can be done in the short term to address this conflict between
supply and demand, and I think you would only need to look at
the back row behind me. I am not sure they are still back
there, but all those young folks when they first came in, I
came in front of--right behind many of them through security.
Every single one of them had at least one device.
And so what we are looking at, and I think Ms. Brown
referenced this is what is in the pipeline in terms of spectrum
resources, and there really isn't anything, and we are unique
in the develop world in that sense. So we have got to focus on
getting something in the pipeline now that is usable now.
And so when I talk about sort of real-time sharing or
opportunistic use, I think everyone agrees that that is the
long-term solution except for every panel I have been on in
front of Congress, at the President's PCAs, everyone has said
there is not a solution that is available or scalable yet.
And so how do we get to that, how do we bridge that
timeframe between now and Mr. Bennett's five, 10, 30 years, and
from our perspective it is let us focus again in the short
term, having our government, you know, officials focus on
repurposing the spectrum that is available. We looked at the
broadcasters for every 100 megahertz that they use, 190 are not
being used. So how do we drive efficiencies from that? How do
we drive efficiencies from some of the government uses? There
are microwave uses in bands that just do not need to be there.
So how can we drive out some of those efficiencies, bring
it to market. At the same time you heard Ms. Brown say that
they have every incentive to move to solutions that drive
efficiency. When we were in Dallas last week, one of our
largest manufacturers who is one of the largest in the world,
said every single wireless solution that they have employed
around the world was developed in the United States.
So I hope that the takeaway from here is not that the
United States is not doing its part. That is why we are seeing
multinational companies move their R&D facilities here into the
United States. But there does need to be some focus on sort of
some of the longer-term solutions. My point is we can't say
that that is the gold standard now when it currently doesn't
exist. It is a wonderful, absolutely necessary aspiration to
get to it, and it will solve a tremendous amount of the
problems, but once it is available, and there are people
spending great deals of money on that.
Ms. Edwards. So, thank you, and because my time is running
out, so I just want to be clear. From your industry perspective
reallocate, repurpose for the short term, invest in the R&D and
the technology and the development for the long term and so,
Dr.--Mr. Bennett, Dr. Olthoff, are we making enough of an
investment in basic research from the Federal Government to
support the long-term activities that have to take place in
R&D?
Mr. Bennett. Probably not.
Ms. Edwards. Just say it for the microphone. It is okay.
Dr. Olthoff. Certainly NIST has sufficient resources to be
addressing the problems that we are working on right now, and
the proposed initiative in the President's '13, budget will go
a long way towards helping us address some of the new
measurement needs that are being--all these new technologies we
will be needing.
Ms. Edwards. Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady yields back.
Mr. Lipinski, the gentleman from Illinois, for five
minutes.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. A quick
question. The question that people I go home, people will want
to know the answer to, is there going to be a point, maybe you
feel like it is happening now, but is there going to be a point
where the spectrum crunch causes a noticeable drop off in
service? That is what--I talk about this at home, and people
just want to know, okay, so what is it going to do to me? What
am I going to--what impact am I going to feel?
So I just wanted to hear what any of you want to say about
that. So, okay, let us start on the right side and go across.
Dr. Subramanian. Yeah. I mentioned this some time back
here. If you look at the major carriers, they have already
removed the unlimited data plans. So at minimum now you have to
pay $50. I used to pay for my Blackberry $29.99 for unlimited
data plan from Verizon, and now if anyone wants to get a new
data plan, you just get 5 gigabytes for $50, and this is going
to be increasing more and more.
Now, added to this, there is going to be quality of service
issues, there is going to be dropped call issues, and things
are going to go slow, and if this continues in 4 or five years,
even to look at Facebook is going to be very difficult.
Mr. Lipinski. And that first part, is that a spectrum
issue, or is that--well, if I had one of these companies, I
could raise my prices, I would raise my prices. Is it that, or
is it the spectrum issue?
Dr. Subramanian. One of the major carriers has said it is a
spectrum issue, and the government needs to act.
Ms. Brown. Yes. It is a spectrum issue. All of the major
carriers have discussed this in various respects, and the thing
to understand about it is it is going to hit, the impact to
consumers is going to hit, geographically it is going to be
different and by carrier it is going to be different, depending
on how much spectrum they have in the cupboard that they can
bring out to address it.
So the major metropolitan areas, New York City, even San
Francisco when I go back to Cisco's corporate headquarters in
San Jose, when you are driving down the 101 to San Jose, it is
very hard to get a connection that actually doesn't drop or
have some issue with trying to get connectivity.
So we are already starting, sort of the early hints of it
are here. The Federal Communications Commission said they think
that we are going to start seeing that more in a broad way next
year if additional spectrum isn't found.
Mr. Lipinski. So is this something that is going to happen
sort of slowly and just gets more and more aggravating and so--
and that is something that is going to, unfortunately----
Ms. Brown. Yeah.
Mr. Lipinski [continuing]. A lot of times up here on
Capitol Hill we don't do anything until there is a crisis or a
big sharp drop off somehow but----
Ms. Brown. Yes.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Congressman, we coined the term
``looming spectrum crisis,'' in part to get the attention of
you as leaders because----
Mr. Lipinski. Because you know that is the only way.
Mr. Guttman-McCabe. Exactly. I didn't say that, but that
was--we tried to find a way to identify in a very succinct,
very easy to understand way, and I think, again, I have spent
an inordinate amount of time defending whether, in fact, there
is a looming spectrum crunch or crisis, and I keep saying, you
know, if this is a conspiracy, it is a global conspiracy
because every country is addressing this issue, and when we
talk about the area where we are falling behind, that is one
area where we are falling behind. You look at the countries
that I listed earlier, the closest one has a third of our
population, you know, Japan. I mean, you look at Germany, the
UK, Italy, France, South Korea. They have all identified
hundreds and hundreds of megahertz. Some of them have brought
it to market, and they have done it because they don't want to
see that impact, they don't want to see carriers taking steps
to try to drive down usage of their product, and they do want
to see this explosion in verticals, whether it is M-Health or
smart education or intelligent transportation.
I mean, we are seeing sort of the movement of wireless into
so many sectors, and it is fantastic, and yet at the same time,
it could be concerning if we don't begin to address both short
and long-term this concern about the lack of spectrum in the
pipeline.
Mr. Bennett. The spectrum crunch hit San Francisco in 2007,
when the iPhone took off and every hipster in town had to have
one, and San Francisco has its unique policy where they really
don't like to issue zoning permits for new towers, and so
without spectrum, you know, it is, yeah, there is two
solutions. Right. There is either more spectrum or more towers.
And if you can't get the towers and you don't have the
spectrum, then what happens is, you know, the hipsters can't
have their iPhones. I mean, now that they----
Mr. Lipinski. Now you have hit the key here.
Mr. Bennett. But now they have got Sprint so maybe, you
know, maybe with Sprint and Verizon having the iPhone, you
know, the people of San Francisco, some of them are hipsters
but not all, will, you know, will be able to enjoy that.
Dr. Subramanian. You know, personally, I don't think I
would be very upset if I could not see the Facebook on my
smartphone--my 11-year-old daughter might be--but I think the
key point is this Nation has progressed. The economy has grown
through innovation in various sectors and there is a
fundamental dependency of different sectors of the economy. For
example, the Smart Grid, the advanced transportation systems,
the medical systems, advanced manufacturing systems. They are
all extremely different, dependent on wireless technologies,
which means that job creation capability of this Nation is
dependent on what is the spectrum usage and how effectively we
can use it. So that is the fundamental problem.
Mr. Lipinski. Well, I am glad you brought it back to that
because that--when we get down to it, we are talking about the
convenience, and good, you know, devices are important, but the
bottom line, the final bottom line is this is about, you know,
economic growth.
So thank you very much, and I yield back.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back.
I have just a brief something I would like to put in the
record. The spectrum policy has been discussed at length this
Congress, and there has been a dramatic increase in demand on
spectrum in recent years, and to meet this demand there are
those who argue the need for the new technologies and more
efficient use of spectrum.
We also hear the argument from others that unleashing new
spectrum through spectrum auctions is the solution to so-
called, ``spectrum crunch.''
An article appeared in the New York Times today and which
highlighted these various opinions and detailed the issues
surrounding spectrum use and the wireless economy.
I would like to ask unanimous consent that this article be
put in, entered into the record, and without objection, it is
so ordered.
[The information may be found in Appendix 2.]
Chairman Hall. And I will say now to you, nobody else here,
don't judge our interest and our appreciation of your
appearance here today by empty chairs, because all these people
have at least three places they ought to be right now, and we
are thankful that they came and gave us as much time as they
could, but we know you took time to prepare yourselves, and it
takes time to give this testimony, and we are very grateful to
you because you are helping us solve something that is almost
insolvable.
I thank you for your valuable testimony and thank the
Members for their questions, and the Members of the Committee
might have some additional questions for you. We will ask you
all to respond to those if you will, and the record will remain
open for two weeks for additional comments and statements from
Members.
The witnesses are excused. Thank all of you for coming.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:32 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses from Dr. James Olthoff

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Response from Ms. Mary L. Brown

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix 2

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Carriers Warn of Crisis in Mobile Spectrum: Reprint from the New York
Times

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


