- THE NEXT IT REVOLUTION? CLOUD COMPUTING OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE NEXT IT REVOLUTION?:
CLOUD COMPUTING OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-36

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
68-317PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
Tennessee                        FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation

HON. BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona, Chair
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                VACANCY
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
Tennessee                        BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota             EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
RALPH M. HALL, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Hearing Date

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Benjamin Quayle, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     7
Written Statement............................................     8

Statement by Representative Ben R. Lujan, Subcommittee on
Technology and Innovation, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Witnesses:

Mr. Michael Capellas, Chairman and CEO, Virtual Computing
Environment Company; Co-Chairman, Commission on the Leadership
Opportunity in U.S. Development of the Cloud ``CLOUD\2\,''
Oral Statement...............................................    11
Written Statement............................................    13

Dr. Dan Reed, Corporate Vice President, Technology Policy Group,
Microsoft Corporation; Vice Chairman, ``CLOUD\2\''
Oral Statement...............................................    19
Written Statement............................................    20

Mr. Nick Combs, Federal Chief Technology Officer, EMC Corporation
Oral Statement...............................................    27
Written Statement............................................    30

Dr. David McClure, Associate Administrator, Office of Citizen
Services and Innovative Technologies, General Services
Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    41
Written Statement............................................    42

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Michael Capellas, Chairman and CEO, Virtual Computing
Environment Company; Co-Chairman, Commission on the Leadership
Opportunity in U.S. Development of the Cloud ``CLOUD\2\,''.....    62

Dr. Dan Reed, Corporate Vice President, Technology Policy Group,
Microsoft Corporation; Vice Chairman, ``CLOUD\2\''.............    64

Mr. Nick Combs, Federal Chief Technology Officer, EMC Corporation    67

Dr. David McClure, Associate Administrator, Office of Citizen
Services and Innovative Technologies, General Services
Administration.................................................    69

Appendix II: Additional Materials Submitted for the Record

Representative Ben R. Lujan, Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    74

THE NEXT IT REVOLUTION?
CLOUD COMPUTING OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ben Quayle
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

The Next IT Revolution:

Cloud Computing Opportunities and Challenges

wednesday, september 21, 2011
10:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

I. Purpose

On Wednesday, September 21, 2011, the Subcommittee on Technology
and Innovation will convene a hearing to examine the potential
opportunities and challenges associated with cloud computing, and to
assess the appropriate role of the Federal Government in the cloud
computing enterprise. The hearing will focus on: innovation and
efficiency opportunities associated with cloud computing; challenges
restraining the widespread adoption of cloud computing; and federal
cloud computing adoption initiatives.

II. Witnesses

Mr. Michael Capellas, Chairman and CEO, Virtual Computing
Environment Company; Co-Chairman, Commission on the Leadership
Opportunity in U.S. Development of the Cloud ``CLOUD\2\,'' a commission
launched by TechAmerica Foundation to provide federal policy
recommendations for cloud computing.

Dr. Dan Reed, Corporate Vice President, Technology Policy
Group, Microsoft Corporation; Vice Chairman, ``CLOUD\2\''

Mr. Nick Combs, Federal Chief Technology Officer, EMC
Corporation

Dr. David McClure, Associate Administrator, Office of
Citizen Services and Innovative Technologies, General Services
Administration

III. Brief Overview

Cloud computing has significant implications for the way
businesses, scientists, and governments access and use information
technology (IT). It enables users to remotely access scalable, high-
powered computing services via broadband networks from a range of
devices, all on-demand. Cloud computing has the potential to provide
users with increased computing capability, greater efficiency, and
lower energy and infrastructure costs.
Cloud computing is not new. While many people may not be familiar
with the term, ``cloud computing,'' anyone who uses a web-based email
account, such as Gmail or Hotmail, or that uses file-sharing social
networking sites, such as Facebook, is already a user of cloud
computing services. The data and applications on these sites are hosted
on remote servers owned and operated by the service provider, rather
than on an individual's hard drive.
Cloud computing promises to provide new ways of managing
information for the public and private sector. Some of cloud
computing's opportunities include cost savings on IT infrastructure and
maintenance, increased access to high-powered computing applications
for both business and academic researchers, and greater data and file
accessibility for consumers.
However, there are also many challenges associated with cloud
computing. Cloud consumers need assurances that their data will be
secure in the cloud. Without confidence that security and privacy
concerns are addressed, users may be hesitant to adopt cloud services.
Users also want assurances that they will have ubiquitous access to
cloud services. Therefore, network resiliency and broadband
accessibility are crucial factors in determining cloud adoption. Users
want the ability to move their data and applications from one service
provider to another, so portability and interoperable standards within
the cloud are key issues. Additional concerns of cloud users and
service providers include liability and regulations governing cloud
usage.
Witnesses have been asked to provide their insights on the
opportunities that cloud computing offers to users and service
providers, the primary challenges facing cloud computing users and
service providers including security concerns, federal government
initiatives to adopt cloud computing services, and the appropriate role
of the federal government in the cloud computing enterprise, including
in the development of standards.

IV. NIST Definition of Cloud Computing

The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has
worked with various cloud stakeholders to develop a definition for
cloud computing: ``a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-
demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing
resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and
services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal
management effort or service provider interaction.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S. Department
of Commerce, Special Publication 800-145: NIST Definition of Cloud
Computing (DRAFT) 2 (2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To encompass all aspects of cloud computing, NIST identifies five
essential characteristics, three service models, and four deployment
models of cloud computing.

Essential characteristics: \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Ibid; Computer and Communications Industry Association,Public
Policy for the Cloud: How Policymakers Can Enable Cloud Computing
(2011), available online at http://www.ccianet.org

On-demand self-service. Users can access cloud computing
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
services at any time.

Broad network access. Services are available over the
Internet using any web-connected device.

Resource pooling. Providers can serve multiple users
simultaneously.

Rapid elasticity. Cloud computing services can be scaled
to meet user need.

Measured service. Cloud users only pay for the services
they consume, and can adjust this usage based on need.

Service models: \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Ibid

Software as a Service (SaaS). Enables a user to access
provider applications from any device through a web browser. Users do
not manage or control any underlying infrastructure such as servers,
operating systems, storage, or application settings. The infrastructure
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
is managed by the cloud provider.

Platform as a Service (PaaS). Enables a user to deploy
user-created or acquired applications on the cloud using programming
tools supported by the provider. The user does not manage the
infrastructure (servers, storage, etc) but has control over the
deployed applications.

Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). Enables a user to
rent and manage cloud infrastructure from a provider, and to deploy its
own applications and software, including operating systems.

Deployment models: \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Ibid

Private cloud. The cloud infrastructure is operated
solely for an organization, and may be managed by the organization or
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
by a third-party, and may exist on-site or off-site.

Community cloud. The cloud infrastructure is shared by
several organizations and supports a specific community with shared
concerns. The infrastructure may be managed by the organizations or by
a third-party, and may exist on-site or off-site.

Public cloud. The cloud infrastructure is available to
the public at large and is owned and managed by the service provider.

Hybrid cloud. The cloud infrastructure is made up of two
or more clouds (private, community, public) which remain separate, but
share certain technology to enable data portability between clouds.

V. Cloud Computing Opportunities

Cloud computing promises benefits to businesses, individuals,
researchers, and governments.

Opportunities for Business

Businesses can reduce their IT overhead by migrating computing
functions to the cloud. This may lower cost barriers for startup
companies by not requiring expensive IT hardware and infrastructure
purchases in the early stages of growth. Cloud elasticity also enables
businesses to pay for only the services and computing power that they
actually use. This can prevent the problem of purchasing excess
infrastructure capacity that may go unused, or having too little
infrastructure to accomplish key work requirements. Cloud computing can
also enable more businesses in data-intensive fields to access high
powered computing resources, helping to level the playing field between
smaller and larger companies.

Opportunities for Individuals

Cloud computing can provide consumers with unlimited access to data
files from remote locations using a range of Internet-connected
devices. Changes that users make to files and data stored on the cloud
from one device or location will be updated when the user accesses
their files and data from a different device or location.

Opportunities for Researchers

Cloud computing can enable greater collaboration between scientists
and researchers both domestically and internationally. It can also
provide scientists with more computing power allowing them to run high-
powered simulations that were previously restricted only to those with
supercomputing access. Cloud computing may also reduce the amount of
time that researchers and scientists need to set up IT infrastructure
and increase the time spent on performing research.

Opportunities for the Federal Government

Cloud computing has the potential to reduce federal government IT
expenditures by a considerable margin. A major portion of federal IT
budgets is spent on infrastructure and maintenance. Migrating computing
functions to the cloud may greatly reduce these costs helping to reduce
taxpayer funding for these activities.

VI. Cloud Computing Challenges

There are a range of challenges that have prevented more widespread
adoption of cloud computing. Some of these challenges include concerns
about security and privacy, access and network resiliency, data
portability and standards, and liability protection. Each of these
issues has potential policy implications for the Federal Government.

Security and Privacy

Users of cloud services must have the confidence that their data
and applications are secure. Different businesses and government
agencies will require more robust security thresholds to protect more
sensitive data. Cloud computing service providers must be able to offer
these tiered service levels. While cloud computing can make it easier
for providers to continuously update security applications, it may also
offer a bigger ``target'' for malicious actors, requiring stronger
security standards and redundancy.

Network Access, Availability and Resiliency

Users of cloud computing services will require access to services
at any time from any device with an Internet connection. However, there
are concerns that current broadband networks may not be able to provide
constant on-demand access if cloud adoption grows. Network outages
preventing users from accessing applications or data on the cloud could
have severe effects on business and government operations.
Consequently, lack of confidence in network reliability may inhibit
cloud computing adoption. Lack of adequate broadband access in areas
where businesses are located or in areas where users want to access
services remotely will likewise limit further widespread cloud
computing adoption.

Data Portability and Standards

Users of cloud computing services require the assurance that they
can move their data and applications to different cloud service
providers if they feel a change would be beneficial to them, so
computing standards to enable portability and interoperability are
critical to the agility of the cloud. While standards can provide for
greater mobility, they can also inhibit innovation if they are too
prescriptive or have been adopted before markets determine certain
technology preferences.

Liability and Regulations

Lack of certainty associated with the laws and regulations
governing migration of services to cloud computing has prevented more
widespread adoption. Different industries face different regulatory
frameworks which exacerbate problems of uncertainty. Liability concerns
associated with data protection may prevent companies from migrating
data away from their direct control. Finally, because liability and
data storage regulations differ among countries, companies may be
hesitant to expose themselves to potential lawsuits by migrating
services to the cloud.

VII. Federal Initiatives on Cloud Computing

The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has estimated that the
Federal Government could move 25 percent of its IT spending to the
cloud. In early 2011 the White House's Chief Information Officer
released a Federal Cloud Computing Strategy \5\, known as ``Cloud
First'', which requires agencies to evaluate whether using cloud
computing is an option before making new IT purchases.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ http://www.cio.gov/documents/Federal-Cloud-Computing-
Strategy.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In early 2010, the White House released the OMB 25 Point
Implementation Plan to Reform Federal Information Technology Management
\6\. This document described government-wide policies to maximize the
efficiency and management of Federal IT resources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ http://www.cio.gov/documents/25-Point-Implementation-Plan-to-
Reform-Federal%20IT.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As part of the OMB 25 Point Implementation Plan, the Obama
Administration launched a Federal Data Center Consolidation Initiative
(FDCCI) \7\ to consolidate the Federal Government's data center
environment by eliminating a minimum of 800 of the more than 2000
physical data centers by 2015. Data center growth and affiliated costs
are considered unsustainable and cloud computing offers a means of
reducing the number of centers. Currently, as part of this initiative,
more than 350 physical data centers have been identified by agencies
for planned closings before the end of 2012 \8\.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\  http://www.cio.gov/documents/Federal-Data-Center-
Consolidation-Initiative-02-26-2010.pdf
\8\  http://explore.data.gov/Federal-Government-Finances-and-
Employment/Federal-Data-Center-Consolidation-Initiative-FDCCI/d5wm-
4c37?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As part of its responsibilities under the Federal Information
Security Management Act (FISMA), the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) must provide Federal Information Processing
Standards (FIPS) and guidelines for agencies to use. As an agency
considers migrations to cloud computing, NIST must develop the
appropriate consensus standards and guidelines to ensure a secure and
trustworthy environment for federal information.
The General Services Administration (GSA) performs a coordinating
role in the Administration's IT Management Reform Agenda. GSA
facilitates access to cloud-based solutions from private sector
providers that meet federal requirements for federal entities, works
with NIST and other federal agencies to assess and authorize cloud
computing services through the Federal Risk and Authorization
Management Program (FedRAMP), and identifies potential multi-agency or
government-wide uses of cloud computing solutions. \9\ GSA also manages
apps.gov as an e-commerce website for federal entities to purchase
cloud computing products and services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\  Testimony of Dr. David McClure, General Service
Administration, before the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs, Subcommittee on Federal Financial Management,
Government Information, Federal Services, and International Security,
April 12, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Internally, GSA has implemented an agency-wide cloud-based email
solution, has moved certain GSA-managed web sites (including usa.gov
and data.gov) to cloud hosted environments, and expects to reduce its
government owned data centers from 15 to three by Fiscal Year 2015,
among other cloud computing initiatives. \10\ Other federal agencies
are making efforts towards implementing the Administration's Federal
Cloud Computing Strategy with varying degrees of progress. National
security agencies, including the Department of Defense and the
Department of State, may be more hesitant about migrating sensitive
information and data to a cloud environment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The NIST Cloud Computing Program aims to shorten the adoption cycle
for cloud, which will enable near-term cost savings and increased
ability to quickly create and deploy enterprise applications. NIST aims
to foster cloud computing systems and practices that support
interoperability, portability, and security requirements that are
appropriate and achievable for important usage scenarios. \11\ NIST has
published a Cloud Computing Standards Roadmap \12\, Cloud Computing
Reference Architecture \13\, a Draft Cloud Computing Synopsis and
Recommendations \14\, and has held three forums and workshops bringing
together government, industry and private stakeholders in support of
these efforts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ http://www.nist.gov/itl/cloud/index.cfm
\12\ NIST Special Publication 500-291
\13\ NIST Special Publication 500-292
\14\ NIST Special Publication 800-146

Chairman Quayle. Good morning. Welcome to today's hearing
entitled ``The Next IT Revolution?: Cloud Computing
Opportunities and Challenges.'' In front of you are packets
containing the written testimony, biographies, and truth-in-
statement disclosures for today's witnesses. I will now
recognize myself for five minutes for an opening statement.
Good morning. I would like to welcome everyone to today's
hearing, which is being held to examine the opportunities and
challenges presented by cloud computing and to analyze the
appropriate role of federal policy in the growing cloud
computing enterprise. Over the last few decades, developments
in the IT sector have driven our country's economic growth.
Cloud computing has the potential to be the next wave. Its
widespread adoption offers significant opportunities for new
innovation and productivity gains for both the public and
private sectors.
Users of cloud computing services will be able to access
high-powered computing functions from a range of devices that
previously were only available to entities with large IT
infrastructure budgets. Cloud services will also allow
individuals to share information with colleagues in real time,
dramatically increasing opportunities for collaboration.
The adoption of cloud computing has the potential to
significantly reduce IT infrastructure and maintenance costs.
Because these services are elastic, individuals will only pay
for the computing services they consume and will no longer have
to worry about over-investing or under-investing in IT.
Companies can potentially use these savings to help grow and
expand their businesses, while governments will be able to
reduce their massive taxpayer-funded IT budgets.
Finally, cloud computing provides its users with unlimited
access to data and applications from any Internet-connected
device.
While the benefits of cloud computing are vast, there are a
wide range of challenges that will need to be addressed before
its potential is fully realized.
Cybersecurity is a major concern for many users who are
considering moving their computing functions to the cloud.
Users must have confidence that their data and applications
will be secure and that their privacy will be protected.
Further, cloud service providers will need to offer users
different tiers of security depending on the sensitivity of
their data.
Widespread adoption of cloud computing requires broad
network access and resiliency. With increased reliance on the
cloud for computing functions, broadband networks must be up to
the task of handling the massive amounts of data that will be
transmitted over the Internet. Users will also want assurances
that they will be able to transport their data and applications
from one service provider to another. Therefore, the
development of interoperable standards is a key issue. But, as
we have often discussed in this Subcommittee, it is important
that these are consensus-based standards that will not be so
rigid that they inhibit the opportunities for innovation that
cloud computing offers. Finally, liability will need to be
addressed to reflect the new cloud-computing paradigm.
While these are only a few of the relevant issues, it
provides a sense of the challenges confronting industry,
consumers, and policymakers in determining the appropriate path
forward for this technology.
We have an excellent panel of IT industry witnesses who
will share their insights on these topics with us. We have also
asked each of our industry witnesses to comment on the
appropriate role of the Federal Government in cloud computing.
Further, we will hear about the General Services
Administration's efforts to adopt cloud computing services and
enable other federal agencies to do the same.
I would like to extend my appreciation to each of our
witnesses for taking the time and effort to appear before us
today. We look forward to your testimony.
And I now recognize the gentleman from New Mexico, Mr.
Lujan, for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Quayle follows:]

Prepared Statement of Chairman Ben Quayle
Good Morning. I'd like to welcome everyone to today's hearing,
which is being held to examine the opportunities and challenges
presented by cloud computing, and to analyze the appropriate role of
federal policy in the growing cloud computing enterprise.
Over the last few decades, developments in the IT sector have
driven our country's economic growth. Cloud computing has the potential
to be the next wave. Its widespread adoption offers significant
opportunities for new innovation, and productivity gains for both the
public and private sectors.
Users of cloud computing services will be able to access high-
powered computing functions from a range of devices that previously
were only available to entities with large IT infrastructure budgets.
Cloud services will also allow individuals to share information with
colleagues in real time, dramatically increasing opportunities for
collaboration.
The adoption of cloud computing has the potential to significantly
reduce IT infrastructure and maintenance costs. Because these services
are elastic, individuals will only pay for the computing services they
consume, and will no longer have to worry about over-investing or
under-investing in IT. Companies can potentially use these savings to
help grow and expand their business, while governments will be able to
reduce their massive taxpayer-funded IT budgets.
Finally, cloud computing provides its users with unlimited access
to data and applications from any Internet-connected device.
While the benefits of cloud computing are vast, there are a range
of challenges that will need to be addressed before its potential is
fully realized.
Cybersecurity is a major concern for many users who are considering
moving their computing functions to the cloud. Users must have
confidence that their data and applications will be secure and that
their privacy will be protected. Further, cloud service providers will
need to offer users different tiers of security depending on
sensitivity of their data.
Widespread adoption of cloud computing requires broad network
access and resiliency. With increased reliance on the cloud for
computing functions, broadband networks must be up to the task of
handling the massive amounts of data that will be transmitted over the
Internet.
Users will also want assurances that they will be able to transport
their data and applications from one service provider to another.
Therefore, the development interoperable standards is a key issue. But,
as we have often discussed in this Subcommittee, it is important that
these are consensus-based standards that will not be so rigid that they
inhibit the opportunities for innovation that cloud computing offers.
Finally, liability will need to be addressed to reflect the new
cloud-computing paradigm.
While these are only a few of the relevant issues, it provides a
sense of the challenges confronting industry, consumers, and
policymakers in determining the appropriate path forward for this
technology.
We have an excellent panel of IT industry witnesses who will share
their insights on these topics with us. We have also asked each of our
industry witnesses to comment on the appropriate role of the federal
government in cloud computing. Further, we will hear about the General
Services Administration's efforts to adopt cloud computing services and
enable other federal agencies to do the same.
I'd like to extend my appreciation to each of our witnesses for
taking the time and effort to appear before us today. We look forward
to your testimony.

Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Chairman Quayle. And good morning to
our witnesses as well. I want to thank you all for being with
us for this important hearing to examine both the benefits and
risks of cloud computing.
As you all know, and as I expect you will hear from our
witnesses today, cloud computing has many potential benefits.
By sharing IT capabilities in the cloud, individuals,
businesses, and government agencies are able to leverage their
resources more effectively. They need only pay for what they
use and can easily scale up or ramp down the computing power or
amount of data storage they need.
In addition to lowering capital investment, cloud computing
allows people to access their files and applications from
anywhere at any time using everything from their home computer
to their tablet or smartphone, as long as they have broadband
connectivity. In addition to being convenient, the mobility
that cloud computing offers has the potential to increase the
productivity of individuals. The cloud also has the potential
to drive innovation, not only by changing the way businesses
operate, but also how research is conducted. I look forward to
hearing more about how cloud computing can advance basic
research from Dr. Reed later this morning.
However, despite all of the promise cloud computing offers,
there are a number of security concerns associated with moving
information to a remote data server that is operated by a third
party and may be located in a foreign country with less
stringent data protection laws. In fact, according to a recent
report, 71 percent of federal Chief Information Officers stated
that security concerns were preventing them from adopting cloud
solutions. However, the same report found that the Federal
Government could save over $14 billion within the first year if
we were to embrace cloud computing. It is essential that we
find a way to ensure the security and privacy of the cloud so
that the Federal Government can reap the full benefits of this
emerging technology.
I am pleased that the Administration is focusing its
efforts on achieving this goal. As I understand it, this effort
by GSA and NIST will provide federal agencies with tools to
assess and select cloud computing services and products that
satisfy federal security requirements. In addition, I am
pleased that NIST has taken an active role in the development
of cloud computing standards for the Federal Government and is
working closely with industry on the development of standards
to support cloud computing infrastructure, metrics,
interoperability, and assurance as mandated in the America
COMPETES Reauthorization Act.
Standards are a critical component to our ability to
realize the true potential of cloud computing, and I am pleased
that NIST has hit the ground running with these efforts and is
well on its way to delivering the required standards.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about the
Administration's efforts and what we here in Congress can and
should do to ensure progress continues and that the federal
agencies have the tools and resources they need to adopt secure
cloud computing solutions which will save money.
I would like to again thank the witnesses for being here
today. I look forward to your testimony. Thank you, Chairman
Quayle, and I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lujan follows:]

Prepared Statement of Representative Ben R. Lujan
Thank you, Chairman Quayle, and good morning to our witnesses. I
want to thank you all for being with us today for this important
hearing to examine both the benefits and risks of cloud computing.
As you all know, and as I expect we will hear from our witnesses
today, cloud computing has many potential benefits. By sharing IT
capabilities in the cloud, individuals, businesses, and government
agencies are able to leverage their resources more effectively. They
only need to pay for what they use and can easily scale up or ramp down
the computing power or amount of data storage they need.
In addition to lowering capital investment, cloud computing allows
people to access their files and applications from anywhere at any
time, using everything from their home computer to their iPad or smart
phone. In addition to being convenient, the mobility that cloud
computing offers has the potential to increase the productivity of
individuals.
The cloud also has the potential to drive innovation not only by
changing the way businesses operate, but also how research is
conducted. I look forward to hearing more about how cloud computing can
advance basic research from Dr. Reed later this morning.
However, despite all of the promise cloud computing offers, there
are a number of security concerns associated with moving information to
a remote data server that is operated by a third party and may be
located in a foreign country with less stringent data protection laws.
In fact, according to a recent report, 71 percent of federal chief
information officers stated that security concerns were preventing them
from adopting cloud solutions.
However, that same report found that the federal government could
save over $14 billion within the first year if it were to embrace cloud
computing.
It's essential that we find a way to ensure the security and
privacy of the cloud so that the federal government can reap the full
benefits of this emerging technology. I am pleased that the
Administration is focusing its efforts on achieving this goal. As I
understand it, this effort by GSA and NIST will provide federal
agencies with tools to assess and select cloud computing services and
products that satisfy federal security requirements.
In addition, I am pleased that NIST has taken an active role in the
development of cloud computing standards for the federal government and
is working closely with industry on the development of standards to
support cloud computing infrastructure, metrics, interoperability, and
assurance, as mandated in the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act.
Standards are a critical component of our ability to realize the true
potential of cloud computing and I am pleased that NIST has hit the
ground running with these efforts and is well on its way to delivering
the required standards.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses about the
Administration's efforts and what we here in Congress can or should do
to ensure that progress continues and that the federal agencies have
the tools and resources they need to adopt secure cloud computing
solutions.
I'd like to again thank the witnesses for being here today and I
look forward to your testimony. Thank you, Chairman Quayle. I yield
back the balance of my time.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Lujan. I would like to
request unanimous consent that the CLOUD\2\ Commission's report
be added to the record at this point. Without objection, so
ordered.
[The information appears in Appendix II]
Chairman Quayle. If there are Members who wish to submit
additional opening statements, your statements will be added to
the record at this point.
At this time, I would like to introduce our witnesses and
then we will proceed to hear from each of them in order.
Our first witness is Mr. Michael Capellas, Chairman and CEO
of the Virtual Computing Environment Company. Mr. Capellas also
serves as co-chair of the TechAmerica Foundation's Commission
on the Leadership Opportunity in U.S. Deployment of the Cloud,
or CLOUD\2\.
Next, we will hear from Dr. Dan Reed, Corporate Vice
President of the Technology Policy Group at Microsoft
Corporation.
Our third witness is Mr. Nick Combs, Federal Chief
Technology Officer for EMC Corporation.
Our final witness is Dr. David McClure, the Associate
Administrator for the Office of Citizen Services and Innovative
Technologies at the GSA.
Thanks again to our witnesses for being here this morning,
and as our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each. After all witnesses have spoken, Members
of the Committee will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Mr. Michael Capellas,
for five minutes. Mr.--can you turn your mic on? Thank you.

STATEMENTS OF MR. MICHAEL CAPELLAS,

CHAIRMAN AND CEO, VIRTUAL COMPUTING

ENVIRONMENT COMPANY; CO-CHAIRMAN, COMMISSION ON

THE LEADERSHIP OPPORTUNITY IN U.S. DEVELOPMENT OF THE CLOUD
``CLOUD\2\''

Mr. Capellas. That would be helpful. Always takes a tech
guy to learn how to turn the mic on.
So again, good morning, Chairman Quayle and Members of the
Subcommittee. My name is Michael Capellas, and I am Co-Chair of
TechAmerica Foundation's Commission on the Leadership
Opportunity in U.S. Deployment of the Cloud, and I am honored
to be invited to testify on a subject of critical national
importance.
Cloud computing has far-ranging economic implications of
utmost relevance to U.S. job creation, productivity, and
technology leadership. As many on the Subcommittee have no
doubt observed, cloud computing has taken on many meanings and
there is widespread confusion in the market about what cloud
means, how to get it, what it is good for and what possible
drawbacks might exist. But the cloud business opportunity is
significant, with analysts projecting cloud revenues to top $50
billion within three years.
Those that follow the technology industry know that cloud
computing has been around for many years. It is only recently
that revenue projections have sharply increased, so it is
important to understand why many experts think cloud computing
is poised to grow rapidly over the next decade and why all the
cloud hype exists in the marketplace.
The application of IT in general has been the single-most
important driver of U.S. productivity for over two decades. My
objective is to convey the Commission's finding around why
cloud is so important in terms of U.S. competitiveness,
including job creation and productivity. But first I want to
suggest that most of the predictions about cloud's strong
market growth are wrong. I think they are wrong because they
understate cloud growth and they understate the impact cloud is
going to have in reshaping the IT landscape. Cloud is like
nothing we have seen before in prior waves, and why it is
important to the U.S. Government.
Information Technology has been synonymous with economic
prosperity since the middle of the last century. IT has
experienced numerous waves of changes since that time. Previous
IT waves include the World Wide Web, the proliferation of
handheld mobile and tablet Internet devices, virtualization
technologies that together provide anytime, anywhere, any-
manner connection to data, applications, and people. Cloud
computing represents the culmination of those waves, and as
such, it promises to spur the most significant transformation
we have seen so far.
The Cloud will bring unprecedented opportunity to both
users and those engaged in the business of IT infrastructure,
solutions, and services. But what is at stake is significantly
larger than the tens of billions of dollars of revenue that
analysts are describing. I believe that cloud computing has the
potential to reshape the landscape and shift wealth between
nations. Trillions of dollars of economic wealth will be
balanced upon competiveness in our 24-by-7 world. Cloud
computing as a foundational element of IT can make companies,
agencies, and organizations more nimble and competitive by
boosting productivity and increasing the speed of business.
Moving to the cloud faster will thus become a key consideration
as organizations seek to become more competitive.
As requested, let me take a minute to address the essence
of cloud computing. Cloud computing is defined as a model for
enabling convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool
of configurable computing resource--for example, networks,
servers, storage, applications, and services--that can be
rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management
efforts or service provider interaction.
Central to cloud computing are the concepts of on-demand,
self-service to an elastic pool of flexible resources, and
measured service. In contrast to a traditional IT environment
where different teams of specialists independently manage
servers, networks, or storage, in cloud computing these
components are preassembled into highly standardized and
automated converged infrastructure, and the users do not have
to know or care about where any of the components of technology
are.
As an analogy, computers used to connect together over
proprietary local networks, and it was difficult and expensive
for different networks to talk to each other. Information was
generally compartmentalized and generally only available to a
few users. IP, or the Internet Protocol, was created as a
network that could span great distances, and after a few years
of solid but not remarkable growth, the entire market rapidly
shifted and adopted IP because it evolved to solve both the
problem of distance and the problem of communicating with other
networks. IP thus became the de facto standard and users no
longer needed to care or know about where the underlying
network was.
As a participant in the IP technology wave, I will note
that IP technology development was largely led by U.S.
companies and has contributed to U.S. technological leadership,
job growth, and productivity. Standardizing on IP simplified IT
operations, reduced costs, and spurred advances.
Cloud computing also promises to add other forms. Most
social networks today run on clouds with thousands of e-
commerce sites, but the misconceptions with the cloud start
back with agencies, and I believe that continued leadership of
the United States will depend on cloud computing.
The Commission, comprised of 71 commissioners from leading
U.S. companies and academia, delivered detailed recommendations
to federal officials on how to best use the cloud and how the
U.S. Government can capitalize on the advantages of cloud while
spurring growth and enhancing productivity.
The Commission identified a set of barriers as well. I
encourage you to look at the entire set, which is 14
recommendations, which have been detailed. Each of the
recommendations shows how the Federal Government can look and
can help ranging from policy to the different ways that we are
going to deploy economic modeling. And with that, I thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Capellas follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. Michael D. Capellas, Chairman and CEO,
Virtual Computing Environment Company
Good morning, Chairman Quayle, and Members of the Subcommittee. My
name is Michael Capellas and I am Co-Chair of the TechAmerica
Foundation's Commission on the Leadership Opportunity in U.S.
Deployment of the Cloud. I am honored to be invited to testify on a
subject of critical national importance. Cloud computing has far
ranging economic implications of utmost relevance to U.S. jobs
creation, productivity and technology leadership.
As many on the Subcommittee have no doubt observed, cloud computing
has taken on many meanings and there is widespread confusion in the
market about what cloud means, how to get it, what it's good for and
what potential drawbacks to cloud might exist. But the cloud business
opportunity is significant, with analysts projecting cloud revenues to
top $50B within three years.
Those that follow the technology industry know that cloud computing
has been around for many years. It is only recently that revenue
projections have sharply increased, so it is important to understand
why many experts think cloud computing is poised to grow rapidly over
the next decade and why all the cloud hype exists in the marketplace.
The application of IT has been the single most important driver of
U.S. productivity over the past two decades. My objective today is to
convey the Commission's findings around why the cloud is so important
in terms of U.S. competitiveness, including jobs creation and
productivity.
But first I want to suggest that most of these predictions about
strong cloud market growth are wrong. I think they are wrong because
they understate cloud growth and they understate the impact cloud will
have in reshaping the IT landscape. Cloud will be like nothing we've
seen before. Why is this important to the U.S. government? Information
Technology has been synonymous with economic prosperity since the
middle of the last century. IT has experienced numerous waves of
changes since that time. Previous IT waves include the world wide web,
the proliferation of handheld mobile and tablet Internet devices, and
virtualization technologies that together can provide anytime,
anywhere, any-manner connection to data, applications and people. Cloud
computing represents the culmination of many waves, and as such it
promises to spur the most significant transformation we've seen to
date.
Cloud computing will bring unprecedented opportunity to both users
and those engaged in the business of IT infrastructure, solutions and
services. But what is at stake is significantly larger than the tens of
billions of dollars that analysts are describing. I believe cloud
computing has the potential to both reshape the IT landscape and shift
wealth between nations. Trillions of dollars of global economic wealth
will be based upon competiveness in our 24x7 world. Cloud computing as
a foundational element to IT can make companies, agencies and
organizations more nimble and competitive by boosting productivity and
increasing the speed of business. Moving to cloud faster will thus
become a key consideration as organizations seek to become more
competitive.
As requested, let me take a moment to address the essence of cloud
computing. Cloud computing is defined as a model for enabling
convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable
computing resources (for example, networks, servers, storage,
applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and
released with minimal management effort or service provider
interaction. Central to cloud computing are concepts of on-demand,
self-service to an elastic pool of flexibly provisioned resources with
measured service. In contrast to a traditional IT environment where
different teams of specialists independently manage servers, networking
and storage, in cloud computing these components are pre-assembled in a
highly standardized and automated converged infrastructure, and the
users do not have to know or care about how the components are put
together. As an analogy, computers used to connect together over
proprietary local networks, and it was difficult and expensive for
different networks to talk to each other. Information was
compartmentalized and generally only available to a few users. IP--the
Internet Protocol--was created as a network that could span great
distances, and after a few years of solid but not remarkable growth,
the entire market rapidly shifted to IP because it had evolved to solve
both the problem of distance and the problem of communicating with
other networks. IP thus became the de facto standard and users no
longer needed to know or care about the underlying network. As a
participant in the IP technology wave, I'll note that IP technology
development was largely led by U.S. companies and has contributed to
U.S. technology leadership, job growth and productivity. Standardizing
on IP simplified IT operations, reduced cost, and spurred advances like
unified communications and high definition video over IP that we enjoy
in our homes today.
Cloud computing also promises to simplify IT operations, reduce
costs, and increase the speed and effectiveness with which
organizations can do business and accomplish missions. Most Americans
already use cloud computing in one form or another. Most social
networking sites and thousands of e-commerce sites are ``running in the
cloud.''
But misconceptions and concerns with cloud may impact success for
companies and agencies, and I believe continued U.S. leadership in IT
is dependent upon U.S. leadership in cloud computing. The CLOUD\2\
commission, comprised of 71 commissioners from leading U.S. companies
and academia, delivered detailed recommendations to federal officials
on how to best allow the U.S. government to capitalize on the
advantages of cloud, while spurring U.S. job growth and enhancing
overall U.S. competitiveness in the world market. I was privileged to
co-chair the Commission, working with industry leading experts from
many U.S. companies, meeting with key customers and government
agencies, and leading meetings between the Commission and numerous U.S.
government officials. The Commission included some of the technology
industry's brightest minds, who put our nation's best interests above
individual company interests for the duration of our work effort,
displaying focused and intense collaboration over a multi-month period
resulting in a highly successful and influential outcome.
The Commission identified a set of common barriers spanning
institutional inertial, restrictive policies, and technology concerns
such as security and privacy that are currently inhibiting cloud
awareness and adoption. Through comprehensive analysis and
collaboration, a set of fourteen actionable recommendations along with
a prescriptive Cloud Buyer's Guide was delivered to government IT
officials and the commercial market as a whole. The Commission
recognized the need to enable many paths to cloud computing, and
determined that interim steps could be instrumental in accelerating
many customers' journey to cloud.
The first step in accelerating the adoption of the cloud and
driving U.S. leadership in cloud innovation is earning the trust of
current and potential cloud users. Trust in the cloud is a result of a
combination of factors that enable individuals and organizations
consuming cloud services to be confident that the services are meeting
their computing needs. These needs include security, privacy,
performance and availability; the factors that contribute include
transparency of practices, accountability, resiliency and redundancy,
access and connectivity, supply chain provenance, life cycle integrity,
and governance.
In response to industry concerns about cloud trust, the Commission
created recommendations to develop and provide a standard approach to
assessing and authorizing cloud computing services and products for use
by Federal agencies. Specific recommendations are associated with
robust identity management, federal data breach laws, the promotion of
privacy frameworks, cloud service level transparency, transnational
data flows, and re-examining mechanisms for lawful access by law
enforcement or government to data stored in the cloud via reform of the
Electronic Communications Privacy Act. The Commission encouraged the
government to lead by example by increasing adoption of cloud computing
and pursuing interim paths to cloud such as converged infrastructure
deployments and virtualized data centers. Finally, the Commission made
recommendations on policies mandating public disclosure of information
about relevant operational aspects of public cloud services, including
portability, interoperability, security, certifications, performance
and reliability.
Members of Congress are encouraged to absorb the entire set of
recommendations and act on them where possible. Excerpts from the
Commission recommendations follow below, and the benefits of acting
swiftly are clear. Cloud computing will enable companies (and
governments) to move faster and be more responsive and flexible.
Companies will be able to try several prototypes at once, test their
limits, and then build and deploy new, better prototypes-all within a
few weeks. This may be the most important benefit of the cloud-it
enables companies of all sizes and in all sectors, as well as
governments, non-profits, and individuals, to more quickly build new
applications and services by reducing the cost and complexity of
deploying and managing IT resources. Most companies and organizations
spend the vast majority of their IT budget just maintaining their
current infrastructures and the applications that run on them. The
cloud will enable them to devote more resources and talent to creating
new products and services and improving productivity. This
democratization of innovation is a huge opportunity for people,
organizations, and countries around the world. To maintain its
competitive position, the United States must focus on quickly and
effectively harnessing the full power of cloud computing, leading in
both the deployment of cloud and the development of new cloud services.
This will help American companies generate high-paying jobs and compete
in the global marketplace.
Recommendation 1 (Trust in the Cloud): In recent months, senior
U.S. officials have described threats such as cyber crime and state-
sponsored industrial espionage as outpacing many enterprise defenses.
In this evolving cyber threat environment, the commission believes that
cloud security services and solutions, if done correctly, may provide
improved security relative to non-cloud environments.
In order to implement applicable best practices and standards
around security and information assurance, the Commission supports the
efforts underway on programs such as the Federal Risk and Authorization
Management Program (FedRAMP) and NIST Security Content Automation
Protocol (SCAP). FedRAMP is a voluntary, General Services
Administration (GSA) led initiative to develop and provide a standard
approach to assessing and authorizing cloud computing services and
products for use by Federal agencies. The Commission believes that a
well-defined FedRAMP framework will help accelerate the adoption of
cloud in the Federal government. The NIST SCAP is a standard that
enables the automation of reporting and verifying IT security control
parameters. SCAP provides a ready method to capture, test and
continuously monitor the controls and integrity settings required to
achieve the respective standard and/or compliance requirements.
Security metrics efforts should build upon industry and academia
initiatives already chartered to address standard cloud performance
measurement frameworks. As the cloud is deployed by federal agencies
and businesses in multiple sectors, cloud-related security issues will
become an important element of the overall security discussion for
those communities. The Commission therefore recommends that cloud
expertise be integrated into existing information-sharing structures,
such as the Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) and the
Sector Coordinating Councils.
Recommendation 2 (Identity Management): Industry and government
should accelerate the development of a private sector-led identity
management ecosystem as envisioned by the National Strategy for Trusted
Identities in Cyberspace (NSTIC) to facilitate the adoption of strong
authentication technologies and enable users to gain secure access to
cloud services and websites. Mechanisms to provide identity,
authentication, and attribution in cyberspace are essential to
accelerating adoption of cloud computing services and improving trust
in the cloud. (For example, identity management facilitates access
verification, billing, law enforcement access, and other features and
capabilities.) Two characteristics of a robust identity management
ecosystem are (1) enabling higher level transactions to occur
electronically and (2) enabling credentials to be utilized across
multiple services and websites. In addition to supporting the
development of a private sector-led identity management ecosystem, the
commission also suggests specific steps that the federal government
could take as a user of cloud services that would contribute to
advancing robust identity management: Deploy, as appropriate, multi-
factor authentication for federal cloud applications as used by federal
personnel and government contractors doing government contract work.
And accelerate the adoption of strong authentication, including multi-
factor authentication and one time passwords, to enable mobile access
to secure federal cloud services and websites.
Recommendation 3: The Commission recommends a national data breach
law to streamline notifications and make it simple for customers to
understand their rights with regard to notification. Such a law should
include preemption of state laws to provide for harmonization. In
addition, the law should take into account the various types of
entities that are involved in processing the covered data cloud service
providers, industry, government, nonprofit organizations, academic
organizations, etc., and specifically provide that notice should be
given by the entity that has a direct relationship with the parties
whose information was subject to the breach. Finally, the law should
have notification requirements based on risk of harm. Note that the
motivation for such legislation is not limited to cloud computing, but
adoption of cloud computing would benefit from this action.
Specifically, by clarifying responsibilities and commitments around
notification, the law will enable cloud providers to prepare to take
expected steps in case of a breach and enable customers to trust the
providers to do so. As a complement to the above recommendations, the
U.S. government should update and strengthen criminal laws against
those who attack our cyber infrastructure, including cloud computing
services. In addition to clarifying cyber criminal offenses and
defining penalties, the Federal government must commit adequate
resources and personnel to investigating and tracking down cyber
criminals. As much of cyber crime is transnational, the federal
government should promote further international cooperation around
cross-border prosecutions and identifying countries affording safe
havens to such criminals.
Recommendation 4 (Research): Government, industry, and academia
should develop and execute a joint cloud computing research agenda. The
Commission recommends that government, industry, and academia take
responsibility for developing and carrying out a research agenda that
will promote U.S. leadership in the cloud by enabling innovation that
benefits customers and service providers. Relevant cloud-oriented
research areas include, but are not limited to, usability, privacy,
availability, integrity, confidentiality, security, cryptography,
identity management, energy efficiency, resource allocation,
portability, and dependability. Government research agencies, like the
National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA), should fund universities and other
organizations to conduct long range research activities, including
those that build educational and research capacity and high risk, high-
reward projects. Cooperative cloud test beds will also be a critical
element in advancing the overall evolution of cloud technologies.
Recommendation 5 (Privacy): The U.S. government and industry should
promote a comprehensive, technology-neutral privacy framework,
consistent with commonly accepted privacy and data protection
principles-based frameworks such as the OECD principles and/or APEC
privacy frameworks. The Commission recommends that the U.S. build upon
the work of existing, accepted privacy and data protection principles-
based frameworks such as the Organization for economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) and/or Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) to
develop and promote a comprehensive, technology-neutral privacy
framework. The existing U.S. laws are sector specific and state
specific, and this approach is different than those in other regions
(e.g., Europe). In some quarters, there is a concern that this may
impede the transnational flow of data with other countries, especially
those in Europe. These actions would help provide the certainty and
flexibility required for continued cloud innovation and would be a step
toward fostering a global market for cloud services. Industry should
embrace such frameworks and utilize them to the fullest extent
practicable.
Recommendation 6 (Government/Law Enforcement Access to Data): The
U.S. government should demonstrate leadership in identifying and
implementing mechanisms for lawful access by law enforcement or
government to data stored in the cloud. The Commission recommends that
the U.S. modernize legislation governing law enforcement access to
digital information in light of advances in IT in general and the cloud
in particular. Reform of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act
(ECPA) is critical to clarifying the legal conditions under which U.S.
cloud providers and their customers will operate, as technology changes
have overtaken many aspects of ECPA as originally written. Various
groups such as the Digital Due Process Coalition have proposed making
government access to data stored in the cloud consistent with
government access to data stored in in-house IT systems. The U.S.
Department of Commerce should conduct a study to assess the impact of
the USA PATRIOT Act and similar national security laws in other
countries on a company's ability to deploy cloud in a global
marketplace. This action may provide insights into how best to address
the uncertainty and confusion caused by national security statutes
(e.g., PATRIOT Act) and similar laws of other nations) that are
perceived as impediments to a global market place for cloud services.
Recommendation 7: Critical to improving trust in the cloud and
accelerating adoption is the need for best practices in collecting
forensic data and information in ways that do not result in
significant, adverse impacts on individuals and/or organizations using
the cloud-based information. To address this, the Commission recommends
that the Federal CIO work with applicable agencies such as the U.S.
Department of Justice and other relevant organizations to establish
best practices specifically addressing acceptable methods for
collecting forensic evidence from organizations using cloud-based
information systems. In addition, cloud providers should assist their
customers (e.g., individuals, commercial entities, government) with
technologies to facilitate ediscovery and information retrieval
requirements, whether in support of regulatory compliance or litigation
activities.
Recommendation 8 (Lead by Example): The U.S. government should
demonstrate its willingness to trust cloud computing environments in
other countries for appropriate government workloads. This
recommendation highlights the role of the U.S. government both as a
customer of cloud services and as a leader in enabling trustworthy use
of the cloud. Government agencies, in evaluating potential models for
using the cloud, should not assume or default to the notion that no
government workload and/or task is suitable for cloud computing
environments in other countries. Instead, they should carefully
consider the types of data and tasks within their information and
communications technology portfolios to match suitable workloads to the
cloud computing models that achieve the required level of
confidentiality, integrity, and availability at the appropriate levels
of efficiency, cost, and redundancy.
Recommendation 9 (Transparency): Industry should publicly disclose
information about relevant operational aspects of their cloud services,
including portability, interoperability, security, certifications,
performance and reliability. Industry and government should support
development of metrics designed to meet the needs of different user
groups. These metrics should be developed in an open and transparent
environment, taking into account the global nature of cloud use. The
Commission recognizes the need for information and tools that provide
users with meaningful ways to evaluate the characteristics and
performance of various cloud implementations, whether they are
contemplating deployment or evaluating performance of their current
services. Development of metrics around key cloud attributes should be
driven by user needs and provider capabilities. The government and
commercial sector should collaborate on lessons learned, and each
should be careful to avoid dominating the development of these metrics.
Different government and business sectors will likely demand different
measures and tools.
Recommendation 10 (Data Portability): Cloud providers should enable
portability of user data through documents, tools, and support for
agreed-upon industry standards and best practices. One benefit of the
cloud is its ability to store and process large quantities of data. For
customers making the transition to cloud, this often raises questions
about how they access or move that data, especially in cases where they
are switching between cloud providers. Data portability can be achieved
in a variety of ways, and cloud providers should be transparent about
their conformance with industry standards and best practices as well as
the documents, tools, and relevant third-party solutions they make
available to their customers. Customers should recognize that early
consideration of data portability in selecting and implementing cloud
services can reduce the risk of vendor lock-in. A collection of data
portability standards, formats, and practices is vital to encouraging
widespread cloud adoption. Government and industry should collaborate
on facilitating the rapid development and dissemination of these
standards and other relevant tools. The collaboration between NIST and
the private sector in preparing the NIST standards roadmap under the
Federal Cloud Computing Strategy is an excellent example of these types
of efforts.
Recommendation 11 (Federal Acquisition and Budgeting): Agencies
should demonstrate flexibility in adapting procurement models to
acquire cloud services and solutions. Congress and OMB should
demonstrate flexibility in changing budget models to help agencies
acquire cloud services and solutions. In interviews with senior
government officials, the Commission found that the current Federal
Acquisition Regulation (FAR) does not need alteration for agencies to
acquire cloud services. The FAR is already flexible enough to allow
agencies to acquire IT as a service. However, agencies should
demonstrate flexibility in adapting current procurement models and
existing contracts to take advantage of new cloud offerings. One of the
biggest challenges agencies may face in budgeting is predicting the
costs of cloud computing over the course of a fiscal year. Cloud
computing is designed to scale quickly to a customer's needs, providing
maximum flexibility to the user. If the cloud service is based on a
predictable subscription model (such as a standard monthly fee per
user), these budget projections can be easily accommodated. If the
cloud service is based on pay-as-you-go usage, however, it can be
difficult to predict costs unless the user can precisely forecast
future computing needs. To address this challenge, the Commission
recommends that the current efforts to update and streamline the OMB
300 exhibit form and associated budget scoring include tools that
facilitate and encourage the new business models associated with cloud.
OMB and Congress should communicate to agencies that it recognizes
budgeting for cloud is not like budgeting for traditional IT services
and should assure agencies it will provide support and flexibility
during and after the transition to the cloud. To help agencies acquire
cloud services, the Commission also recommends Congress and OMB
demonstrate flexibility in changing budget models. Government must find
ways to provide more flexibility for agencies to reduce and transition
funds in the capital expenditure accounts to the operations and
maintenance expenditure accounts as part of implementing innovative
cloud solutions and achieving savings. In making decisions about
budgeting and acquisition, federal agencies, through the CIO Council,
would benefit from sharing best practices, tools for objective analysis
of cloud performance, and ways to predict and document different
contributors to the budgetary impact of switching to the cloud.
Recommendation 12 (Incentives): Government should establish
policies and processes for providing fiscal incentives, rewards and
support for agencies as they take steps towards implementing cloud
deployments. Adopting a new technology can be difficult, and the
transition of agencies to the cloud will require investment of time,
resources, and political will by the federal government. In recognition
of this, the Commission recommends that OMB establish incentives and
provide support for agencies beginning cloud adoption.
One possible incentive is to allow agencies to retain and redirect
a portion of the overall budget savings realized from cloud adoption.
Another approach is to provide seed money to agencies that help with
the initial investments required in moving to the cloud.
Recommendation 13 (Improve Infrastructure): Government and industry
should embrace the modernization of broadband infrastructure and the
current move to IPv6 to improve the bandwidth and reliable connectivity
necessary for the growth of cloud services. The Commission recommends
that the federal government and industry continue to expand deployment
of high bandwidth networking, enhance network resilience, and advance
IPv6 adoption to ensure ample broadband connections. Efforts such as
those advocated in the Federal Communications Commission's National
Broadband Plan, including making additional spectrum available and
expanding opportunities for opportunistic and unlicensed spectrum use,
are necessary to allow cloud computing to function effectively and for
businesses and citizens to realize the benefits of innovative new cloud
technologies. With rapidly rising demands for connectivity, the last
batch of IPv4 addresses, assigned earlier this year, is unlikely to
meet demand beyond the end of 2011. Since cloud computing depends on
the connection of many individuals, devices, and locations, a quick
transition to IPv6 is vital to ensuring the successful adoption and
operation of cloud computing in the future.
Recommendation 14 (Education/Training): Government, industry, and
academia should develop and disseminate resources for major stakeholder
communities to be educated on the technical, business, and policy
issues around acquisition, deployment and operation of cloud services.
The Commission commends GSA's outreach efforts to federal agencies to
provide materials, expertise, and support around investigating,
procuring, and deploying cloud solutions. GSA could build on this work
by creating a cloud educational portal to help agency buyers,
architects, administrators, and end users in understanding all aspects
of cloud computing. Government, using existing programs in technology
education and workforce training,4 can facilitate and encourage
academic institutions and educational organizations to develop and
offer courses relevant to cloud, in partnership with industry.
In a time when the government is seeking to do more with less and
the commercial sector is being called upon to create jobs and grow the
economy, now is the time to act on the cloud. Cloud computing has
ushered in vast improvements in the cost, agility and efficiency of
computing. These benefits alone drive a strong business case; however,
the more compelling return is the opportunity to leap forward; to
discover new markets and improve how we interact with, serve, and
support U.S. citizens, users and other nations. The cloud holds the
potential to unlock widespread entrepreneurism of all shapes and sizes,
and expand the scope to do entirely new things--innovations such as
social networking, which we could not fully imagine just a decade ago,
would not exist without IT's continued evolution to the cloud.
It is the hope of the Commission that the federal government,
industry and academia will implement these recommendations and be
leaders in shaping how the future unfolds through the adoption of the
cloud across the United States and around the world. Furthermore, these
recommendations should demonstrate that cloud computing is not a new
technology that needs further validation or analysis before it can be
safely adopted; it is a natural evolution in computing. Those who
recognize this and take early advantage of the benefits it offers will,
in the coming decades, be the leaders not in only IT but in driving the
cloud's evolution, and therefore, in driving business and mission
results.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Capellas.
I now recognize Dr. Dan Reed to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. DAN REED CORPORATE VICE PRESIDENT,

TECHNOLOGY POLICY GROUP, MICROSOFT CORPORATION;

VICE CHAIRMAN, ``CLOUD\2\''

Dr. Reed. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Lujan,
and Members of the Committee. My name is Dan Reed and I am the
Corporate Vice President of Microsoft's Technology Policy
Group. And thank you for the opportunity to testify regarding
the cloud today.
Today's smartphone was yesterday's supercomputer and
yesterday's national archive is today's child's digital music
collection. By combining the cloud with rich devices and
sensors, the possibilities ahead are even more exciting--
anticipatory personalized computing, remote healthcare
monitoring and early response, smart grids and more energy
efficient homes, intelligent transportation systems and reduced
commuting times, and a new era of scientific discovery and
innovation.
As a technologist for almost 30 years working in academia
and industry, my testimony concerns how the cloud can help
realize this future--accelerating scientific discovery for
research, creating operational efficiencies, and enabling
innovation by businesses and governments. I will touch on four
areas in my remarks emphasizing how the Federal Government can
facilitate these benefits.
I will begin with the cloud and science. Two major shifts
are underway. First, researches are deluged by observational
scientific data of unprecedented richness and scale. Second,
and related, many of our most pressing technical and societal
questions increasingly lie at the intersection of traditional
disciplines. Both shifts challenge our historical approaches to
investment and discovery via computing. The cloud and
associated tools can let scientists be scientists rather than
being distracted by IT, as they often are now.
I believe the Federal Government can accelerate this
transition by encouraging the purchase of cloud services as a
complement to and rather than just supporting the acquisition
of local IT infrastructure, and equally importantly, by
supporting new tools that facilitate distributed collaboration
and simplify access to multidisciplinary scientific and
engineering data. Microsoft is acting on this belief working in
partnership with the National Science Foundation.
My second point concerns the cloud's impact on business and
government. Cloud computing, as it was just noted, allows
elastic scaling to meet varying demand both in capability and
in management. Via the cloud, companies can be nimble and they
can make forward bets quickly and without large capital or IT
costs. This enables smaller companies to compete globally and
it enables larger companies to explore new products and markets
rapidly. Government, too, can benefit from cloud efficiencies
to lower costs and deliver services in new ways. Clouds can
also allow data from local, state, and federal agencies, as
well as the private sector, to be combined and used in ways
previously difficult if not impossible.
Thus, the Federal Government should move expeditiously to
adopt cloud capabilities beginning with those services and data
that directly match industry experiences and best practices,
and it should revise policies and regulations accordingly to
accelerate cloud deployment.
Third, let us consider the infrastructure needed for
clouds. Cloud services depend on broadband communication. It is
the oxygen via which they breathe. In turn, digital access to
information and services is an enabler of economic
competitiveness--of education, of government efficiency, and of
service delivery. We must continue to design and deploy new
backbone networks that support higher data rates, develop new
protocols for the next generation of wireless networks, and
define the standards that will shape the future of the globe-
encircling cloud with access for all of us.
Fourth and finally, let me come back to research and
education. As this Committee well appreciates and it has helped
enable, today's cloud technology is derived from basic
computing research conducted over the past four decades. To
ensure that the United States remains at the forefront in cloud
computing--and make no mistake, it is--ongoing investment and
basic research remains crucial. There are deep and open abiding
questions in the endless frontier of research in areas as
diverse as privacy and security, chip design, energy
efficiency, data management, networks and reliability, user
interfaces, and accessibility. Equally importantly, this
investment must be complemented by improvements in computing
education at all levels.
In summary, the cloud is a foundation of the 21st Century
digital economy. It can provide access to the world's knowledge
base to individuals and empower entrepreneurs and companies
large and small to sell their products globally, enable
scientists and engineers to discover and innovate, and deliver
government services quickly and efficiently.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Reed follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. Dan Reed, Corporate Vice President,
Technology Policy Group, Microsoft Corporation; Vice Chairman,
``CLOUD\2\''
Chairman, Ranking Member, and Members of the Subcommittee, my name
is Dan Reed, and I am the Corporate Vice President of Microsoft's
Technology Policy Group. Thank you for the opportunity to share
perspectives on the opportunities and challenges surrounding cloud
computing. I appreciate the time and attention that the Committee is
spending on this topic, and I commend you for advancing the dialogue on
information technology and cloud computing to drive innovation.
My testimony begins by describing the advent of the cloud and its
importance, as a major technology inflection point with far-reaching
effects and significant economic and competitive benefits for the U.S.
It summarizes some of the key technologies behind clouds, notably
massive data centers and infrastructure, wired and wireless networking,
and the never-before-seen scale and access to information facilitated
by these technologies. It then outlines the major opportunities clouds
can enable to (1) accelerate scientific discovery for research; (2)
create efficiencies and innovation for businesses and governments; and
(3) enrich and empower the experiences of individual citizens. Finally,
it concludes by providing a set of recommendations and next steps for
the Federal government and others to allow the U.S. to benefit fully
from the potential of clouds and to maintain its global leadership.

I. The Advent of the Cloud and its Importance

There has been extensive coverage of clouds in the popular media,
and, as with all new technologies, considerable excitement about the
benefits, as well as potential confusion. As a technologist and
computing researcher for nearly 30 years, working in both academia and
industry, I would like to separate the technical realities from the
publicity.
Reviewing the history of modern digital computing reveals a
prevailing theme--the fundamental questions do not change, but the
technological answers change repeatedly, for the costs, capacities and
speeds of the component technologies shift by many orders of magnitude.
Today's smartphone was yesterday's supercomputer, and yesterday's
national archive is now a child's digital music collection.
Since the late 1940s, we have experienced a series of computing
revolutions, from the mainframe to the minicomputer, from the
minicomputer to the workstation and then the PC and a variety of mobile
and embedded devices. Each of these technological revolutions further
democratized access to computing and extended its benefits. Today, I
believe we are in the midst of another such revolution, enabled by
inexpensive client devices and powerful cloud computing services.
Cloud services are not a sudden, new development. Each time we
share digital photos, shop online, use an email service, download and
use applications, or query a search engine, we are using the cloud.
Every day, the combination of wired and wireless broadband networks,
PCs and smartphones, and online services hosted in remote data centers
connect individuals, deliver valuable data and insights, and drive
business efficiency and innovation.
Although the cloud has already reshaped our lives, a converging set
of technology trends in infrastructure, devices and communications will
drive a new generation of experiences that will benefit society in ways
we cannot yet imagine.
First, there is the increasingly expansive and efficient
infrastructure that supports clouds. Today's cloud data centers are the
largest computing capabilities ever built, a consolidation of computing
at a truly massive scale--ten or more times the size of a football
field for a single cloud data center. To put that fact in perspective,
one cloud data center today contains more computers than the entire
Internet did just a small number of years ago, and it contains as much
digital data as would equal a substantial fraction of the text holdings
of the Library of Congress.
Each of the major cloud operators, Microsoft and its competitors,
is building a worldwide network of those data centers to support a new
generation of cloud services. In doing so, they are changing the way
the computing industry designs and builds systems, and they are drawing
on the best practices and insights of operating infrastructure at large
scale to make those clouds reliable 24/7, to make them secure, and to
make them energy efficient.
The second trend is the explosive growth and availability of
powerful consumer devices. While many think that the power of the cloud
is predominantly about the massive computing and storage capabilities
in data centers, the truly transformative effect comes from the
intersection and interaction of the cloud with increasingly powerful
devices.
With powerful sensors, wireless communications, and new natural
user interfaces, coupled with the power of the cloud, new kinds of
experiences emerge--for governments, for businesses and for consumers.
Remote health care monitoring and early response, smart grids and more
energy efficient homes, intelligent transportation systems and reduced
commuting times, and a host of other possibilities are now realizable.
Finally, our continued investments in more powerful networking are
coming to fruition. Cloud services rest on the foundational investment
the U.S. has made in broadband networking, both wired and wireless,
because communication networks are the oxygen that lets cloud services
breathe. Reliable, high bandwidth, inexpensive and ubiquitous
communications connect us in a true global village, albeit one on which
demands and expectations continue to rise.

II. The Opportunities Presented by Clouds

Cloud services and data management bring several exciting
opportunities for greater efficiency, innovation and discovery in
domains as diverse as scientific research, business and U.S.
competitiveness, and citizen empowerment.
Accelerating Scientific Discovery for Research. Throughout the
history of science, data has been scarce and precious. Indeed, the
modern scientific method is defined by a careful cycle of hypothesis
and experiment, which gathers experimental data to test the hypothesis.
Today, the same technological economics that have given us inexpensive
computing, digital cameras and ubiquitous data-generating sensors,
allow scientists to capture data at rates and volumes heretofore
unimaginable.
In almost all domains, scientists and engineers are now drowning in
a sea of data. In a few short years, they have gone from scarcity to an
incredible richness, necessitating a significant change in how they
manage and extract insight from all this data. In astronomy, the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey in January 2011 released ``the largest digital color
image of the sky ever made. . . . This terapixel image is so big and
detailed that one would need 500,000 high-definition TVs to view it at
its full resolution.'' \1\ In neuroscience, the researchers working on
mapping the connections among the neurons in the brain are finding that
the images necessary to make that map for a cube of mouse brain a
millimeter on a side require roughly one petabyte of storage; this
implies that similar maps of the human brain would require millions of
petabytes. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Sloan Digital Sky Survey Press Release of January 11, 2011
at http://www.sdss3.org/press/20110111.largestimage.php.
\2\ See New York Times article of Dec. 27, 2010 on the Human
Connectome Project at http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/28/science/
28brain.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In a parallel shift, many of our scientific, engineering and
societal questions increasingly lie at the intersections of traditional
disciplines. Consider, for example, the recent oil spill in the Gulf of
Mexico. Understanding the complexities of oil distribution in water is
a problem related to computational fluid dynamics, but understanding
the impact of that oil on the marine ecosystem is a biological problem.
In both cases, observational data are essential. To fully understand
the issue, researchers from multiple disciplines--from different
cultures, using different research tools-must unite to build models and
analyze data from diverse sources.
Increasing data volumes and the complexity of collaboration on
interdisciplinary problems are challenging our historical approaches to
discovery and innovation via computing. Researchers and research
institutions are ill-prepared for the large-scale computing
infrastructure management challenges posed by large data sets and
complex models. The cloud and associated applications and tools offer a
possible solution to this challenge by letting scientists be
scientists.

Computing Infrastructure.

Today researchers, graduate students, and research support staff
often spend inordinate amounts of time maintaining the computing
systems needed to conduct research rather than devoting their time and
talents to the research itself. The cost to maintain and refresh this
computing infrastructure is becoming a larger and larger burden, and
the economics are unsustainable, particularly at a time when our
research universities are under financial stress. As a result, much of
our research funding has focused (because of the power of computing for
scientific discovery) on equipment replacement and repeated
infrastructure deployments on research campuses and in laboratories.
Yet at even the best funded research organizations, the majority of
researchers do not have access to the computing resources they need.
Cloud computing can provide software applications, computing and
data analytics, with remote access via familiar tools on PCs and
smartphones. Because the cloud is professionally managed and regularly
upgraded, delivering computational resources on demand, one can ``pay
as you go,'' using large-scale computational capacity and data
analytics only when needed. The cost to use 10,000 processors for an
hour is the same as using ten processors for 1,000 hours, but will
deliver results much faster to the researcher. Organizations can buy
just-in-time services to process and exploit data, rather spending
scare resources on infrastructure.

Enabling Computing Tools and Applications for Research.

Much of our historical investment in high-performance computing
(HPC) has brought the benefits of advanced computing to only a subset
of the research community. Although powerful, and offering breakthrough
capabilities for scientific and engineering discovery, these systems
are often difficult to use, with steep learning curves and software
tools that are unfamiliar to many. The key lesson of the consumer
computing world is the importance of the ``killer app'' that opens
computing to a new community by solving an important problem or
creating a new capability. Thus, for scientists to realize fully the
acceleration enabled by the power of the cloud, they also need a full
complement of powerful, yet easy to use tools that are accessible via
familiar PC and smartphone interfaces.
To accelerate access to cloud computing for research discovery,
data analysis and multidisciplinary collaboration, Microsoft has formed
a deep partnership with the National Science Foundation (NSF) to
provide researchers with scalable cloud tools and services, accessible
via client PCs. Thirteen research teams from across the country, whose
proposals were selected via the NSF peer review process, have been
awarded funding through the program and are being given access to
Windows Azure \3\ for a two-year period. In addition, a Microsoft
support group, composed of software developers and researchers, is
working directly with the teams to help them quickly integrate cloud
technology and equip them with a set of common tools, applications and
data collections that can be shared with the broad academic community.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Windows Azure is Microsoft's cloud computing platform that
provides on-demand computing and storage to host, scale and manage
applications and data through Microsoft data centers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The NSF awardees cover a diverse set of topics, but two examples,
as described in the NSF announcement of the awards, illustrate the
opportunities made possible via the NSF-Microsoft partnership \4\:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See NSF Press Release of April 20, 2011 at http://www.nsf.gov/
news/news--summ.jsp?cntn--id=119248.

University of South Carolina (Jonathan Goodall) and the
University of Virginia (Marty A. Humphrey)- Managing Large Watershed
Systems. Understanding hydrologic systems at the scale of large
watersheds is critically important to society when faced with extreme
events, such as floods and droughts, or with concern about water
quality. Climate change and increasing population are further
complicating watershed-scale prediction by placing additional stress
and uncertainty on future hydrologic system conditions. This project
advances hydrologic science and water resource management by creating
and using a cloud-enabled hydrologic model and data processing
workflows to examine the Savannah River Basin in the Southeastern
United States. This will provide the detail and scale necessary to
address fundamental research questions related to quantifying impacts
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
of climate change on water resources.

Virginia Tech (Wuchun Feng)- Conducting Intensive
Biocomputing. With DNA sequencers in the life sciences able to generate
a terabyte--or one trillion bytes--of data a minute, the size of DNA
sequence databases will increase 10-fold every 18 months . . . This
research team aims to create a new generation of efficient data
management and analysis software for large-scale, data-intensive
scientific applications in the cloud. They will leverage recent
experience in delivering reliable computing over volatile cloud
resources to further enhance the robustness of data management and
analysis software. They will strive to eliminate the need to assume
``no hardware failures'' or ``very infrequent failures'' as is the case
with traditional HPC data-management techniques.

Working in collaboration with the NSF teams, Microsoft has
continued to develop client tools to leverage the power of the cloud
and empower the research community. One example is an addition to
Microsoft's Excel spreadsheet software, called Excel Datascope.
Directly from Excel, a user can share data with collaborators around
the world, discover and download related data sets, or sample from
extremely large data sets in the cloud. It also provides new data
analytics and machine learning algorithms, the execution of which
transparently takes place on Windows Azure.

Driving Efficiencies, Innovation and Agility for Businesses and
Governments.

The business questions are the same for any young entrepreneur or
seasoned CEO. \5\ How do I differentiate myself from my competition?
How do I best deploy my resources and maximize the return on my
investment? How can I be nimble? How can I survive and flourish? To
answer these questions, a leader must understand and use the disruptive
economic and technological forces of his or her time.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ The business-related topics in this section were also discussed
in a supplemental advertorial by Dr. Daniel A. Reed in the June 2011
issue of Harvard Business Review.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The cloud offers small and large companies alike new opportunities
to focus on core capabilities, compete in new ways in new markets,
reduce capital costs, and increase efficiencies.
Before the cloud, a small company could only create an Internet
presence or harness IT capabilities by buying and building IT
infrastructure and hiring IT support staff, a daunting and financially
challenging prospect for many. Large companies who used IT to support
their businesses in new or increased ways faced the same challenges.
The best and worst experience that could happen to a company was that
its latest ``widget'' would be suddenly popularized in the media, and a
deluge of queries or orders would appear in a short time frame,
overwhelming its IT infrastructure.
Cloud computing allows elastic scaling to meet varying demand, not
only in the capability but also in the management of that
infrastructure. With cloud computing, companies of all sizes can be
nimble and make forward bets--quickly and without large capital costs.
This enables those smaller companies to compete globally with companies
of all sizes, fostering an environment of innovation and growth, and
enables larger companies to scale and handle burst demand, as well as
experiment with new products, approaches, or business models.
Moreover, by reducing infrastructure cost and IT staff
requirements, the cloud also lets companies focus on their core
competencies, delivering their unique products and services to their
customers. The lesson of business over time has been that success
accrues to those companies who focus on their differentiated
competencies, and partner with the other companies who specialize in
ancillary or support services. The core competency of healthcare
providers, manufacturers, retailers and others is not the management of
IT infrastructure.
Further, the cloud offers unique opportunities to support global,
multi-party and neutral collaborations-allowing a diverse set of
scattered experts to bring their expertise to bear on a joint activity.
No matter how large a business is, there is both a collaborative as
well as a competitive environment with other companies or entities. The
ability to share and extract insights from information by virtue of
partnerships with multiple parties is a powerful concept. This is
particularly important in this time of converging industry sectors-
smart vehicles are bringing auto manufacturers, energy utilities, and
entertainment companies together. Collaboration among these diverse
parties raises a host of issues--extracting the relevant data,
correlating concepts, bridging cultural and technological divides, and
alleviating competitive concerns. The cloud allows all these parties to
access the data in neutral ways, using shared or separate tools, and to
collaborate using many different models for responsibility, data
ownership, and service delivery.
Just as it does for businesses, the cloud can enable local
governments and federal agencies to focus on their core competencies
rather than IT and to act nimbly. Rarely is IT a government service
itself; it is an enabler that allows government to conduct essential
operations and deliver services. Government can take advantage of the
efficiencies of the cloud to lower operating costs for government
services, to deliver new services in more nimble and adaptive ways, and
to partner with other organizations.
The city of Miami, for instance, is using Microsoft's Windows Azure
cloud platform for Miami311, an online service that allows citizens to
map some 4,500 non-emergency issues in progress. The 311 package
combines multiple IT capabilities, including mapping, communications,
web-based interfaces, and databases and systems for tracking calls and
responses. These combined capabilities have enabled the city to
transform what had been a difficult-to-use list of outstanding service
requests into a visual map that shows citizens each and every
``ticket'' in progress in their own neighborhood and in other parts of
the city.
Clouds, together with data-generating sensors, provide the
mechanisms to combine and analyze large data sets in new ways and
extract insights. Consider all the data that has been collected by the
U.S. government, much of which has been used sparingly or by single
programs or agencies. Clouds could allow data from different agencies,
different levels of government, state or federal, and even the private
sector to be combined and used in powerful ways. One could think about
connecting historical earthquake data with local information about
building codes and private information about insurance policies, or
using health data to analyze populations and respond to flu outbreaks
or emergencies in real time.
One example of combining input from multiple government
organizations is the Pew Voting Information Project. This project is
building on Microsoft's cloud to provide official, customized data for
voters on relevant information, such as polling place locations,
including maps and directions, along with a list of candidates and
issues on the ballot. The cloud implementation allows Pew to scale up
the process of merging data from multiple sources and to facilitate
interfaces and tools that allow others to create and disseminate
applications that build on this information.

Enriching Experiences to Empower Individual Citizens.

Today, most of us own hundreds of computers, from PCs and
smartphones to embedded devices in our cars, home appliances, and
entertainment systems, and we interact with thousands of others
embedded in society's everyday supporting infrastructure, from health
monitors to traffic sensors. The number of such devices is soon
projected to exceed 50 billion, most connected to the Internet,
communicating device-to-device, device-to-cloud, and cloud-to-device.
The future is a seamlessly connected world of devices and services.
Today, we can already see glimpses of this. While in transit, I can
use my smartphone to connect to Microsoft's Bing search engine and ask
a question. With the location from the smartphone's GPS, speech-to-text
translation and location-specific data, Bing can return an answer--the
nearest movie theater is four blocks away; click here for directions
and to purchase a ticket. Such tailored, contextually appropriate
experiences are only possible through the combination of devices,
sensors and diverse cloud services.
In the future, my smartphone and the cloud might well cooperate
with my plug-in hybrid car. The appointments in my smartphone's
calendar, together with traffic data and my car's continuously
monitored energy usage will allow the cloud to plan my driving route
and charging plan, even alerting the utility as to the expected energy
load from all cars being charged. While this might sound like science
fiction, scenarios like this are being explored today, enabled by the
combination of devices, networks and clouds.

III. The Next Steps: Recommendations for Moving Forward

To realize the opportunities that the cloud creates for research,
business, government, and individuals, there are specific steps the
U.S. government should consider in four areas.
1. Deploy the Cloud for Government and Research Use. The U.S.
government, including research agencies, should be at the forefront of
deploying the cloud in innovative and effective ways.
The federal government is actively exploring and implementing cloud
solutions across many agencies. In so doing, it is discovering, as has
the private sector, that clouds provide operational efficiencies and
new sources of value. The federal government should move expeditiously
to adopt cloud capabilities, beginning with those services and data
that directly match industry experiences and best practices. NIST can
and is playing a valuable role in disseminating cloud best practices
across the U.S. government, in defining standards for cloud security
and in working with other groups to foster understanding of
opportunities afforded by clouds. In addition, the government should
explore how clouds could allow data from different agencies, different
levels of government, and even the private sector, to be combined and
used in powerful new ways.
Second, and specifically, federal research agencies should embrace
the cloud to host large-scale data sets, accelerate scientific
discovery and create new opportunities for data intensive exploration
and multidisciplinary collaboration. In addition, the federal rules for
allowable research expenses should encourage and enable the use of IT
services, such as the cloud, where appropriate, rather than duplicative
purchase and maintenance of IT infrastructure.
Finally, federal research agencies should also support the
development and implementation of new algorithms and tools that
simplify access to the burgeoning scientific data archive, facilitating
collaboration and ease of use. These tools would reduce the time
researchers, staff and students spend on IT management, allow more
scientists to tap the power of the cloud and more easily build and
share analyses and insights. The tools and techniques developed by and
for researchers analyzing and interpreting large quantities of
heterogeneous data have potentially broad applicability in domains as
diverse as health, security, energy, and business analytics.
2. Ensure Adequate Wired and Wireless Connectivity. The web and
cloud services depend on broadband communications. Without them,
service and information sharing are impossible. Concomitantly, ensuring
reliable wired and wireless connectivity, with adequate bandwidth and
latency, is critical to ensuring successful adoption of the cloud and
realization of its benefits. The phenomenal growth of digital data, the
rise of streaming media services, and the explosive growth of Internet-
connected devices are all straining our nation's broadband
infrastructure.
It is critical that we continue to design and deploy new backbone
networks that support higher data rates, develop and deploy new
protocols and infrastructure for the next generation of wireless
networks and define the global standards that will shape the future of
the globe-encircling cloud. We must also remember that digital access
to information and services is increasingly the enabler of economic
competitiveness, of lifelong education in a rapidly changing world, and
of government efficiency and service delivery.
These are technology challenges, requiring new semiconductor
approaches and device designs, optical networks and switches, and
software and adaptive spectrum management. They are also policy
challenges, where the growth of demand and shifting expectations
challenge our existing approaches to network regulation, construction,
deployment and operation. We need to adopt a new model that fosters
innovation and rapid, large-scale deployment, recognizing that the pace
of change is quickening.
3. Foster Continued Support for Computing Research and Education.
Today's cloud technology-software and services, servers and storage,
PCs and smart phones, wired and wireless networks-is derived from basic
computing research conducted by universities, government laboratories,
and companies over the past four decades. Yet each new computing era
brings new questions and new research opportunities and needs. Clouds
are no exception.
To ensure that the U.S. continues to remain at the forefront of
cloud technology, continued investment in basic research is critical.
There are deep and open questions in areas as diverse as the future of
silicon scaling and system-on-a-chip design, energy-efficient system
design, primary and secondary storage, data mining and analytics, wired
and wireless networks, system resilience and reliability, privacy and
security, and user interfaces and accessibility, to name just a few.
Insights and innovations from this research will spawn new companies,
create jobs and reshape our future.
In addition to continued research investment, it is critical to
support the pipeline that produces researchers, and others who will
able to invent new uses of the cloud and information technology. The
Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that the computing sector will
have 1.5 million job openings over the next ten years, yet the number
of graduates receiving Bachelors, Masters or Ph.D. computer science
degrees in 2009 was approximately 45,000. While the number of degrees
is trending upward, it falls far short of where it needs to be to meet
the demand. For example, in May, Microsoft had 4,551 unfilled job
openings, of which 2,629 were for computer science positions.
To meet this current and future demand, the U.S. must strengthen
the quality of and access to computing education at all levels,
particularly K-12. Such efforts, by federal, state, and local
governments, as well as by companies and non-profit organizations, will
not only provide a more capable and larger workforce for IT research
and operations, but also raise the overall computing-related
capabilities of the population. Strong analytical thinking and
understanding of technological systems will be necessary for many
careers as IT continues to permeate more and more aspects of society.
Consistent with these concerns about the IT workforce and computing
education, Microsoft is a founding member of the Computing in the Core
coalition, which supports computer science education, particularly at
the K-12 level. To tackle these challenges, the coalition advocates for
coordinated efforts on a number of fronts: improving the training,
certification, and support for K-12 computer science teachers, as well
as increasing their numbers; improving the available standards and
assessments, and developing appropriate courses, for K-12 computer
science courses; ensuring that computing courses count toward a
student's core graduation requirements; and expanding access to and
participation in computing courses by under-represented populations.
4. Revise Policies in Light of Technology Change. Every new
information technology shift brings change. In each case, the benefits
of change accrue to the prepared and adaptable. Many of our current
policies and regulations have not kept pace with new technology
developments, and their revision is important to accelerating the
implementation and benefits of cloud.
Many such issues are discussed in the report of the Commission on
the Leadership Opportunity in U.S. Deployment of the Cloud (CLOUD\2\),
which has been described by another witness at this hearing. For
example, policies around the Electronic Communications Privacy Act,
processes for pursuing and prosecuting cybercriminals, privacy
frameworks, and transnational data flows require reconsideration in
light of current technologies and in recognition that technology is
rapidly evolving.
The best approach in a time of rapid technological change is to
establish policy goals and a flexible framework for achieving them, and
to avoid focus on specific technological approaches that could chill
innovation or quickly become outmoded.
***
The cloud is the foundation of the 21st century digital economy.
This is an exciting time, when the future becomes the present. Access
to the power of the cloud can be a great equalizer, providing access to
the world's knowledge base to individuals, anywhere, anytime;
empowering entrepreneurs and companies large and small to sell their
products and ideas globally; and enabling scientists and engineers to
discover and innovate in ways that will define the future.
Will we come together and take the steps necessary to prepare and
enable this vision for the future? I believe we can and we will.
Working together, the private and public sectors can ensure U.S.
competitiveness and cloud adoption in the short term, and realize the
benefits that result from the cloud's new capabilities and experiences
in the long term.
In conclusion, let me thank you for this Committee's longstanding
support for scientific discovery and innovation. I would be pleased to
answer any questions you might have.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Dr. Reed. I now recognize Mr.
Combs for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. NICK COMBS, FEDERAL CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER,
EMC CORPORATION

Mr. Combs. Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Lujan, and other
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
invitation to address both the opportunities and challenges
associated with cloud computing.
My name is Nick Combs and I am the Chief Technology Officer
for EMC Corporation's Federal Division. Prior to joining EMC, I
spent 25 years in the Federal Government, including senior
positions in the Department of Defense and the intelligence
community. Over the course of my career, I experienced many of
the IT challenges facing organizations today, particularly as
enterprises transition to cloud services.
For today's testimony, I was asked by the Subcommittee to
discuss some of the major cybersecurity challenges facing cloud
service providers and adopters.
During the past couple years, the frequency, volume, and
impact of cyber attacks has reached pandemic levels. Those
attacks are resulting in real economic harm, as well as posing
very significant national security challenges. Because the
Internet is used by everyone everywhere, by large and small
government and commercial organizations, there are multiple
avenues of exploitation. The targets of more advanced cyber
attacks now include organizations as diverse as pharmaceutical
and automotive companies to the defense industrial base and
government agencies, and yes, even information security
companies.
As you may know, RSA, the Security Division of EMC,
announced on March 17 of 2011 that it detected a sophisticated
cyber attack on its systems. The attack on RSA was a stark
reminder to us and for the entire information security
community that no one is immune from cyber attacks. The attack
also reflects the sophistication of advanced attackers in
understanding the interconnections and the interdependencies
organizations have in our network world and how to exploit
those relationships to achieve their goals.
And this brings us to cloud computing, which is
fundamentally changing the way that organizations think about
IT. There is a lot of confusion in the market today, especially
around what type of clouds and what type of data is appropriate
to go into those clouds, whether it is public, private,
community, or hybrid, CIOs must have the information available
to make risk-based decisions on what information should be
placed into what types of clouds. Most security architectures
of today are nothing more than a broken safety net of point
security solutions products.
During the next several years, cloud computing adoptions
could enable organizations to improve information security by
replacing the disparate and legacy IT systems that are so
common today. Instead of having IT and information security
organizations protecting stovepipe systems, organizations are
able to implement centralized monitoring, management, and
security solutions. Security is also being built into the
information infrastructure that makes the foundation of the
cloud, including virtualization and data storage platforms.
Cloud computing holds special promise for smaller
organizations which left to their own device cannot always
afford the advanced expertise and technologies necessary to
protect against today's threats. Those organizations, by
consuming IT services from cloud providers, can gain the
benefits of advanced security in an affordable way.
Through the cloud, organizations can centrally manage their
IT systems and provide uniform policy implementations. They
will reduce the operating and management cost, thus freeing up
resources to address other needs.
EMC supports the Administration's ``cloud-first'' strategy,
and along with the ongoing data center consolidation efforts,
we believe that the policies, if fully implemented, will save
the Federal Government billions of dollars in IT budgets
annually. In this skyrocketing budget deficits and new budget
caps, now is the time for Federal Government agencies to
adopt--to accelerate their adoption of cloud infrastructure and
services.
Many federal agencies have already begun to build the
cloud--the bridge to the cloud by adopting some form of
virtualization. For example, right here in the House of
Representatives, your IT organization has utilized
virtualization in its transition to the cloud. Technologies and
best practices exist today to deliver private cloud
environments inside federal organizations to gain dramatic IT
improvements and IT efficiency while also providing the
security required to protect the sensitive information within
the government enterprise.
Security must be--must evolve to become much more centered
around the users and on the information they are accessing. For
that reason, emerging technology practices such as adaptive
authentication and data loss preventions are both widely used
in the commercial world and should be increasingly used in
Federal Government agencies.
As I conclude my testimony, I would like to comment on the
role of NIST in advancing cloud computing and trust in the
cloud. Through its cloud computing workshops, NIST has already
played a vital role in bringing together the public and private
sectors to zero in on security interoperability and portability
challenges related to the cloud. Congress should also allow
federal agencies to select the cloud deployment models that
best fit the business needs and security needs rather than
favoring one cloud model over the other.

I again thank the Committee for allowing me to contribute
to this hearing today. Thank you and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Combs follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Nick Combs, Federal Chief Technology Officer,
EMC Corporation

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Combs. I now recognize Dr.
McClure to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. DAVID MCCLURE,

ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE OF CITIZEN SERVICES

AND INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES, GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION

Dr. McClure. Thank you, Chairman Quayle and Congressman
Lujan. It is a pleasure to be here, and I would like to applaud
the Subcommittee's leadership in expanding the dialogue and
understanding of new cloud technologies, and the risks and the
rewards they offer for modernizing the government's IT.
As you have heard from the other witnesses today, cloud
computing really offers a compelling opportunity to
substantially improve the efficiency, agility, and performance
of federal IT. With cloud, agencies pay only for the resources
they use in response to fluctuating demand, they avoid the
expenses of building and maintaining costly IT infrastructure,
and ensure the appropriate level of security for data and
applications.
At GSA, we are developing new cloud computing procurement
vehicles that leverage the government's buying power, we are
ensuring effective cloud security standards are in place to
lower risk, we are identifying and leveraging government-wide
adoption of cloud solutions such as email and collaboration. My
written statement highlights our significant progress under the
25-point IT Reform Plan in areas like data center consolidation
analysis and cost-modeling, more robust government-wide
security approaches under the soon-to-be-launched FedRAMP
program, and efficient procurement vehicles.
Let me summarize my written statement provided to you with
three key points. First, agency executives should focus on the
desired government, business, or mission outcome driving cloud
adoption rather than cloud technology itself. We know there are
opportunities for improving the cost-effectiveness and
efficiency of IT used in the Federal Government. CIOs need to
develop and deploy effective cloud solution strategies that
address pressing agency needs taking into account cost savings
and expected performance improvements. Agencies must analyze
business needs and identify cloud solutions that best fit their
requirements by making cloud adoption part of an overall IT
portfolio management and sourcing strategy.
In short, cloud readiness assessments and prudent
decisional roadmaps are essential to move forward both
decisively and expeditiously in cloud computing.
Second, while early, we definitely are seeing concrete
benefits from the adoption of cloud computing solutions in the
Federal Government, particularly for low- and moderate-risk
data areas. At GSA and USDA, for example, we expect to see
email costs cut by 50 percent, and many other agencies are
projecting similar results.
The benefits are not just around cost reduction. Cloud
deployments allow for much faster deployment of systems and
applications. Provisioning can occur in hours or days as
opposed to traditional months or years. It can increase
productivity, it gives agencies greater flexibility and
scalability, it enhances our sustainability postures, and it
improves self-service capabilities. As agencies consolidate
their virtual data centers, cloud provides an ideal path
forward.
Third, while the path forward for cloud computing is
positive, we still must pay attention to the inherent risk
associated with its use, as is the case in virtually all
technology areas. The risks generally revolve around the
evolution of some key standards designed to address technical,
operational, and managerial risk associated with computing in
general. Let me mention three key standard areas.
Number one is establishing baseline security standards that
must be met by cloud service providers. We are taking steps to
achieve this via our FedRAMP program, which we have designed
with extensive industry and government-wide participation and
feedback. We are establishing a common set of baseline security
assessments and continuous monitoring requirements for cloud
computing using NIST standards. We are providing a common,
consistent, security-risk and authorization process that can be
leveraged across agencies, the use-once-and-often approach.
Certifying qualified, independent, third-party assessors is
another area where we are spending a great deal of attention so
that we can bring some consistency and uniformity in how cloud
security assessments are done. And we are shifting the risk
from annual reporting under FISMA to more robust continuous
monitoring providing real-time detection and demonstration of
successful mitigation of vulnerabilities.
The other two standards areas involve interoperability and
data portability. NIST is taking the lead in these two areas.
It is aggressively pursuing use-case study approaches that can
adequately demonstrate the utility of proposed standards in
test scenarios so that market solutions can proceed and be
moved into the Federal Government. These two things can help
protect against vendor lock-in and ensure data reconstitution
should an agency decide to move its services to another
provider.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. That concludes my statement. I
would be glad to respond to any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McClure follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. David McClure, Associate Administrator,
Office of Citizen Services and Innovative Technologies,
General Services Administration
Chairman Quayle and Members of the Subcommittee:
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss
the General Service Administration's (GSA) leadership role in ongoing
efforts to enable and accelerate adoption of cloud computing across the
federal government. Cloud adoption is a critical component of the
Administration's plan to improve management of the government's IT
resources. The reforms underway are enabling agencies to use
information more efficiently and effectively, delivering improved
mission results at lower cost.
Cloud computing offers a compelling opportunity to substantially
improve the efficiency, agility and performance of the federal
information technology portfolio. It allows agencies to pay only for
the resources they use in response to fluctuating demand, avoid the
expenses of building and maintaining costly IT infrastructure, and
control the appropriate level of security for data and applications.
Cloud computing is also a key technology for achieving cost effective
IT. In fact, agencies have already started to realize numerous benefits
as they begin to adopt cloud computing across their programs. These
include cost reduction, faster deployment of systems and applications,
increased productivity, greater flexibility and scalability and
improved self-service capabilities. As agencies consolidate and
virtualize their data centers, cloud provides an ideal path forward to
achieve needed results while substantially lowering costs--an essential
focus given federal budget constraints.
GSA is playing a leadership role in facilitating easy access to
cloud-based solutions from commercial providers that meet federal
requirements, enhancing agencies' capacity to analyze viable cloud
computing options that meet their business and technology modernization
needs, and reducing barriers to safe and secure cloud computing. We are
developing new cloud computing procurement options with proven
solutions that leverage the government's buying power, ensuring
effective cloud security and standards are in place to lower risk, and
identifying and leveraging government-wide uses of cloud computing
solutions such as email. These are highlighted on our web page
Info.Apps.gov, which provides useful information about cloud computing
and available solutions.
The Administration's efforts to apply rigor to information
technology management and foster cloud adoption is framed by several
key guidance documents and policies, including the OMB 25 Point
Implementation Plan to Reform Federal Information Technology Management
and the Federal Cloud Computing Strategy issued by the federal CIO's
office. The initiatives being implemented in response to these
documents are making significant progress tackling long standing
challenges in the way IT is acquired and managed. These reforms are
also meeting the Administration's goals to make government more
responsive, operationally effective, cost efficient, transparent,
participatory, collaborative, and innovative for the citizens it
serves.

The Subcommittee asked that I address the four questions outlined
below.

(1)  Please provide an overview of how the General Services
Administration (GSA) is implementing the Office of Management and
Budget's (OMB) 25 Point Implementation Plan to Reform Federal
Information Technology Management, the OMB Federal Data Center
Consolidation Initiative, and the Federal Chief Information Officer's
Federal Cloud Computing Strategy.

GSA plays a central role in realizing the goals set forth in the
Administration's initiatives and strategies to reform IT management,
consolidate data centers and implement cloud computing. Below are the
primary initiatives underway to achieve the policy goals of Data Center
Consolidation, the Cloud Computing Strategy and the specific objectives
of the 25 Point Plan.
Below is an overview of the work we are conducting to support
specific objectives of the Federal IT Reform Strategy. Each objective
of the 25 Point IT Reform Plan for which GSA is directly responsible is
identified in bold; the specific section is in parenthesis.

Complete detailed implementation plans to consolidate at least 800 data
centers by 2015 (#1)

Create a government-wide marketplace for data center availability (#2)

The Federal Data Center Consolidation Initiative (FDCCI), managed
jointly by GSA and OMB, is charged with reversing the federal
government's explosive data center growth to optimize and improve
efficiency of federal IT infrastructure. The FDCCI is chartered to
engage with agencies, support and facilitate agency data center
consolidation planning, and to provide tools to federal partners.

Under the FDCCI, GSA is accomplishing the following:

Working with a government-wide task force co-chaired by
DHS and DOI that meets monthly and includes representatives from all 24
CFO Act agencies.

Assisting agencies to maximize the return on investments
for data centers to remain in their inventory after consolidation

Ensuring consistent data collection of the federal data
center inventory by developing and disseminating standard templates to
collect, manage, and analyze agency data center inventory data.

Collaborating with industry on best practices and
solutions for key data center consolidation issues.

Developing a comprehensive data center Total Cost Model
for agencies to use to analyze alternative consolidation scenarios,
enable data-driven decision-making for infrastructure cost and
performance optimization.

Pursuing development of a data center marketplace that
would help optimize infrastructure utilization across government by
matching agencies with excess computing capacity with those that have
immediate requirements. A working group is addressing consensus-
building, requirements gathering, and other key facets necessary to
ensure the marketplace's success.

Stand up contract vehicles for secure IaaS solutions (#4)

IT infrastructure represents a multi-billion dollar investment that
requires constant maintenance, expensive technology upgrades, and
dedication of valuable personnel. Agencies are faced with outdated
infrastructure requiring ongoing, major investments to keep pace with
growing demand and rapidly changing technology. Servers across both
government and industry are highly underutilized. To address these
issues, GSA's Federal Acquisition Service (FAS) established a Blanket
Purchase Agreement (BPA) with 12 companies (many with multiple
partners) that offer cloud storage, computing power, and cloud-based
website hosting as commodity services that enable agencies to optimize
their infrastructure and achieve substantial, long-term cost savings.
Under these Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) contracts, agencies pay
only for what they need, define performance requirements, have the
flexibility to respond to changing demands, benefit from commodity
pricing, and are assured of secure solutions. At present, four
contractors are offering services under the BPA, with the remaining
completing the security authorization process. DHS has recently awarded
a task order under this BPA for the consolidation and migration of its
public facing websites to a cloud hosting service.

Stand up contract vehicles for commodity services (#5)

Working closely with email and collaboration experts from across
government, GSA developed a government-wide contract vehicle to help
agencies move email and collaboration solutions to the cloud. The Email
as a Service (EaaS) BPA is an active procurement managed by FAS;
responses are currently being evaluated. It will offer federal
customers a streamlined procurement vehicle to commercially available
cloud email solutions that best fits their agency's needs. Based on
information from Forrester Research, average cost savings for agencies
migrating to cloud-based email are expected to be $11/mailbox/month, $1
million in annual savings for every 7,500 users, or approximately 44%
over existing on-premise email solutions. The BPA will offer a range of
email services in public, private, and highly secured clouds, making
available robust, feature-rich, secure email and collaboration service
options similar to those currently being implemented at GSA, USDA,
USAID, DOE, and other agencies. It can meet the needs of the 15
agencies that have identified 950,000 e-mail boxes they plan to move to
the cloud under the Administration's IT Reform effort.

Launch an interactive platform for pre-RFP agency-industry
collaboration (#25)

To streamline the procurement process and enhance communication
with industry, GSA is establishing ``cross-trained'' program teams and
improving the way requirements are defined. GSA is working to establish
an interactive platform for pre-RFP agency-industry collaboration.
Based on input from government and industry, alternatives for design
and delivery of an online collaboration tool have been examined and
rated. Candidates for the tool included existing government systems and
commercial collaboration tools.
GSA not only is fostering adoption of cloud computing government-
wide, but as required under the Cloud First policy, has recently
completed a major cloud migration of our internal email and
collaboration solution that demonstrates the significant potential of
cloud solutions to achieve substantial cost savings. In approximately
seven months, we moved 17,000 users to Google Apps for Government.
Savings over the next five years are projected to be over $15M. Not
only have we reduced costs, but we have also made significant gains in
environmental sustainability--we shut down 45 servers, which is
equivalent to taking 60 cars off the road. The lessons learned from our
cloud implementation have been captured and are being shared with
agencies across the government as they seek to achieve similar success.

2. Please provide an overview of the costs associated with implementing
these plans at GSA, and provide a description of both the short-term
and long-term budgetary impacts of these changes.

To date, GSA's Federal Cloud Computing Initiative has been funded
under the e-Government program administered by the Federal Chief
Information Officer. In FY10 and FY11 GSA's Federal Cloud Computing
Initiative (FCCI) Program Management Office (PMO) budget of $4.8
million was allocated to five primary tasks:

Establish procurement vehicles that allow agencies to
purchase IT resources as commodities--resulting in the award of the
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) Blanket Purchase Agreement under GSA
Schedule 70

Address security risks in deploying government
information in a cloud environment--resulting in the development of the
Federal Risk Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP)

Establish a procurement vehicle that allows agencies to
purchase cloud-based e-mail services--resulting in the issuance of the
Email as a Service (EaaS) procurement that is currently underway Work
with agencies to consolidate their data center asset--resulting in the
Federal Data Center Consolidation Initiative that works with agencies
to inventory their data center assets and to identify targets for
consolidation and optimization Create apps.gov, an on-line storefront
that provides access to over 3,000 cloud-based products and services
where agencies can research solutions, compare prices and place on-line
orders using GSA's eBuy system.
This initial funding provided by the e-Gov Fund allowed GSA to
accomplish significant results. However, there are key activities that
still need to be accomplished to realize the significant, additional
potential cost savings and productivity improvements that GSA can help
agencies achieve. The continuation of these cost-saving initiatives is
dependent on FY12 eGov Fund budget levels and decisions.

3. What cybersecurity steps is the GSA taking to protect federal data
and communications in the cloud? To what extent does GSA work with NIST
on the development of cybersecurity standards for federal cloud
computing use?

The primary goal of the Administration's Cloud First policy is to
achieve widespread practical use of secure cloud computing to improve
operational efficiency and effectiveness of government. Currently, each
agency typically conducts its own security Certification and
Accreditation (C&A) process for every system it acquires, leading to
unnecessary expense, duplication and inconsistency. According to the
2009 FISMA report to Congress, agencies reported spending $300M on C&A
activities alone.
Working in close collaboration with DHS, NIST, DoD and OMB and the
Federal CIO Council, GSA is leading establishment of the Federal
Authorization Risk Management Program (FedRAMP) to accelerate adoption
of secure cloud solutions by agencies across government.

Key benefits include:

Provides a single, consistent security risk assessment
and authorization that can be leveraged across agencies--an ``approve
once, and use often'' approach

Establishes a common set of baseline security assessment
and continuous monitoring requirements using NIST standards

Approves and makes available qualified, independent third
party assessors, ensuring consistent assessment and accreditation of
cloud solutions and based on NIST's proven conformity assessment
approach

Shifts risk management from annual reporting under FISMA
to more robust continuous monitoring, providing real-time detection and
mitigation of persistent vulnerabilities and security incidents.

There is strong support and demand for FedRAMP from agencies
seeking to adopt cloud services, as required by the Administration's
Cloud First policy, and from industry. FedRAMP's processes, policy,
governance, and technical security standards have all been arrived at
via a consensus-based approach that includes agencies' Chief
Information Security Officers, the Federal CIO Council, National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Department of Homeland
Security (DHS), Department of Defense (DoD), National Security Agency
(NSA), and numerous industry organizations. This new program is
expected to be initially launched this Fall.

4. What other challenges face federal agencies in adopting cloud
computing services, and what steps is the GSA taking to overcome these
challenges?

Considerable progress has been made in adopting successful cloud
solutions. Cloud computing is now an accepted part of the federal IT
lexicon. However, there continues to be a need for more thorough
understanding of the cloud's deployment models, unique security
implications, and data management challenges. Agency executives should
not focus on cloud technology itself; rather, they should focus on the
desired outcome driving the need for cloud adoption. CIOs need to work
with their line of business executives and program managers to develop
and deploy effective cloud roadmaps that address pressing agency
mission needs, taking into account costs savings and expected
performance improvements. Agencies should analyze business needs and
identify cloud solutions that best fit their requirements by making
cloud adoption part of an overall IT portfolio management and sourcing
strategy. NIST is currently working on a Cloud Computing Technology
Roadmap that will be released in November. If linked to cloud provider
products and services, it would greatly assist in this decision-making.
Cultural resistance is also a major challenge. Cloud adoption
requires moving away from managing physical assets to buying services.
As GSA's own experience has shown, these issues can be effectively
addressed. Critical success factors include robust communication,
practical training and emphasis on the benefits of cloud, and
especially on the control agencies gain by buying what they need and
defining performance metrics that are tied to desired performance
results. GSA found that having a group of early adopters fostered buy-
in and enthusiasm, and provided a ready corps of skilled users.
Conclusion
Mr. Chairman, General Services Administration is leading the
Administration's charge to make government more open, transparent, and
effective for the citizens it serves. In our increasingly data-centric
and network--based world and workplace, effective and efficient
procurement and implementation of information technology will be
paramount in making sure the federal government closes the IT
performance gap between it and the private sector. Cloud computing and
data center consolidation are key initiatives that should be pursued
aggressively to achieve needed costs savings and improve effectiveness
of government operations.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear today. I look forward to
answering questions from you and Members of the Subcommittee.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Dr. McClure, and I want to
thank all the witnesses for their testimony today.
Reminding Members that Committee rules limit questioning to
five minutes, the Chair will at this point open the round of
questioning, and I will recognize myself for five minutes.
Mr. Capellas, when looking at the data from the last 10, 20
years like you pointed out, a lot of the job creation was
occurring in the IT sector, but it was also occurring with
companies that are five years or younger, the startup IT, the
startup companies. In Phoenix where I am from, we have a lot of
the larger players like Honeywell, Intel, and some of the
bigger players. We also have some smaller ones as well, but
where do you think the opportunities for new service and
application providers in the IT sector are going to come from?
Does cloud computing offer a unique area for more startup
companies to really be created in advance in that realm?
Mr. Capellas. So what we are going to see--great question
by the way. What we are going to see, I think, is something
different than we have seen in the past, and we are going to
have a bifurcation of the two sides of IT. The cloud basically
says I don't have to care or know where the physical or
underlying infrastructure is, and today, if you think about
most cases, most IT shops, 70 percent of all costs go on
physical hardware and only 30 percent on the real innovation,
which is the application side. And when you think about what
other business would you have where you spend 70 percent to
keep the lifeline and 30 percent to really drive innovation?
What is happening today in the industry is a level of
industry verticalization we haven't seen before, so I will be
respectful to all the players in the industry. If you are a
Hewlett Packard, you are starting--you are building an entire
conversion infrastructure from servers to storage to capacity
and you are going to buy that as a physical. If you are IBM,
you have got your stack; if you are Oracle, you have got your
stack; if you are EMC and Cisco in partnership with VM where
you have got your stack; and it is much more tightly bundled.
The big players will capture a much larger share of the
physical side of the infrastructure because the end user will
want to buy it from one place. And that is the beauty of it.
You don't have to know or care.
The second big piece of this is of that physical piece, 30
percent of all IT resources are just screwing the pieces
together to make a match. So what will happen is the job
creation will come from the large players going to the physical
side with vertical consolidation. Now, what that--on the good
side of that says is then there will be a lot more people who
are able to write much quicker applications. The whole world of
application development will change.
And so one of the fun things I do is the average person has
three connected devices and over 100 applications that they do
on their smartphone and there are 500,000 smartphone
applications because those applications can be generated very
quickly because the physical infrastructure is there. So to
answer your question very specifically, I think the large
players who are vertically integrated will create the job
growth, and it is imperative that U.S. companies continue to
succeed as the foundation of the critical infrastructure and
there will probably be fewer levels of innovation at the
physical layer. But that will spawn a whole new generation of
application developers and smaller companies can write quicker,
lighter applications and those frameworks will be available
because you can then drop those applications onto the physical
infrastructure that is in place. And you will see in the world
of business and other applications the same kind of just
massive rollouts you have seen with the--with everybody who has
got their, you know, iPhone. And how many of you could even
count how many applications you have on your own phone? You
probably paid a $1.99 on average for them.
So application development becomes a foundational piece. It
opens up for lots of great innovation. That innovation allows
IT spending to be placed where it belongs most, which is on
being creative and the big guys take over running the physical
infrastructure.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. And then I wanted you to expand on--
because I would want to get an understanding is that the
commissioner states that one of the things we should do is
provide incentive for people to migrate to the cloud.
Mr. Capellas. Yes.
Chairman Quayle. My question is if you are going to save--a
company is going to save money and increase efficiency, isn't
that incentive enough to have people moving--migrating to the
cloud rather than--why do we need additional incentives to push
people to the cloud?
Mr. Capellas. A bit of our recommendation relates
strictly--is focused on the manner of our procurement of the
Federal Government and agencies.
Chairman Quayle. Okay.
Mr. Capellas. If you think today the way agencies work is
each of the departments has to measure against a unit of
measurement. So if I have a personal computer, I can say I want
it from company A, B, or C. If I want a server company A, B, or
C but I want to buy a unit of computing, which can be shared,
there is no benchmark, and so as a result, there tends to be a
rollover of individual departments acting to simply get five or
ten percent better than they used to be and groups not wanting
to share.
At a fascinating exercise, which was brought about by Vivek
Kundra, who brought us in to sort of say would you talk to the
whole group and to see how many data centers could be shared by
agencies crossing buying in a different way. So one of the
incentives is to be able to say how about we put an incentive
in place that says you will get to reinvest in your budget
cycle what you saved in order to get more collaboration across
groups but also to change the paradigm to simply buying
something at five percent more.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. Thanks. And Dr. Reed, really
quickly, one of the things that I have been talking with a lot
of people within the research area is the lack of collaboration
that has occurred. Do you think that the more people going to
the cloud will actually increase collaboration, not just
between the public and private sectors, but also within
researchers who are working on tandem projects from different
universities? Because you have been in the universities for a
while even though it was UNC--I am a Dukie so we still count
that as a university. But could you just explain that very
briefly?
Dr. Reed. Certainly. I think it is actually--it is the
research version of part of the answer to the question that
Mike was mentioning as well, which is many of the value
propositions that exist by virtue of the rise of scientific
data--and the reason why we have had explosive growth of
scientific data is the same reason all of us have cheap digital
cameras and lots of digital photos is because those kinds of
sensors have made it very possible to capture large volumes of
data economically. I exaggerate a bit, but that is
fundamentally the technology piece.
What has happened in the research world is an analog
actually of many other phenomena. It is true in industry and I
think in government that much of the value lies actually in the
intersection of data from multiple disciplines. And because
those data tend to be held in silos within individual
organizations, research universities, or federal agencies, it
is extraordinarily difficult to cross-fertilize them and look
at their intersection.
One of the things that the cloud brings to the table is the
ability to host that data and make it broadly available so that
one can extract insight. I think that is true in an
entrepreneurship level where the ability to mine insight from
data actually has economic value. It is certainly true in the
research world as well. And so the ability to attack complex
problems--because the traditional model of success in academia
is depth in their own area, and yet many of the problems we
care about cross not only technical domains but they cross
social and other domains. The ability to bring people together
to reason is one of the powers of the cloud.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Mr. Lujan for five minutes.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Dr. Reed, I appreciate again the panel's attention to
the cost saving that is going to take place associated with IT
tools, hardware and software. But I want to zero in on total
cost, specifically energy. And can you briefly talk about what
cloud computing means to smart grid application across the
country as we talk about energy efficiency and lowering utility
costs, energy consumption costs for businesses small and large,
for people all around America and what this means to that?
Dr. Reed. Certainly. Let me start with the cloud itself.
One of the interesting things that has happened in the back-end
infrastructure is the growth of that infrastructure at scale
has driven an enormous focus in the industry on reducing the
energy consumption of data centers themselves--more efficient
packaging and cooling and other things. That is one of the
enabling pieces, and so it is important not to forget energy
efficiency there.
But if one looks at the larger question you are posing
about how does analysis of data enable new possibilities? It is
actually related to the Chairman's question in an interesting
way, because if you think about the broad sort of issues about
how being able to capture data appropriately, anonymized,
private, and secure from individual homes, the future of hybrid
and smart vehicles that are electrically powered where you
could take that information and do intelligent route planning
so that--reduce the energy consumption for the vehicles and the
demand on the electrical grid by planning routes accordingly to
give drivers advice about routes. Similar sorts of issues begin
to accrue in the home about being able to plan when you turn on
appliances, how you manage that energy, and then the same sort
of things apply largely at the large-building scale whether
they be federal or private buildings where understanding the
behavior patterns make it possible to do some new things.
So what brings those two things together? One is this
incredible world of sensors, and that is part of what the smart
grid is about. The other is the ability to analyze data at
unprecedented scale and generate and extract trends and
behavior. It is true in healthcare; it is true in smart grids
and energy; it is true in transportation; it is true in all
kinds of other business, competitive worlds. It is the insight
from the data that that makes possible.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that and especially with the
conversation around the smart grid, recently there was a
conversation in New Mexico that someone described the smart
grid as the Internet for electricity. As you talk about the
connectivity and really what it means to integrate, but it is
really lower cost.
Along those lines, I would be interested in hearing your
thoughts or any of the panel on what can be done with NIST or
with the market as a whole as we talk about containing costs.
So the cloud will allow us to lower utility consumption right
now so on the desktop, the hardware that we are using as
individuals, what can be done to lower the utility consumption,
lowering cost for the data centers where we are having to spend
so much money right now on the cooling? Because those
temperatures when you walk into a server, we all--or data
center, you all know that it is cooled. What is preventing us
from getting to the point where those things can run at 72 to
76 degrees, lowering consumption costs without using outside
air on the cooling as opposed to doing it inside? That way we
are lowering costs for the government, the taxpayer, for you
all and for businesses everywhere.
Mr. Capellas. Well, that--please, go ahead.
Dr. Reed. Well, I was going to say that is exactly what is
happening. Please.
Mr. Capellas. It is a couple of real simple things. The
first one, you know, I always love, you know--one of my
favorite things is unfortunately sense isn't common. Common
sense tells you whenever you consolidate a huge number of
servers which are very inefficient--so when you have all these
small boxes running out there, the best you can hope for is 30
to 35 percent utilization. That is the best and--whether that
is servers or storage. When you run these big virtualized
machines because the way a cloud works is it says I am going to
go grab a piece of capacity, I am always running at a higher
level, you are going to 80 or 90 percent capacity utilization.
So the first question is you have a whole lot more efficiency
and a whole lot less boxes.
The second one is just the natural evolution of technology.
We have designed into these next-generation boxes. They are
much more environmentally friendly simply because we have taken
power consumption as a fundamental design to lower it. So part
of it is just the natural curve. The second place is just the
much higher utilization that you get off the consumption.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that, Mr. Capellas. Anyone else?
Mr. McClure?
Dr. McClure. No, please, go ahead.
Mr. Combs. I would just like to add, you know, an example
of EMC's first phase in virtualization doing exactly what
Michael was talking about, we had $74 million in data center
equipment savings the first year. 12 million of that was in
power and space cooling alone. And that was just in the very
initial stage, which only represents about 20 percent of the
savings that we have gained over our corporation's transition
to the cloud. The best practices are out there. Industry is
already doing this. The Federal Government can just look to
industry and the successes that we have had in industry and
apply those within the government.
Dr. McClure. And I would agree. I think, you know, exactly
the case at GSA and around the government, the average server--
if you put it in real terms, the average server utilizes about
4 tons of carbon dioxide waste annually. Every server is the
equivalent of--if you retire a server, on average, you are
taking one and a half cars off the streets. So we point to over
half a million dollars in savings by just doing virtualization
technologies in our data centers. Up to 60, 70 cars taken off
the road, you know, these are real terms that is showing that
you are having an impact on sustainability in a real way. And
the adoption of new technologies I think is absolutely
essential as we go forward because the technology improvements
will continue to occur.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Dr. McClure. I notice that time has
run out. I think we will get another chance to ask a few
questions here, but I really appreciate the attention to the
cost savings that we will yield from energy consumption as well
for businesses all over the country as well as residential.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Lujan.
The Chair now recognizes the Chairman of the Full
Committee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hall.
Chairman Hall. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Dr. Reed, in your testimony, you state that the need to
adopt a new network policy model that fosters innovation and
large-scale deployment indicates that you think that they don't
already have that. I guess my question is what way do you see
the current model as inadequate and what changes would be
required to foster innovation and large-scale deployment?
Dr. Reed. So it is really a comment on the fact that if one
looks at any set of computing technologies that it is the
ratios of speeds and capacities that determine the efficacy. So
if we look at the rise of consumer devices, the speed and power
consumption of the devices, their performance, their form,
factor, and mobility really made some things possible.
One of the challenges we face in networks, there are two
fundamentally in my judgment, and they are related in the
spirit that I said networking is the oxygen that lets cloud
services breathe because it is the conduit of the information
and services from the data center to the consumer, whether that
consumer be a government agency, a company, or an individual.
The rate of growth and scale of the data that is being produced
is challenging the speed of the broadband networks that we have
deployed in this country. It is the electronic analog of saying
we have too many cars on the road; we need to address the
issue. So the ability to deliver that data reliably and at high
volume across the country and indeed the connections of the
rest of the world is a big piece of that.
The other is the pressure that we are all experiencing in
wireless communications and the explosive growth of the number
of devices and the expectations that we all have for not only
access to data but the ability to deliver multimedia, audio and
video to those devices is stressing many of the historical
approaches that we have had, the spectrum allocation and
management.
So what I am really saying is we have to face both of those
issues and work together to address the need not only to
continue to expand the speed and coverage that we have for our
optical and wired networks but continue to work together to
address the access issues that will deliver those just-in-time
services. Because that smart grid vision of the world depends
on wired and wireless access to that information to be able to
make those intelligent decisions.
Chairman Hall. Well, you say that we have to address--I
guess if you told me I didn't get your answer as to how, what
kind of changes would be required? What special changes would
you make?
Dr. Reed. So it is a good question. I will try to be a bit
less circular in my answer. I apologize.
We have to build out more networks and we have to find
mechanisms to make that happen more rapidly. On our wired
networks, if you think about the speeds that we normally
denominate units in, we talk in units of the Broadband
Transcontinental Network in units of 10 or 40 gigabytes per
second. When you consider the fact that a large cloud data
center contains a nontrivial fraction of the text holdings of
the Library of Congress, you see the problem. There is a
mismatch there in the ability to deliver versus the volume of
data. So we need to accelerate construction.
What I was also advocating is we continue to need to
advance the state of the art of the technology. How do we move
beyond the current rates? How do we address in the spectrum
areas some more nimble ways that would allow high bandwidth
data sharing? We are going to have to change some of the
standardization process, we need to invest in research, and we
need to find the economic incentives that will drive the
private sector to continue to build out those networks.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. I yield back my time, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. I thank Chairman Hall for his questions.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Lipinski, for five minutes.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Chairman Quayle. Thank you for
holding this hearing today on this important issue. It is
something I have been interested in for a while, even before
the Administration announced their ``cloud-first'' policy,
because I really think, as you talked about here today, that
the cloud will have positive impacts on how the Federal
Government researchers and the world will operate in the
future. But I want to make sure that our implementation is done
intelligently and we capitalize on the benefits while
accurately assessing and mitigating the risks.
So the first question I have is probably best for Mr.
Capellas, Mr. Combs, and Dr. Reed. What are the challenges to
ensuring, first of all, the physical security of the servers
and the security of the data stored in the cloud and how would
you recommend we address these challenges? We need to gain the
public's trust, but we also need to make sure that we do have
adequate security in the cloud. I had a couple amendments on
appropriations bills. I was just trying to address this issue.
I have concerns, especially if we are talking about the, you
know, obviously the Federal Government with our appropriations
bills if we are going to go to cloud computing is where these
servers are placed in other countries, perhaps, if there are
any risks to that? But just more generally, what are the risks?
How do we do all that we can to maintain both the--like I said,
the physical security of the servers and also, then, the data
security?
Mr. Capellas. Okay. We are going to tag team this right
down the row.
Mr. Lipinski. All right. Very good.
Mr. Capellas. Very highly logical, we are simply going to
go from right to left as we sit.
I will start off at kind of 100,000 feet. So the first one
is the question of cybersecurity and I know there has been, you
know, multiple testimonies which I diligently read last night.
The problem is enormous. The threats are now extremely
sophisticated. We are no longer thinking about, you know, the
guy in the garage but, you know, some of the most advanced
minds in computer science and engineering in terms of very
systemic threats. So one, it is real.
The second is to realize that because we never built the
original systems as they sit, don't think that by moving to
another system or the cloud that it inherently says that what
we have is fail proof because it is not. Every single security
breaks at one point. The science of security says that you have
data moving in three pieces in a system: one, data at rest
where is it physically stored and is being used or the data
is--think of it the data on your PC has records into it. The
second one is called data in motion when the data is moving on
a network, which is actually quite secure because we can
analyze that network, we can see its patterns, we can see
trends, we can analyze it.
The third one when it is in use by an application or
server, in which case that server is under control. The real
risk to security is data that is at rest when it is sitting
there. The second big risk--and this will happen and a
prediction will be is that we will have a major disruption to
the Internet over the next 18 months is not particularly bold.
So the question is, when you think about a cloud, is it
more or less secure? So the security answer says that you have
to have an end-to-end view of how you think of all pieces with
really the emphasis on how the data is sitting when it is at
rest. And the second one is how do you mitigate interruption? A
cloud by its definition says I am using resources. And as those
resources are consumed, if I have a node or a computer that
goes down, I can shift it to another one, isolate that node,
and shut it down. You cannot do that in the convention.
So theory number one is the cloud itself, by being able to
utilize different resources really mitigates the risk that you
take your whole network down. Pretty simple answer. If I have
got four people sharing the workload, I lose one, the other
three pick it up. If I got one person doing the work and he
gets hurt, I am dead. All right? So the theory of the cloud
says allocation of resources. So properly designed, denial of
service is less risk.
The second point, then, is data at rest. I can tell you
right now having data centrally stored in a physical location
under control of all of the analytical tools is much less risky
than having data spread over many machines or PCs or small
servers which are open to a network because it will always
break. And you understand how attacks happen. You know, you
probe the network to find the weakest link. Once you find the
weakest link, you enter there.
So the basic premise I would have is we have an enormous
problem, networks break at their weakest link and attack data
at rest. The cloud, when properly designed, allows you to
offset the denial of service by being able to distribute the
workload and secondarily the central storage of data is in its
essence far more reliable again when properly--and so I think
the answer is how do we use the cloud to make it more secure,
not less secure?
Dr. Reed. So I think one of the things that is important to
remember is that nothing in this world is absolute and it is
all about assessing risks and benefits. And I think the cloud
is no exception.
I think one corollary of that is we tend to equate through
most of our lives location with security and that is a piece of
the story, for sure, but it is by no means the only piece of
the story. What it really means with any important asset--and
clouds are no exception--is that one really thinks about a
multifactor protection mechanism. There are certainly physical
security issues that have analogs in our traditional approach
to protecting things to physical security around a data center,
the vetting of the people who manage and operate the data
center for their reliability and trust. Then there is a whole
set of best practices and operational mechanisms that one uses
to manage that. And of course there are legal recourse that
ultimately comes into play when there are data breaches.
There is a perpetual cat-and-mouse game in the computing
business between the attackers and the protectors. And what
that means is we have to continually advance the state of the
art. And that means Microsoft--and I know I speak for my
colleagues here--we are continuing to invest in advancing the
state of that technology. But it is a nuanced and complicated
issue.
I would suggest one concrete thing to consider which is an
issue that the Cloud Commission Report mentioned explicitly and
that is a need to revise some of our data breach laws because
right now it is somewhat difficult to distinguish between the
breach of an individual account and the possibility of breaches
of many more of those. And they are fundamentally treated in
very similar ways, and that means that it is very difficult to
take sometimes the kind of concerted legal action between the
private sector and government to deal with malicious behavior
when it does occur.
But it is a multifactor problem. Like all things, there is
no silver bullet. It is a vigilance and continuing to advance
and multifactor approach.
Mr. Combs. Thank you for your question.
I started my career 28 years ago at NSA working on
encryption systems, so security is something I have always been
critically interested in my entire career. Today--as I stated
in my testimony, today's security architectures are--most of
them are based around point security products. We have to move
to a secure ecosystem. In any secure environment, you have the
identities, those people and processes that you either want to
give access to or deny access to your resources.
At the other end of the spectrum you have the data. That
data must either be available or restricted, however an
organization's security policies exist. In between those two
environments, you still have the brick-and-mortar. You have the
applications, the networks, the storage, the servers. We have
to have a way of applying consistent security policy across the
technology stack. That is what we have to do to implement
security in the cloud.
And it is the secure ecosystem. It is moving the things in
identities, right, the physical protection of the environment
to a risk-based authentication. Why is an engineer going to the
financial resources of a company? They shouldn't be going
there. Look at the patterns of the users of the information and
then you need to flag it or restrict access to it. Technology
exists to do that today.
Data loss prevention capabilities, right, they can be
rapidly--they are widely adapted in the commercial world. If
you have ever had to put your--back to identification, if you
ever had to put your ZIP code in the gas station, you are using
adaptive authentication. It is widely deployed. You can use
that within the government on your own policies to provide
access.
And then restrict the information going out. The
intelligence analyst, Bradley Manning in Iraq, right, had
access, had the appropriate access to the environments and had
appropriate right to go look at a cable, but there is no reason
he should have downloaded 250,000 cables, right, to his CD-ROM.
You can set policies around the data to prevent that. And in
the absence of a policy, set a standard policy.
These capabilities exist and we look forward to working
with the government to implement them.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Hultgren, for five minutes.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here, too. I apologize. I have a couple of committees
meeting at the same time so I am a little bit late here.
So I do know you have addressed some of my questions, but I
would like to ask and get your thoughts on this. I know on
Monday morning's Politico this week, the President of
Information Technology Industry Council, Dean Garfield, was
quoted, ``There are certain things Congress can do to help
cloud computing and there are certain things they should not do
at all.'' I would just ask if you could talk a little bit more
of what are the things we should be doing? And I think you have
touched on that a little bit with Chairman Hall's question and
also Congressman Lipinski's question but maybe even more
focused. What shouldn't we be doing? I mean where could we
actually do more harm than good, which I think can happen here
sometimes. So I would just appreciate thoughts you might have
on that.
Mr. Capellas. So I think what Congress--I am not sure what
I am--to tell you what you shouldn't do but I will try to be
proactive on it. The first one foremost is I think that there
is a policy around the acquisition and how dollars are spent
relative to it. And those tend to come up with each agency
measuring a single point of unit like I was talking about
before, you know, one computer, one PC. So somehow relaxing
where there could be more cost collaboration relative to how
money is spent. For example, you take four agencies together
and create one cloud that is secure and private is better than
each one doing differently and recognizing that perhaps that
investment will be done in a way that is different from the
normal. And I can't tell you how many times we get involved
with very meaningful projects that have ROI only to get caught
up in the actual procurement.
I do want to acknowledge the work of the GSA, which has
been extraordinary in terms of moving in a fast way, and I
don't do that just because he is my colleague because it is
very real.
The second one that I would say is--and there has not been
very many references to NIST--standardization is the key. All
right. Now, obviously this group is probably not going to sit
around and determine, you know, what the technical standards of
feeds and speeds are, but to continue the promotion of
standards, there was one that we addressed on, you know, the
cloud is so much about trust and that trust is the end user.
And we make several recommendations about what policies can be
done relative to trust won by other governments trusting so
that we can have global clouds, and the second one was already
referred to as--when we know we have a breach and it is done,
both companies should be required to have transparency in what
they report, but there has to be some teeth in the law that
allows them to go after the people who are really the bad guys.
And so if I had to sort of summarize standards, acquisition
policy, cross-border, and finally put some teeth into the laws
that are required to enable that we have trust.
Mr. Hultgren. Any others have thoughts of what we should be
doing or, again, what we shouldn't be doing? And we need to
hear from you what we shouldn't be doing and, you know, so I
don't ever want you to feel like you can't tell us what we
should stay away from because I think we need to hear that as
well if there are places where we can meddle that I think we
can cause more trouble.
Mr. Capellas. Can I add one more?
Mr. Hultgren. Absolutely.
Mr. Capellas. I would also encourage you to read the
report. Seventy-one companies, hours and hours of testimony, I
have been doing this a long time like my colleagues. I have
rarely seen people put their personal companies' interest aside
and sort of come up with a report that is meaningful. Of
course, I was the Co-Chair, so what am I going to say. But I do
encourage you. It is an enormous amount of work by some of the
brightest minds, and I do encourage you to read it.
Mr. Hultgren. We will.
Dr. McClure. If I can add as the government witness here, I
think what you could really do to help tremendously is to tie
this cloud agenda to improving the performance of government,
saving money, improving service delivery. Those are the things
that I think the American public really cares about. It is not
about how many virtualized servers do we have sitting in data
centers? I would agree with Michael the other push--the other
two pushes are in the standards area, not the long-term
decades-long standards approach but the more aggressive fast-
paced approach that NIST is adopting in this area.
And the third thing is in a time when we are--we know we
are under fiscal constraint and budgets are certainly going to
be reduced, we must recognize that innovation still has to take
place. And in many agencies, it is about allowing investment to
actually get these capabilities in place. While it requires
spending long-term, we are going to gain from it. So we can't
lose sight of that either.
Dr. Reed. I might add one last thing which is something I
briefly mentioned in my opening remarks. In cloud computing,
there is no doubt that the United States is the world leader
right now. It is ours to lose in the future. And there is a
major transformation taking place in the computing industry. It
seems like they happen every other week, but this is a major,
major one that will change lots of the ways that we think about
not only the consumer side but the production side of
computing. And so the first do-no-harm rule I absolutely
believe because in these competitive times, it is important
that we maintain that preeminence.
Mr. Hultgren. Great. Thank you very much. My time has
expired. I yield back. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Hultgren.
We will now move into the last round of questioning, and I
will recognize myself.
And Mr. Combs, this is actually a good segue from the last
question, but how does the fundamental architecture of cloud
computing influence the type of standards that are necessary?
And then also when do you think that the standards should
actually be put into place so that it wouldn't actually thwart
any sort of innovation within the cloud? Because that would be
the--really the last thing that we need. And then maybe touch
briefly on some of the standards within the cloud that could be
harmful in terms of actually beings barriers to entry for
trade. And so how would we deal with all of those to make sure
that we are not affecting trade, affecting innovation, but
still coming up with the proper standards so that the cloud can
be what it can be?
Mr. Combs. Well, one of the biggest problems, right, is
interoperability and data portability around clouds. One of the
concerns about the government is being able--is getting vendor
lock-in, right? So one of the reasons that EMC is a full
supporter of open-based standards, we think that any technology
that is implemented into a cloud environment should be based on
open architectures. How do you connect to storage in the cloud?
Simple SOAP and REST protocols exist to be able to access data
anywhere in the cloud. If you enforce those, you create
innovation. Industry is going to bring this innovation. The
government is not going to develop it. So--but enforcing the
open standards and not getting into proprietary stacks is
probably the best way to continue evolution.
I think Dr. McClure might be able to add a little bit there
as well.
Dr. McClure. You know, I agree, I think open architectures
are absolutely key and I do believe that there are actually
standard protocols that exist, SOAP, otherwise, that are easily
workable into cloud environments. We have an enormous amount of
work being done by NIST and industry partners to aggressively
take a lot of existing standards and begin to move them into
this environment rather than recreating whole new sets of
standards, which is what we don't want to do to slow this down.
So again, the aggressive approach that NIST is taking I think
is the right way. Use case demonstrates standards viability and
allow market solutions to adapt to them as fast as we can.
Chairman Quayle. Great, thank you. I now recognize Mr.
Lujan for five minutes.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Combs, even though it is your position that government
won't develop the innovation, what happens if you don't have
government as a client?
Mr. Combs. What happens if we don't have government as a
client? Well, I think----
Mr. Lujan. Will cloud computing advance and make the
advances that we are seeing now, will we reap the full benefits
of what this could potentially be sooner rather than later?
Mr. Combs. Well, as I testified last year before the
Government and Oversight Committee, if you put something out in
the public cloud today, in my opinion, the risk is too high for
sensitive government data to go there. I think we have proven
it doesn't take a security or a cloud expert to pick up the
Washington Post and see the number of companies that have been
breached, right? So I think there is always going to be a
market for the Federal Government to maintain the sensitive
data within private clouds in their organizations. So I think
there will always be a marketplace.
I think Microsoft has been very successful in standing up a
private cloud to support the Federal Government, right? I think
you will continue to see organizations stand up these
capabilities to protect the sensitive nature of the data in the
federal marketplace.
Mr. Lujan. So a federal client is critical to the
development of cloud or the future of cloud or it is an
important customer?
Mr. Combs. I think it is an important customer to continue
to evolve the security required to meet what is called multi-
tenancy in cloud. I think it is very easy to have community
clouds--we will say--give the Department of Defense----
Mr. Lujan. Um-hum.
Mr. Combs. --and the intelligence community or civil
agencies, the FBI, law enforcement community. It is very easy
to set multi-tenant security boundaries around similar types of
data. But what I want to put--do you think Coca-Cola and Pepsi
is going to have their intellectual property on the same cloud?
It is probably not going to happen. So there is just this
sensitive data in the commercial world that exists as there is
in the Federal Government.
Mr. Lujan. Absolutely.
Mr. Combs. But the Federal Government will help drive the
security around protecting information in the cloud.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that.
Dr. McClure, in your testimony you note that the
continuation of GSA's cloud computing cost savings is dependent
on fiscal year 2012 E-Gov Fund budget levels. Can you tell us
what the fiscal year 2012 budget level request included for the
E-Gov Fund and how that compares to funding levels currently
proposed in the House and the Senate?
Dr. McClure. Absolutely. And I am glad you are bringing it
up. The E-Gov Fund has been the instrument by which the Federal
Government over the last 3 fiscal years has fueled innovation
like cloud computing. GSA has been the steward of a lot of
monies and actually uses E-Gov funds to run the Cloud Computing
Program Management Office, to produce the FedRAMP program and
actually help and assist OMB in the data center consolidation
analysis and produce things like the total cost model that the
agencies are using now.
The requested funding in '12 was for $34 million. The House
mark came in at 15.8 million, which is a little bit less than a
half, 50 percent reduction in that fund, and the Senate mark
came in at 7.4, which is only a fifth of the money. When anyone
gets less money than being requested, something has got to
give. So that is our challenge I think is we are trying to use
this fund to fuel innovation, to do cross-agency government-
wide work, not single-agency work. This is not GSA money. And
if we reduce the funding levels down to those levels, you will
have essentially what I could equate to as O&M work going on on
existing projects rather than fueling new creative ways to save
money for the government.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that, Dr. McClure.
And Mr. Chairman, I hope that is an area that we might be
able to work together with colleagues on both sides of the
aisle is if we talk about the importance of this, what it means
to business, cost savings all around, and also the taxpayers
that this is a place important for investment.
The last line of questioning that I have, and I may only
get to hear one answer and I will submit it to all of you for a
response--and maybe I will just start with you, Mr. Capellas,
is you stated that the physical underlying infrastructure is
not important necessarily to the consumer, and I can appreciate
that from the end consumer, but from a security perspective, I
have a question around that that I would suggest that we should
care where the components are. And what I am getting to is,
one, would there be anyone that disagrees that we have enough
domestic real estate associated with data server facilities to
house our data centers? And two, shouldn't we be looking to
increase our capacity with domestic data centers on U.S. soil,
especially as we talk about the security of U.S. information?
Mr. Capellas. So the first one is the--I think what is
important is that the user shouldn't have to know or care where
it is----
Mr. Lujan. Um-hum.
Mr. Capellas. --right? So that is--in terms of use----
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that.
Mr. Capellas. From a security point of view, do we have
enough real estate? We certainly have plenty of real estate.
The question that we have as we start to develop these clouds
is we have to understand that there are going to be some
workloads--and that is how the cloud starts to think about what
tasks are you trying to do on a workload--where it is not going
to be relevant to where the data resides. I simply--I want a
browser that I want to look at some price catalog. And I think
we have to be sensitive and take a leadership point of view
around the globe and so it says some workloads are going to
reside in different places and we need to be savvy enough to
say that those different workloads are going to be in different
places. Other workloads are going to be critical to our
national security, and those workloads need to take place in
secure ways and secure places we know. And I think it is to
having the wisdom to know which goes in which place that where
we can share it globally, where we must lead and have it
locally, and to know the difference between the two, because if
we get too rigid on either side, then I think that is when we
start to break down and we create mistrust.
One of the things that the report does call out is we need
to be cautious that if we get overly sensitive to not being
able to want to have some global distribution that countries
around the world will cease to have confidence in us,
particularly relevant to some of the nature of some of the laws
we have on the books today relevant to how data is viewed by
law enforcement.
So I will summarize. It is--we have plenty of real estate.
A little of what my colleague Dr. Reed said is it is ours to
lose. We need to think about the workloads and be sensitive to
where global workloads are fine but to make sure that for those
workloads that we really care about, that we do take the
leadership in the United States and drive it here.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Lujan.
I would like to thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and the Members for their questions. The Members of
the Subcommittee may have additional questions for the
witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to those in writing.
The record will remain open for two weeks for additional
comments and statements from Members. The witnesses are
excused. Thank you all for coming. This hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:15 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Mr. Michael D. Capellas, Chairman and CEO,
Virtual Computing Environment Company

Questions submitted by Chairman Ben Quayle

Q1.  What steps can the U.S. government take to make sure other
governments don't implement cloud computing standards that advantage
their own domestic industries and serve as barriers to free trade.

A1. The U.S. should examine its own policies to ensure that U.S.
companies or companies with U.S. influence and/or jurisdiction are not
subject to U.S. based policies that serve as a barrier to their own
success. In general, the U.S. government should encourage free trade
and adopt international security and privacy frameworks rather than
creating a standalone U.S. framework that can be positioned against
U.S. owned or partially owned industries. As an example, the Patriot is
already being publicly targeted by EU entities to promote EU cloud
computing offerings. At least one EU company has publicly discussed a
cloud offering where they will guarantee that data will not reside in
the US, enter into infrastructure owned by U.S. entities or be subject
to U.S. government confiscation. The U.S. should seek to influence and
adopt existing international frameworks rather than creating a distinct
framework for the U.S.

Questions submitted by Representative Ben Lujan

Q1.  What does the federal government need to do to ensure the security
and privacy of a person or organization's information is protected?

A1. The industry should develop a service catalog (or service catalogs)
for various categories of information, using industry standard language
and metrics. Where the information is permitted to reside is based upon
the categorization of data, the level of secureness of the data, and
the policies associated with the service providers in the host nations.
Policies should not overly restrict data based upon location. It is
more important to ensure appropriate data security measures (advanced
encryption, etc.) are applied to sensitive data.

Q2.  Why is strong identity management so important to accelerating the
adoption of Cloud computing?

A2. In order for cloud computing to be successful and deliver the full
benefits envisioned, it needs to be trusted and it needs to be secure.
One of the most significant threats to infrastructure today is
represented by identity theft, where hackers and evildoers gain access
to information by pretending to be something they are not. In order to
minimize the threat of identity theft, whether it be person or machine
credentials, strong authentication and access controls are required.
Measures like dual factor authentication can ensure that a user of
entity is who they say they are, and that they have access rights to
the information they are trying to access.

Questions submitted by Representative Randy Neugebauer

Q1.  What is the industry doing to establish best practices to protect
and secure users' data and privacy rights? If standards are adopted how
can we give them enough flexibility to allow the industry to evolve?

A1. The industry recognizes the potential for cloud computing to
provide a more secure and easily protected model for computing than
what exists today. Security threats are constantly evolving and as a
result, the state of the art in security also evolve rapidly. The
government should allow the market to evolve and advance security
measures with minimal involvement. Government should refrain from
imposing any security requirements on industry, recognizing that not
all data has strict security requirements. The government should focus
efforts on being aggressive in requiring industry to both report on
their security provisions and, more importantly, to quickly disclose
any security breaches. Having to disclose security breaches is the best
way to protect other users, encourage providers to adopt the best
security they can, and compete in the market based upon track record.

Q2.  How quickly have industries and businesses converted to cloud
services? What factors might be inhibiting large scale moves away from
traditional IT services to cloud services?

A2. Industry is moving very quickly to cloud, and the march is
inevitable. Barriers are largely centered around organizational inertia
and internal turf resistance. Cloud computing requires transformation
of technology, people and processes. While transformation presents
immense opportunity, it can also be perceived as a threat by those who
resist change of any kind. In many cases, running a vastly more
efficient and responsive IT organization means having less headcount
and less budget and is therefore seen as a step backward in authority
or standing. As cloud gains more traction, organizations that are slow
to move to cloud will be at a competitive disadvantage, and this will
serve to dissolve existing barriers.
Responses by Dr. Daniel A. Reed, Corporate Vice President,
Microsoft Corporation's Technology Policy Group

Questions submitted by Chairman Ben Quayle

Q1.  What steps can the U.S. Government take internationally to ensure
that other countries do not implement cloud computing standards that
advantage their own domestic industries and serve as barriers to free
trade?

A1. There are two important things that the U.S. government can
continue to do internationally to ensure that other countries do not
implement cloud computing standards that advantage their own domestic
industries and serve as barriers to free trade. First, the U.S.
government can monitor other nations' promulgation of national
standards and other technical measures and, via the U.S. Trade
Representative, can express concerns if such standards appear to
violate World Trade Organization rules or to be designed to benefit
unfairly a nation's indigenous industries. The second, related, step
the U.S. government can take is to lead by example. The government can,
when considering its use of cloud services and associated standards,
engage in the sort of behavior that it hopes to see in other nations.
This includes recognizing the diversity of data and services that could
move to the cloud and deploying standards and requirements in ways that
allow federal agencies to access a variety of options to meet the
performance, security, and other needs of specific deployments. This
can be complemented by U.S. companies' participation in international
activities related to standards and best practices, with the support of
government expertise such as from the National Institute of Standards
and Technology.

Q2.  It is important to let new business models like cloud computing
flourish, yet at the same we cannot allow unscrupulous actors to use
new technologies for infringement. Do you believe that Congress should
act in this area to address criminal and infringing behavior as applied
to cloud computing? If so, what steps would actions would you
recommend?

A2. Cloud computing is a major technology inflection point with far-
reaching effects on the capabilities and empowerment of businesses,
governments, scientists, and individuals, and significant economic and
competitive benefits for the U.S. In addition, some individuals with
the intent to defraud or infringe will seek to exploit the cloud. As
new concerns with new forms of infringement arise, Microsoft believes
that Congress should respond not by focusing on any specific technology
(such as cloud computing) but rather by examining whether existing laws
are adequate to address evolving forms of infringing behavior.
Similarly, for criminal behavior related to cloud computing, the focus
should be on examining evolving forms of attacks on computer systems
and networks, including cloud computing services, and updating and
strengthening criminal laws against those responsible, as noted in the
CLOUD\2\ Commission report, Recommendation 3.

Q3.  In your response to Mr. Hultgren's question about which actions
the government should not be taking in the cloud computing enterprise,
you stated that you believe in the ``first do-no-harm rule.'' Can you
provide examples of government cloud computing actions that could
potentially be harmful? Are there any specific principles government
should follow when determining whether action is appropriate?

A3. Some of the policy challenges created by the cloud relate to the
exponential rate of change we are seeing in our technological
capabilities. This pace can conflict with the pace at which government
and society can evaluate the implications of the deployment of these
new technologies. The best approach in such times is to establish
policy goals and a flexible framework for achieving them, and to avoid
focus on specific technological approaches that could chill innovation
or quickly become outmoded.
A specific example of flexibility that the U.S. government should
embrace related to cloud computing can be seen in the above answer to
Rep. Quayle's first question. Imposing overly constraining requirements
or standards around all possible U.S. government uses of cloud could
have a chilling effect on other nations' openness to cloud deployment,
while nuanced approaches by the U.S. that recognize the different needs
of various types of cloud applications would set a positive example for
others.

Questions submitted by Representative Ben Lujan

Q1.  Security and privacy are often cited as concerns for cloud
computing. Specifically, there is concern about the transnational flow
of data and the possibility that confidential or proprietary
information might be hosted in a data center located in a foreign
country. What does the federal government need to do to ensure that the
security and privacy of an individual or organization's information is
protected?

A1. Security is a multifactor challenge. The physical location of a
data center (and the steps taken to provide security for its physical
plant) is only one component of many that help control access to data.
Individuals and organizations need to understand the nature of the
various types of data they handle and what their expectations are for
its access and control before developing requirements for where it will
be stored and processed. Decisions about the geolocation of data will
have implications not only in terms of security, but also in terms of
efficiency, redundancy, cost, and resiliency.
One potential role for the federal government in this space is to
lead by example. Agencies can, when evaluating their potential use of
cloud services, recognize the different types of data they holds and
deploy targeted security and privacy requirements for different classes
of information and applications. The government can also, in assessing
security, recognize that it is critical to focus on how data is
secured--i.e., are there adequate processes in place to protect the
data against an evolving threat landscape. In the context of this
evolving landscape, it can also continue to support basic research in
cybersecurity, as new defenses and approaches will be needed in the
future.

Questions submitted by Representative Randy Neugebauer

Q1.  What is the industry doing to collaborate or establish best
practices that will ensure that users' data will be secure in the cloud
and privacy rights will be protected? Are there any areas which require
Congressional direction to ensure a high level of safety in this
regard? If standards are adopted, how can we ensure that they give
enough flexibility to allow the industry and the technology to evolve?

A1. Microsoft and other companies are engaged in a variety of
activities related to best practices around security and privacy. One
example, in which Microsoft is a participant, is the Software Assurance
Forum for Excellence in Code (SAFECode), a global, industry-led effort
to identify and promote best practices for delivering more secure and
reliable software, hardware, and services. Another is the privacy,
confidentiality, and compliance framework for data governance that
Microsoft has developed and publicly released so it can be adopted and
implemented by organizations of all sizes.
In thinking about Congressional action, it is important to
recognize that consumer expectations regarding online privacy are
continually evolving as the technology evolves. For this reason, and to
allow companies the flexibility to innovate, Congress needs to be very
careful when considering legislation related to privacy and security.
However, there are two areas with regard to online privacy where
Microsoft has supported the idea of federal legislation. One is a
comprehensive federal privacy law; and more information on Microsoft's
view on the policy context for such a law is at http://
go.microsoft.com/?linkid=9768689. The second is the updating of the 25-
year-old Electronic Communications Privacy Act to maintain a balance
between the privacy expectations of users and the needs of law
enforcement in a way that reflects how people use information
technology, including the cloud, today. In this area, Microsoft is a
member of the Digital Due Process Coalition (http://
digitaldueprocess.org/).

Q2.  In a broad sense, how quickly have industries and businesses
converted to cloud computing services? What factors, if any, might be
inhibiting large scale departure from traditionally internal IT
services to cloud computing services to save on overhead costs?

A2. Many industries and businesses have embraced cloud services. A
particular niche that innately appreciates the value of cloud is start-
up technology businesses, which value the inherent flexibility of
cloud--the ability to scale up or down their information technology
resources depending on demand or current business phase, and the
ability to shift expenses from up-front costs to purchase information
technology hardware to pay-as-you-go-only-for-what-you-use models. In
general, many industries and government are moving forward with cloud
services. In some cases, they are replacing existing information
technology systems with capabilities that are similar but are deployed
using the cloud (e.g. email). In other cases, they are exploring how
cloud actually will provide new capabilities and opportunities, e.g.
for global, multi-party and neutral collaborations, or for flexible and
rapid exploration of new products and services by existing businesses.
While these latter applications may be emerging more slowly, they will
have a significant impact on many sectors and on our economy as a
whole.
Responses by Mr. Nick Combs, Federal Chief Technology Officer, EMC
Corporation

Questions submitted by Chairman Ben Quayle

Q1.  What steps can the U.S. Government take internationally to ensure
that other countries do not implement cloud computing standards that
advantage their own domestic industries and serve as barriers to free
trade?

A1. It is important for the U.S. Government to advocate for alignment
of cloud computing standards (in areas such as interoperability,
mobility and security) that align with current and evolving global
industry standards. The U.S. Government should also push back on
countries that try to impose domestic or indigenous standards in bi-
lateral and multi-lateral trade negotiations. For example, there are
efforts by some countries to advance specific information security or
encryption requirements that could deter the adoption of cloud
computing infrastructure and services provided by multi-national
corporations in those markets. In addition, it is important for the
U.S. government and other governments internationally to resist
mandates or laws that would require a specific cloud deployment model.
The U.S. Trade Representatives and the U.S. Department of Commerce can
continue to play important roles in advancing effective policies in
these areas internationally.

Questions submitted by Representative Ben Lujan

Q1.  Security and privacy are often cited as concerns for cloud
computing. Specifically, there is concern about the transnational flow
of data and the possibility that confidential or proprietary
information might be hosted in a data center located in a foreign
country. What does the federal government need to do to ensure that the
security and privacy of an individual or organization's information is
protected?

A1. When implemented correctly, cloud environments can be much more
secure than today's IT environments. The level of transparency cloud
vendors provide is a critical aspect when choosing a cloud partner. Via
the regular procurement and contractual process, U.S. federal agencies
should take a trust-but-verify approach. Cloud vendors should be
required to provide the tools and capabilities to allow customers
visibility into their cloud environments to ensure compliance with
those SLAs. SLAs should be clearly defined and monitored by government
customers to ensure maximum service value is received for budget
dollars spent. For instance, SLAs in areas of performance,
availability, backup and recovery, archive, continuance of operation,
and disaster recovery must be clearly stated, measured, and monitored
by the government agencies. Additionally, government risk and
compliance capabilities need to be deployed and dashboards provided to
the customer to ensure that our information is protected and the
policies are being followed.

Questions submitted by Representative Randy Neugebauer

Q1.  What is the industry doing to collaborate or establish best
practices that will ensure that users' data will be secure in the cloud
and privacy rights will be protected? Are there any areas which require
Congressional direction to ensure a high level of safety in this
regard? If standards are adopted, how can we ensure that they give
enough flexibility to allow the industry and the technology to evolve?

A1. Best practices such as risk-based authentication should also be
implemented in cloud environments and we think that that approach fits
well within the President's National Strategy for Trusted Identities in
Cyberspace (NSTIC) which was released earlier this year. This important
effort, which is being coordinated by the NSTIC Office at NIST in
collaboration with the private sector, should be supported by the U.S.
Congress.
NIST has played an instrumental role in the development of the
Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP) and NIST Security Content
Automation Protocol (SCAP). FedRAMP is a voluntary, General Services
Administration (GSA)-led initiative to develop and provide a standard
approach to assessing and authorizing cloud computing services and
products for use by Federal agencies. The NIST SCAP standard enables
the automation of reporting and verifying IT security controls. SCAP
provides an effective method to capture, test and continuously monitor
these controls.
Both of these initiatives are important steps in the transition of
the Federal Government from the old FISMA focus on compliance, to
better operational risk management and continuous monitoring under the
new FISMA. This process is critical for improving cyber security today
as well as positioning the federal government to fully utilize the
transition to the cloud to help improve cyber security. Congress should
update FISMA.
Congress should reduce the regulatory complexity that businesses
and critical infrastructure organizations have to deal with complying
with myriad state data breach disclosure laws in the U.S. In an
advanced threat environment, it does not make sense to have
organizations devoting their resources and focus to complying with 46
separate state laws on breach notification when they need to invest
more time and resources in managing operational cyber security risks.
Simplifying the compliance requirements with a reasonable and uniform
federal standard (with preemption of the existing state laws) would
allow security organizations to focus more on risk management.

Q2.  In a broad sense, how quickly have industries and business
converted to cloud computing services? What factors, if any, might be
inhibiting large scale departure from traditionally internal IT
services to cloud computing serves to save on overhead costs?

A2. A shift to cloud computing is a journey that occurs in phases.
EMC's own journey to the cloud has provided significant savings and
efficiency. In both industry and government, we are seeing data center
consolidation move forward--with the associated cost savings--in tandem
with organization' transition to cloud infrastructure and services.
Responses by Dr. David L. McClure, Ph.D., Associate Administrator,
Office of
Citizen Services and Innovative Technologies, General Services
Administration

Questions submitted by Chairman Ben Quayle

Q1.  What steps can the U.S. Government take internationally to ensure
that other countries do not implement cloud computing standards that
advantage their own domestic industries and serve as barriers to free
trade?

A1. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has the
lead federal role in standards setting. NIST is actively encouraging
the establishment of international, consensus based standards, which is
one of the primary recommendations of the recently published NIST Cloud
Computing Roadmap. In fact, the NIST definition of cloud computing was
the U.S. contribution to the International Committee for Information
Technology Standards (INCITS). International standards are critical to
avoid development of country specific standards that may create
barriers to trade. The broad adoption of international standards
ensures a level playing field and fair trading conditions for all
products and services, both in the U.S. and overseas.

In addition, the Department of Commerce, Department of State, and
other Federal agencies are working on policies that will ensure that
differences between the U.S. approach to data privacy and security, and
those of our international partners, do not become barriers to the
global free flow of information. This approach involves the development
of domestic policy recommendations and engagement with industry and our
trading partners.

Questions submitted by Representative Ben Lujan

Q1.  Security and privacy are often cited as concerns for cloud
computing. Specifically, there is concern about the transnational flow
of data and the possibility that confidential or Proprietary
information might be hosted in a data center located in a foreign
country. What does the federal government need to do to ensure that the
security and privacy of an individual or organization's information is
protected?

A1. The Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP) has
been established to provide a standard approach to Assessing and
Authorizing (A&A) cloud computing services and products. Leveraging a
common security approach and baseline will not only allow for greater
efficiency, but will ensure the entire Federal Government and Cloud
Service Providers are working together to ensure government and citizen
information stored in the cloud is protected and privacy concerns are
addressed. Government contracts for cloud computing services and
solutions require compliance with the Federal Information Security
Management Act of 2002 (FISMA). FISMA establishes a strict set of legal
requirements for information security that apply to all federal
information systems, including those implemented through cloud
computing. These requirements and guidelines apply regardless of where
data is stored. It is essential that federal acquisition professionals
and contracting officers be knowledgeable in the latest requirements
and take advantage of common contract language that is helpful to
address key issues specific to cloud computing solutions.
With respect to privacy, the Federal CIO recently released the
FedRAMP Memorandum, which indicates that the CIO Council will ``publish
the standardized baseline of security controls, privacy controls, and
controls selected for continuous monitoring'' from NIST SP 800-53. See
Memorandum for Chief Information Officers, Security Authorization of
Information Systems in Cloud Computing Environments, Dec. 8, 2011, p 5.
The controls at issue are based on existing Federal privacy law. Under
this provision, Federal agencies should take steps to ensure that they
consider and implement the appropriate controls before releasing
sensitive or personal information into a cloud solution. The Memorandum
also requires previously deployed solutions to meet these requirements
within a fixed period of time, which should mitigate the risks you
identified.

Questions submitted by Representative Randy Neugebauer

Q1.  What is the industry doing to collaborate or establish best
practices that will ensure that users' data will be secure in the cloud
and privacy rights will be protected? Are there any areas which require
Congressional direction to ensure a high level of safety in this
regard? If standards are adopted, how can we ensure that they give
enough flexibility to allow the industry and the technology to evolve?

A1. Cloud policies and standards are being developed in collaboration
with industry and other stakeholders to ensure acceptable balance of
risks and benefits of cloud computing. Congress should continue to
encourage cloud adoption by ensuring sufficient resources are invested
in programs such as FedRAMP and Cyberscope. The Cloud Security Alliance
works with industry and governments across the world regarding best
practices for cloud security. Their mission statement is: To promote
the use of best practices for providing security assurance within Cloud
Computing, and provide education on the uses of Cloud Computing to help
secure all other forms of computing.

Q2.  In a broad sense, how quickly have industries and businesses
converted to cloud computing services? What factors, if any, might be
inhibiting large scale departure from Traditionally internal IT
services to cloud computing services to save on overhead costs?

A8. Data collected on both industry and public sector movement to cloud
solution indicates steady, pervasive interest and broad adoption as an
inevitable technology market direction. Key barriers and mitigations
are shown in the table below.

Appendix II

----------

Additional Materials Submitted for the Record


