- ARE WE PREPARED? ASSESSING EARTHQUAKE RISK REDUCTION IN THE UNITED STATES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ARE WE PREPARED?
ASSESSING EARTHQUAKE RISK REDUCTION IN THE UNITED STATES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 7, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-13

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-491                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DAVID WU, Oregon
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 PAUL D. TONKO, New York
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JERRY McNERNEY, California
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
Tennessee                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation

HON. BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona, Chair
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                DAVID WU, Oregon
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
Tennessee                        BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Thursday, April 7, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Benjamin Quayle, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     6
Written Statement............................................     6

Statement by Representative David Wu, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     8
Written Statement............................................     9

Witnesses:

Dr. Jack Hayes, Director, National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program (NEHRP) at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST)
Oral Statement...............................................    10
Written Statement............................................    11
Biography....................................................    21

Mr. Jim Mullen, Director, Washington State Emergency Management
Division and the President of the National Emergency Management
Association (NEMA)
Oral Statement...............................................    22
Written Statement............................................    23
Biography....................................................    27

Mr. Chris Poland, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Degenkolb
Engineers and Chairman of the NEHRP Advisory Committee
Oral Statement...............................................    28
Written Statement............................................    30
Biography....................................................    34

Dr. Vicki McConnell, Oregon State Geologist and the Director of
the Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries
Oral Statement...............................................    36
Written Statement............................................    37
Biography....................................................    42

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Jack Hayes, Director, National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program (NEHRP) at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST)..............................................    56

Mr. Jim Mullen, Director, Washington State Emergency Management
Division and the President of the National Emergency Management
Association (NEMA).............................................    71

Mr. Chris Poland, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Degenkolb
Engineers and Chairman of the NEHRP Advisory Committee.........    73

Dr. Vicki McConnell, Oregon State Geologist and the Director of
the Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries........    74

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Submitted Statement by Representative Randy Neugebauer, Member,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    78

ARE WE PREPARED?
ASSESSING EARTHQUAKE RISK REDUCTION
IN THE UNITED STATES

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 7, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:04 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Benjamin
Quayle [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Are We Prepared?

Assessing Earthquake Risk Reduction in

the United States

thursday, april 7, 2011
10:00 a.m.-12:00 p.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

Purpose

On Thursday, April 7, 2011 the Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology will hold
a hearing to examine earthquake risk in the United States and to review
efforts supporting the development of earthquake hazard reduction
measures, and the creation of disaster-resilient communities.

Witnesses

Dr. Jack Hayes is the Director of the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program (NEHRP) at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST).

Mr. Jim Mullen is the Director of the Washington State Emergency
Management Division and the President of the National Emergency
Management Association (NEMA).

Mr. Chris Poland is the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of
Degenkolb Engineers and the Chairman of the NEHRP Advisory Committee.

Dr. Vicki McConnell is an Oregon State Geologist and the Director of
the Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries.

Brief Overview

The hearing will examine various elements of the Nation's level of
earthquake preparedness and resiliency including the U.S. capability to
detect earthquakes and issue notifications and warnings, coordination
between federal, state and local stakeholders for earthquake emergency
preparation, and research and development measures supported by the
federal government designed to improve the scientific understanding of
earthquakes.

Background

Earthquake Risk and Hazard in the United States
Portions of all 50 states are vulnerable to earthquake hazards,
although risks vary across the country and within individual states.
Twenty-six urban areas in fourteen U.S. states face significant seismic
risk. Earthquake hazards are greatest in the western United States,
particularly in California, Oregon, Washington, Alaska, and Hawaii.
Though infrequent, earthquakes are unique among natural hazards in that
they strike without warning. Earthquakes proceed as cascades, in which
the primary effects of faulting and ground shaking induce secondary
effects such as landslides, liquefaction, and tsunami, which in turn
set off destructive processes within the built environment; structures
collapse, people are injured or killed, infrastructure is disrupted,
and business interruption begins. The socioeconomic effects of large
earthquakes can reverberate for decades.
The recent earthquake that struck off the coast of northern Japan
on March 11, 2011, illustrates that the effects of an earthquake can be
catastrophic. The earthquake, recorded as a 9.0 on the Richter scale,
is the most powerful quake to hit the country, and it triggered a
devastating tsunami that swept over cities and farmland in the northern
part of the country. As Japan struggles with rescue efforts, it also
faces a nuclear emergency due to damage to the nuclear reactors at the
Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station. As of March 31, the official
death toll from the earthquake and resulting tsunami includes more than
11,600, and more than 16,000 people were listed as missing. The final
toll is expected to reach nearly 20,000. More than 190,000 people
remained housed in temporary shelters; tens of thousands of others
evacuated their homes due to the nuclear crisis and related fear.

The National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP)
In 1977 Congress passed the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act (P.L.
95-124) establishing NEHRP as a long-term earthquake risk reduction
program for the United States. The original program focused on research
to understand and predict earthquakes. NEHRP's focus was changed in
1990, when Congress decreased the emphasis on earthquake prediction,
expanded the program objectives, and required federal agencies to adopt
seismic safety standards.
Currently under NEHRP, four federal agencies have responsibility
for long-term earthquake risk reduction: NIST, FEMA, the NSF, and the
USGS. Current program activities are focused on four broad areas
including supporting the development of effective earthquake hazard
reduction measures, promoting the adoption of these measures by
federal, state, and local governments, improving the basic
understanding of earthquakes and their effects on people and
infrastructure, and developing and maintaining the Advanced National
Seismic System (ANSS), the George E. Brown Jr. Network for Earthquake
Engineering and Simulation (NEES), and the Global Seismic Network
(GSN).
Primary responsibilities for the NEHRP agencies break down as
follows:

NIST is the lead NEHRP agency and has responsibility
for the planning and coordination of the program. NIST also
promotes earthquake resistant design and construction practices
through building codes, standards, and construction practices.

FEMA assists other agencies and private-sector groups
to prepare and develop earthquake risk modeling tools, and aids
the development of performance-based codes for buildings and
other structures.

NSF supports basic research to improve the safety and
performance of buildings and structures using the research
facilities of NEES and other institutions engaged in earth
sciences, engineering, and social sciences relevant to
understanding the causes and impacts of earthquakes.

USGS conducts research to assess earthquake causes
and effects, produces national and regional seismic hazards
maps, monitors and rapidly reports on earthquakes and their
shaking intensities in the U.S. and abroad. The USGS maintains
the ANSS and the GSN.

The table below shows the authorized and enacted levels of funding
for NERHP over the last reauthorization period.

110th and 111th Congressional Hearings

The House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology held one
hearing in the 111th Congress entitled ``Reauthorization of the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program'' to review NEHRP in
preparation for reauthorization. The Subcommittee also held two
hearings related to this legislation during the 110th Congress.

Reauthorization

The last year to provide an authorization for NEHRP was fiscal year
2009. The House passed reauthorization legislation (H.R. 3820) in the
last Congress, but it was not considered by the Senate.

Issues for Examination

Coordination of Federal Preparedness Efforts
The Subcommittee has requested that witnesses address the
coordination between federal, state, and local stakeholders, and their
roles in earthquake preparedness efforts. Witnesses will also discuss
how well NEHRP is functioning, opportunities to improve coordination
among the NEHRP agencies, and the priorities for NEHRP moving forward.

Hazard Mitigation Costs and Benefits
Much of the expense resulting from damage caused by earthquakes is
borne by the federal government. Witnesses are asked to discuss the
costs and benefits of hazard mitigation spending, specifically, whether
the cost of government investments in natural hazard mitigation with
the objective of reducing or eliminating losses from future natural
disasters results in a measurable benefit.

The State of Hazards Reduction Science
In the Strategic Plan for the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program Fiscal Years 2009-2013 \1\, the NEHRP agencies list nine
strategic priorities to accomplish the goals of understanding
earthquakes and their impacts, developing cost-effective measures to
reduce these impacts, and improve earthquake resiliency nationwide. The
Subcommittee has asked witnesses to address how these goals are bring
accomplished, challenges faced by the NEHRP agencies, and how research
priorities align with the strategic plan goals. Also, in a recent
National Research Council report \2\, eighteen preparedness tasks were
identified, ranging from basic research to community-oriented
applications. Witnesses have been asked to discuss how this ``roadmap''
helps to further NEHRP goals and implement the NEHRP Strategic Plan to
provide the basis for a more earthquake resilient nation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program, Strategic Plan
for the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program Fiscal Years
2009-2013, October 2008, http://www.nehrp.gov/pdf/strategic--plan--
2008.pdf.
\2\ National Research Council of the National Academies, National
Earthquake Resilience: Research, Implementation, and Outreach, March
2011, http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record--id=13092.

Response and Recovery Planning
The Subcommittee has requested that witnesses address research and
development for hazard mitigation tools and products. These activities
must meet the needs of state and local officials who must prepare their
communities for disasters and help them respond. How well do NEHRP
activities meet state and local needs, how could efforts be better
aligned, and what are the lessons that can be drawn from the resilience
demonstrated in responding to a moderate earthquake in preparing for a
great one?
Chairman Quayle. The Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation will come to order.
Good morning. Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``Are We
Prepared? Assessing Earthquake Risk Reduction in the United
States.'' In front of you are packets containing the written
testimony, biographies and truth in testimony disclosures for
today's witnesses. I now recognize myself for five minutes for
an opening statement. I would like to welcome all the witnesses
here today for this hearing.
In light of the devastating effects of the recent
earthquake and subsequent tsunami that struck off the coast of
northern Japan on March 11th, many countries are examining
their own level of preparedness. The scale of the human tragedy
is difficult to comprehend, and our thoughts and prayers are
with the people of Japan. It is always a challenge to measure
how prepared we are for the next unexpected event, and whether
current efforts are adequate.
Although earthquake risks vary across the country, portions
of all 50 states are vulnerable to these hazards. Twenty-six
urban areas in 14 different U.S. states face significant
seismic risk. My own district in Arizona does not lie on top of
a major subduction zone or fear the threat of tsunamis. But I
believe today's topic is important for all of us. Earthquake
catastrophes have the potential not only to destroy lives and
buildings, but also to wreak havoc on civil and industrial
infrastructure and the national economy.
In Japan, the aftereffects of the earthquake have reduced
supplies of water and electricity, hampering Japan's ability to
export many manufacturing products and forcing some businesses
to slow or stop operation all together. Supply chains for
important technology products here in the United States have
also been interrupted, directly impacting our productivity.
The impacts and consequences of a major earthquake are felt
on a global scale. These hazards consequently represent a
serious threat to both national security and global commerce.
Given our current economic situation, it would be even more
painful for the United States to endure a disastrous
earthquake, the socioeconomic effects of which would
reverberate for decades.
This Committee has supported ongoing work amongst four
federal agencies focused on researching and developing
techniques to minimize the devastation of earthquakes. This
includes improving forecasting, supporting the development of
effective hazard reduction measures, engineering disaster-
resilient buildings, and furthering our basic understanding of
earthquakes and their effects on people and infrastructure.
Coordination of these elements is important in order to
effectively deal with these hazards, and communication between
federal, state and local stakeholders is critical.
Much of the federal research and development effort is
housed in the National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program,
also known as NEHRP. This program coordinates the earthquake
hazards reduction efforts of the National Institute of
Standards and Technology, the National Science Foundation, the
United States Geological Survey and the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. Coordination of these agencies' work
provides the public and private sectors with the necessary
scientific and engineering information to prepare for
earthquakes, and hopefully reduce their impact. NEHRP was last
authorized in 2009, and while the House passed reauthorization
legislation in the last Congress with bipartisan support, it
was not considered by the Senate.
We have an excellent panel of witnesses today, who will
examine earthquake risk in the United States and review efforts
supporting the development of earthquake hazard reduction
measures. We will hear perspectives from the director of a
federal program created to reduce earthquake hazards, a state
geologist, an emergency management professional, and a
structural engineer and member of a national advisory committee
overseeing earthquake engineering programs. I would like to
extend my appreciation to each of our witnesses for taking the
time and effort to appear before us today.
Thanks again to our witnesses for their participation. I
look forward to a productive discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Quayle follows:]

Prepared Statement of Chairman Ben Quayle

Good morning. I'd like to welcome everyone to today's hearing.
In light of the devastating effects of the recent earthquake and
subsequent tsunami that struck off the coast of northern Japan on March
11, many countries are examining their own level of preparedness. The
scale of the human tragedy is difficult to comprehend and our thoughts
and prayers are with the people of Japan. It is always a challenge to
measure how prepared we are for the next unexpected event, and whether
our current efforts are adequate.
Although earthquake risks vary across the country, portions of all
50 states are vulnerable to these hazards. Twenty-six urban areas in
fourteen different U.S. states face significant seismic risk. My own
district in northern Arizona, does not lie on top of a major subduction
zone or fear the threat of tsunamis. But I believe today's topic is
important for all of us--earthquake catastrophes have the potential not
only to destroy lives and buildings, but also to wreak havoc on civil
and industrial infrastructure and the national economy.
In Japan, the after effects of the quakes have reduced supplies of
water and electricity, hampering their ability to export many
manufacturing products and forcing some businesses to slow or stop
operation all together. Supply chains for important technology products
here in the States have also been interrupted, directly impacting our
productivity.
Clearly the consequences of a major earthquake are felt on a global
scale. These hazards represent a serious threat to both national
security and global commerce. Given our current economic situation, it
would be even more painful for the United States to endure a disastrous
earthquake, the socioeconomic effects of which would reverberate for
decades.
This Committee has supported ongoing work amongst four federal
agencies focused on researching and developing techniques to minimize
the devastation of earthquakes. This includes improving forecasting,
supporting the development of effective hazard reduction measures,
engineering disaster-resilient buildings, and furthering our basic
understanding of earthquakes and their effects on people and
infrastructure. Coordination of these elements is important to deal
with hazards, and effective communication between federal, state and
local stakeholders is critical.
Much of the federal research and development effort is housed
within the National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program, also known as
NEHRP ["KNEE-HURP"]. This program manages the earthquake hazards
reduction efforts of the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), the National Science Foundation (NSF), the United States
Geological Survey (USGS) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA). These agencies have distinct but highly complementary missions.
Coordination of these agencies' work provides the public and private
sectors with the necessary scientific and engineering information to
prepare for earthquakes, and hopefully reduce their impact. NEHRP was
last authorized in 2009. While the House passed reauthorization
legislation in the last Congress with bipartisan support, it was not
considered by the Senate.
We have an excellent panel of witnesses before us today, who will
examine earthquake risk in the United States and review efforts
supporting the development of earthquake hazard reduction measures. We
will hear perspectives from the director of a federal program created
to reduce earthquake hazards, a state geologist, an emergency
management professional, and a structural engineer and member of a
national advisory committee overseeing earthquake engineering programs.
I'd like to extend my appreciation to each of our witnesses for taking
the time and effort to appear before us today.
Thanks again to our witnesses for their participation. I look
forward to a productive discussion. With that, I now recognize the
gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Wu, for his opening statement.

Chairman Quayle. With that, I now recognize the Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee, the gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Wu,
for his opening statement.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for calling this
very important hearing to assess the state of earthquake risk
reduction in the United States and our readiness, and thank you
to our witnesses. Many of you have traveled a long distance to
be here with us today, and I appreciate it very much as does
the rest of the Committee.
Our hearts go out to the Japanese people as they continue
their work to recover and rebuild from last month's devastating
earthquake and ensuing tsunami. The loss of life and property
is a stark reminder of the destruction that can be caused by a
large-scale earthquake, even in a country like Japan that is on
the leading edge in earthquake preparation and mitigation, and
this tragedy certainly forces us to take stock of our own
vulnerabilities.
As an Oregonian, I am particularly concerned with the
prospect of a similar disaster occurring in the Pacific
Northwest. Off the coast of Oregon, Washington and northern
California, we have the Cascadia subduction zone, and this
fault is currently locked in place, but research over the last
30 years indicates that the same stress now accumulating has
been released as a large earthquake once about every 300 years
dating back to the last ice age about 12,000 years ago. The
last Cascadia earthquake occurred 309 or 310 years ago. It was
a magnitude 9.0 earthquake, the same destructive magnitude as
the one that stuck Japan. All indications show that we
Oregonians can expect another quake any time. It is a matter of
when, not a matter of if.
When the next earthquake occurs on our fault, there will be
prolonged shaking, perhaps for as long as five minutes, with
the potential to collapse buildings, create landslides, and
destroy water, power, and other crucial infrastructure and
lifelines. Such an earthquake will also likely trigger a
devastating tsunami that could overwhelm the Oregon coast in
less than 15 minutes, resulting in potentially thousands of
fatalities and billions of dollars in damage.
Unfortunately, this type of disaster scenario is not
limited to the Western United States. In fact, more than 75
million Americans across 39 states face significant risk from
earthquakes.
The good news is that we have already learned a lot about
how to prepare for, mitigate, and respond to a large-scale
earthquake. There is a lot of work already underway to help us
better understand earthquakes, develop safer building
construction standards, and ensure that affected communities
can respond to and recover from earthquakes as quickly as
possible.
The National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program, or
NEHRP--lovely acronym--has driven us to make significant
progress in this area. I expect that we will hear testimony
today that the four NEHRP agencies, NIST, FEMA, NSF and USGS,
are making significant strides with at-risk communities by
developing new hazard maps, model building codes, and public
outreach efforts. I have no doubt that the progress we have
made through NEHRP has enhanced the safety of our communities
and will save lives. NEHRP's good work must be continued.
That is why I have reintroduced the Natural Hazards Risk
Reduction Act, which will reauthorize the NEHRP program. This
bipartisan legislation passed the House by an overwhelming
margin in the last Congress, and already this year, my bill has
been introduced in the Senate, where they are moving quickly to
mark it up next week. I look forward to working with my
colleagues on this Subcommittee and Full Committee, and in the
Senate to get this bill signed into law as quickly as possible,
so that we can continue addressing the large challenges that
remain: retrofitting existing structures, improving the
performance of critical infrastructure, and encouraging the
adoption of mitigation measures by households, businesses, and
communities. And I might add here that I am particularly
interested in education measures, education that can reduce
casualties from earthquakes but especially along the Oregon
coast where appropriate education not only of the coastal
population but of the populations in the valley, well, what we
call the valley where a significant number of people vacation
on the coast is particularly important so that people will head
for high ground immediately after the ground stops moving so
that they can have a good chance of avoiding the ensuing
tsunami.
We are here today to engage in a productive discussion
about where we stand, particularly in relation to other
countries that have suffered large-scale earthquakes, in terms
of our preparedness and resiliency to earthquakes, and what
more needs to be done.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing and I look forward to the witness testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wu follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ranking Member David Wu

Thank you, Chairman Quayle, for calling this very important hearing
to assess the state of earthquake risk reduction in the United States.
And thank you to our witnesses for being here today. Many of you have
traveled a great distance to be here, and I appreciate that.
Our hearts go out to the Japanese people as they continue their
work to recover and rebuild from last month's devastating earthquake
and tsunami. The loss of life and property is a stark reminder of the
destruction that can be caused by a large-scale earthquake, even in a
country like Japan that is on the leading edge in earthquake
preparation and mitigation. This tragedy forces us to take stock of our
own vulnerabilities.
As an Oregonian, I am particularly concerned with the prospect of a
similar disaster occurring in the Pacific Northwest. Off the coast of
Oregon, Washington, and Northern California lies the Cascadia
Subduction Zone. This fault is currently locked in' place, but research
shows that the same stress DOW accumulating has been released as a
large earthquake once about every 500 years. The last Cascadia
earthquake occurred 300 years ago. It was a magnitude 9.0, the same
destructive magnitude that hit Japan last month. All indications show
that we Oregonians can expect another one at any time.
When the next earthquake occurs on our fault, there will be
prolonged shaking with the potential to collapse buildings, create
landslides, and destroy water, power, and other critical lifelines.Such
an earthquake will also likely trigger a devastating tsunami that could
overwhelm the Oregon coast in less than 15 minutes, resulting in
thousands of fatalities and billions of dollars in damages.
Unfortunately, this type of disaster scenario is not limited to the
Western United States. In fact, more than 75 million Americans across
39 states face significant risk from earthquakes.
The good news is that we have already learned a lot about how to
prepare for, mitigate, and respond to a large-scale earthquake. There
is a lot of work already underway to help us better understand
earthquakes, develop safer building construction standards, and ensure
that impacted communities can respond to and recover from earthquakes
as quickly as possible.
The National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program, or NEHRP, has
driven us to make significant progress in this area. I expect that we
will hear testimony today that the four NEHRP agencies--NIST, FEMA,
NSF, and USGS--are making significant strides with at-risk communities
by developing new hazard maps, model building codes, and public
outreach efforts.
I have no doubt that the progress we have made through NEHRP has
enhanced the safety of our communities and will save lives. NEHRP's
good work must be continued.
That is why I have reintroduced the Natural Hazards Risk Reduction
Act, which will reauthorize the NEHRP program. This bipartisan
legislation passed the House by an overwhelming margin in the last
Congress. Already this year, it has been introduced in the Senate, on
the heels of the recent disaster in Japan.
I look forward to working with my colleagues on this Committee and
in the Senate to get this bill signed into law as quickly as possible,
so that we can continue addressing the large challenges that remain:
retrofitting existing structures, improving the performance of critical
infrastructure, and encouraging the adoption of mitigation measures by
households, businesses, and communities. We're here today to engage in
a productive discussion about where this country stands--particularly
in relation to other countries that have suffered large-scale
earthquakes--in terms of our preparedness and resiliency to
earthquakes, and what more needs to be done.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing. And thank
you again to the witnesses for being here. I look forward to your
testimony.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Wu.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time I would like to introduce our witnesses and
then we will proceed to hear from each of them in order. Our
first witness is Dr. Jack Hayes, Director of the National
Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program at the National Institute
of Standards and Technology. Next we will hear from Mr. Jim
Mullen, President of the National Emergency Management
Association and Director of the Washington State Emergency
Management Division. Our third witness is Mr. Chris Poland, the
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Degenkolb Engineers and
Chairman of the NEHRP Advisory Committee. Our final witness is
Dr. Vicki McConnell, Oregon State Geologist and Director of the
Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries.
Thanks again to our witnesses for being here this morning.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited to
five minutes each. After all witnesses have spoken, Members of
the Committee will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Jack Hayes,
Director, National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program,
National Institute of Standards and Technology.

STATEMENT OF DR. JACK HAYES, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL EARTHQUAKE
HAZARDS REDUCTION PROGRAM, NIST

Dr. Hayes. Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Wu and Members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me today to testify
on the state of earthquake risk reduction in the United States.
My testimony reviews the impact of the NEHRP partnership that
includes FEMA, NIST, which is my home agency, NSF and USGS.
This partnership also includes other federal agencies, state
and local governments, non-governmental professional
organizations, model building code and standards organizations,
and earthquake professionals in the private sector and
academia.
NEHRP fosters unique cooperation among the four agencies
with each agency having a crucial role that complements but
does not overlap or compete with the roles of the other NEHRP
agencies. Briefly, NSF supports relevant basic research in the
earth and social sciences and the relevant engineering
disciplines. The USGS carries out earthquake hazards
assessments, earthquake monitoring and notification, and
targeted research in those areas. NIST serves as the program
lead agency and develops and tests earthquake-resistant design
and construction practices. And finally, FEMA promotes the
implementation of earthquake safety tools and policies focusing
on the development of earthquake-resistant building codes and
practices.
NEHRP has an Interagency Coordinating Committee consisting
of the leaders of each NEHRP agency and the directors of OMB
and OSTP. This committee, the ICC, provides overall program
direction. NEHRP also has an external advisory committee that
provides independent assessment of our work and recommends
warranted program changes back to the ICC. The current chair of
the advisory committee, Mr. Chris Poland, is also a witness at
this hearing. We have developed a strategic plan that guides
our partnership. As stated in that plan, our vision is to
create a Nation that is earthquake-resilient in public safety,
economic strength and national security.
How are we achieving this vision? Significantly, NEHRP is
not a regulatory body. We develop, disseminate and promote
knowledge, tools and practices for earthquake risk reduction,
working through coordinated multidisciplinary interagency
partnership both internal to NEHRP and with our stakeholders.
We emphasize resilience, or the ability for a community, region
or even the Nation to recover in a timely manner from the
occurrence of an earthquake or other hazard, recognizing that
this is key to long-term sustainability. Attaining resilience
requires coordinated application of planning, mitigation,
redundancy, robustness, and response and recovery activities.
Our NEHRP annual reports, website and other publications
cover our activities. While I summarize some recent program
highlights in my written testimony, time does not allow me to
review them in detail with you now. Of course, I will certainly
respond to any specific questions you may have later.
During the last 14 months, we have seen devastating
earthquakes in Haiti, Chile, New Zealand and Japan. We offer
our sympathy to these nations and their citizens who have been
affected by these events. Despite their tragic consequences,
these events teach us numerous lessons that can be applied at
home. There are many technical and scientific aspects of these
earthquakes that we are investigating, but two overarching
lessons are already clear. First, these devastating earthquakes
strike without warning, and often at locations where their full
impacts are not expected or understood. Second, earthquake
preparedness and resilience measures can greatly reduce
earthquake impacts, human suffering, and societal and economic
disruption. The purpose of NEHRP is to ensure that we are
prepared and that we do not have to relearn those two lessons
here at home.
Chairman Quayle and other Subcommittee Members, thank you
again for the opportunity to testify on NEHRP efforts to reduce
earthquake risk in the United States. This concludes my
remarks, and I shall be happy to answer any questions that you
may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hayes follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. Jack Hayes Director, National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program, NIST

Introduction

Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Wu and Members of the Subcommittee,
on behalf of Secretary of Commerce Gary Locke and the Department of
Commerce, thank you for inviting me to testify on the current
activities of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP)
today. Before I start, I wanted to share with you that all of us at the
Department share in the grief felt by people around the world for the
people of Japan. On behalf of the Department of Commerce, Secretary
Locke expressed his condolences at the Embassy of Japan on March 23rd.
My testimony provides an overview of the statutory four-agency
NEHRP partnership that includes the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)--my
home agency, the National Science Foundation (NSF), and the U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS). This partnership also extends far beyond
these Federal agencies to include other Federal agencies, state and
local governments, non-governmental professional organizations, model
building code and standards organizations, and earthquake professionals
in the private sector and academia. Without this extended ``family'' of
dedicated earthquake professionals, the NEHRP agencies simply could not
fulfill their statutory responsibilities effectively.
In the almost-two years since I last testified before this
Subcommittee, the U.S. has fortunately continued to experience a
relatively quiet period of seismic activity. However, worldwide seismic
events during that time, particularly those around the Pacific ``Ring
of Fire'' that borders the West Coast of the U.S., have been
devastating, taking many lives, disrupting many other lives, and
costing billions in direct and indirect impacts on infrastructure and
economic activity. Since the beginning of 2010, we have witnessed
horrific losses of life in Haiti (over 230,000) and Japan (toll still
unknown but numbering in the tens of thousands) due to the combined
earthquake and tsunami impacts, and lesser, but nevertheless
significant, losses of life in Chile and New Zealand. The toll in terms
of human life is overwhelming, and we all offer our heartfelt sympathy
to those nations and their citizens.
The NEHRP agencies have begun analyzing lessons-learned from all of
these tragic events. Some preliminary ``big picture'' lessons are
already clear. The 2010 Haiti and Chile earthquakes provided a stark
contrast in the effectiveness of modern building codes and sound
construction practices. In Haiti, where such standards were minimal or
non-existent, many thousands were killed in the collapses of homes and
other buildings. In Chile, with much more modern building codes and
engineering practices, the loss of life, while still tragic, was far
smaller, about 500, despite the fact that the Chile earthquake had a
significantly higher magnitude of 8.8 (M8.8) than the Haiti earthquake
(M7.0). The fault rupture that caused the Chile earthquake released
approximately 500 times the energy released in the Haiti earthquake.
The Chilean building code provisions had been based in large part on
U.S. model building codes that have been developed by researchers and
practitioners who have been associated with and supported by NEHRP.
Scientists and engineers have not yet had enough time since the
2011 earthquakes in New Zealand (M6.3) and Japan (M9.0) to draw
detailed conclusions. We do know that Japan and New Zealand are
international leaders in seismology and earthquake engineering--we in
the U.S. partner with our counterparts in both countries, because we
have much to learn from one another. Despite their technical prowess,
leaders in both countries have been taken aback by the amount of damage
that has occurred. One lesson we take from this before we even begin
detailed studies is that we still have much to learn about the
earthquake hazards we face and the engineering measures needed to
minimize the risks from those hazards. Assuming that we already know
everything we need to know is the surest strategy for catastrophe. The
other broad lesson that has already become clear from both of these
events is that local, and indeed national, resilience --to recover in a
timely manner from the occurrence of an earthquake or other hazard
event--is vital, going far beyond the essential, but narrowly focused,
issue of ensuring life safety in buildings and other locations when an
earthquake occurs. In Christchurch, NZ, the central business district
has been largely closed since the February 21 earthquake, severely
impacting the local economy. Some reports indicate as many as 50,000
people are out of work as a result of this closure. In Japan, the
impact of the March 11 earthquake and resulting tsunami have been far
worse on the national economy, with energy, agriculture, and commercial
disruptions of monumental proportions. Some estimates already put the
economic losses over $300 billion, and economic disruption is certain
to continue for years and extend far beyond Japan's shores.
The 2010 and 2011 events followed decades or even centuries of
quiescence on the faults where they struck and are sobering reminders
of the unexpected tragedies that can occur. The USGS has recently
issued updated assessments of earthquake hazards in the U.S. that
provide appropriate perspectives for us. For example, in 2008, the
USGS, the Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC), and the
California Geological Survey (CGS), with support from the California
Earthquake Authority (CEA), jointly forecast a greater than 99%
certainty of California's experiencing a M6.7 or greater earthquake
within the next 30 years. The recent New Zealand earthquake, at M6.3,
is slightly less severe than that which is postulated for California.
The recent Chile and Japan earthquakes, at M8.8-M9.0, occurred in
tectonic plate collision zones where one plate overrides another; that
characteristic is closely comparable to those which generated 1964
Alaska earthquake and more ancient earthquakes off the coasts of Oregon
and Washington, in the Cascadia Subduction Zone. Seismologists thus
believe that what we have recently observed in Chile and Japan should
serve as clear indication to us for what may likely occur again someday
off the Alaska, Oregon, and Washington coasts.
While concern for future earthquake activity is always great along
our West Coast, the National Research Council has noted in its
publications that 39 states in the U.S. have some degree of earthquake
risk, with 18 of those having high or very high seismicity. In 2011 and
2012, earthquake practitioners and state and local leaders in Memphis,
St. Louis, and other Midwestern locales will participate in events that
will commemorate the bicentennial anniversary of the New Madrid
sequence of earthquakes, which included at least four earthquakes with
magnitudes estimated at 7.0 or greater.
NEHRP is predicated on the reality that earthquakes are inevitable
and will occur without warning, but that there is much the nation can
do to minimize their consequences. The NEHRP agencies strive to perform
the needed research and then translate the research results into
actions that ensure that U.S. citizens are less threatened by
devastating earthquakes. As described briefly in this testimony, the
NEHRP agencies work in partnership, with each agency fulfilling its
unique role, to perform a national service that simply cannot be
duplicated by others. The studies and monitoring of the earthquake
hazard cuts across both governmental and commercial boundaries. The
research and implementation in both science and engineering by the
NEHRP agencies is made possible by the ``critical mass'' they provide,
which would not otherwise be possible if all responsibilities were left
to the many states and (for the most part) small corporate entities
that work in this field.

NEHRP Organization, Leadership, and Reporting

NEHRP is authorized through the Natural Hazards Risk Reduction Act
of 2004. The Senate Committee on Science, Commerce, and Transportation
has introduced S. 646, the Natural Hazards Risk Reduction Act of 2011,
to reauthorize these program. A similar bill was passed through the
House of Representatives in the last session of Congress. We and the
other agencies involved look forward to working with both chambers of
Congress in the 112th Congress on this important legislation. The NEHRP
Interagency Coordinating Committee (ICC) and the external Advisory
Committee on Earthquake Hazard Reduction (ACEHR) continue to provide
leadership to the program.

Interagency Coordinating Committee

Since 2006, the ICC has been very actively engaged in NEHRP
leadership, meeting formally and conducting informal exchanges of
information. This has resulted in a significant increase in program
visibility in each agency and in the Executive Office of the President
and has elevated key interagency decisions directly to the agency
leader level. The direct involvement of, and interactions between the
agency leaders has greatly improved program coordination and
efficiency. The ICC has actively overseen the development of NEHRP's
annual reports and, most importantly, the development of the new NEHRP
Strategic Plan that was released in October 2008. The ICC members
viewed the significance of the Strategic Plan to be so great that they
remained fully engaged with its development throughout its preparation.

Advisory Committee on Earthquake Hazards Reduction

The ACEHR advises the NEHRP program on trends and developments in
the science and engineering of earthquake hazards reduction; Program
effectiveness in carrying out Program activities; Program management,
coordination, implementation and activities; and any need for Program
revision. The ACEHR first met in 2007 and consists today of 16 leading
earthquake professionals from across the U.S., from all walks of the
non-Federal earthquake practitioner sector.

Lead Agency

The 2004 reauthorization designated NIST as the NEHRP Lead Agency
with primary responsibility for planning and coordinating the Program.
While NIST ``leads'' NEHRP activities it is only with the
outstanding teamwork of all the agencies working together under well
defined roles and responsibilities that NEHRP accomplishments occur.
There is a genuine camaraderie, sense of common purpose, and dedication
to improving earthquake safety and resilience among the agency
representatives.

NEHRP Strategic Plan

Vision

The 2008 Strategic Plan presents a new NEHRP vision for our nation:
A nation that is earthquake-resilient in public safety, economic
strength, and national security.
This vision sets a fresh course for NEHRP, recognizing the
importance of not only improving public safety in future earthquakes
but also enhancing national economic strength and security. For
example, if a southern California earthquake severely damaged the ports
of Los Angeles and Long Beach, as happened to the port of Kobe, Japan,
in 1995, there would be national economic implications. Similarly, if a
major earthquake occurred in the Central U.S., one or more Mississippi
River transcontinental rail or highway crossings in the Saint Louis to
Memphis region, as well as oil and natural gas transmission lines could
be severely disrupted. Working with its partners in both the Federal
and non-Federal sectors, NEHRP can and should provide tools to assist
the government and private sector entities who address those
challenges.
More significantly, the vision also recognizes the need for
improving our national resilience in the face of future damaging
earthquakes. Achieving resilience requires coordinated application of
mitigation, redundancy, robustness, and response and recovery
activities and is a vital issue for the nation.
NEHRP does play a role in providing the means for improving
response and recovery capacity. For example, led by FEMA and USGS, the
NEHRP agencies are engaging in scenario demonstration projects, such as
the 2008 Great Southern California Shakeout \1\ and subsequent similar
activities. These projects serve to catalyze both pre-earthquake
mitigation measures and post-earthquake response and recovery
activities for state and local leaders.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Http://www.shakeout.org/

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Plan Structure

The Strategic Plan sets three overarching program goals that
involve synergies among the agencies: improve understanding of
earthquake processes and impacts (basic research); develop cost-
effective measures to reduce earthquake impacts on individuals, the
built environment, and society-at-large (applied research and
development); and, improve the earthquake resilience of communities
nationwide (knowledge transfer and implementation).
The Plan also sets out nine areas of strategic priority for the
program, areas of great importance to the nation that will be
emphasized more prominently as resources become available to address
them: fully implement the Advanced National Seismic System (ANSS);
improve techniques for evaluating and rehabilitating existing
buildings; further develop performance-based seismic design (PBSD);
increase consideration of socioeconomic issues related to hazard
mitigation implementation; develop a national post-earthquake
information management system; develop advanced earthquake risk
mitigation technologies and practices; develop guidelines for
earthquake-resilient lifeline components and systems; develop and
conduct earthquake scenarios for effective earthquake risk reduction
and response and recovery planning; and, facilitate improved earthquake
mitigation at state and local levels.

Figure 1. Primary NEHRP Activity Areas

The slide above shows the primary roles of the four agencies and
further emphasizes that NEHRP is incomplete without the significant
contributions made by those outside the four agencies--in fact, that
non-Federal community is a major factor in the historic success of
NEHRP. In addition to the strong principles of ensuring synergy without
duplication, the NEHRP agencies will seek, within their designated
mission areas, closer ties to the international community. Not only can
NEHRP-developed technologies be applied to help others, but the U.S.
can learn from advances that are being made abroad.
NEHRP agencies seek to foster synergies among disciplines as well
as with those who work with other hazards, such as wind, flood, and
fire. The NEHRP agencies are aware of the similarities, differences,
and linkages that exist among the hazards. Most of the technical issues
that are tied to monitoring hazard occurrence, assessing the resulting
risks, and developing tools, standards, and guidelines for design and
construction differ substantially from hazard to hazard, making direct
interactions at that level difficult. However, there are opportunities
for the coordination of some NEHRP activities with those that have
parallels for other hazards: e.g., similarities in disaster response
that can and should be shared with professionals in other hazard areas
and similarities in structural response analysis for earthquakes and
for blast or impact situations. Some key linkages provide excellent
opportunities for multi-hazard cooperation, e.g., tsunami warnings for
such events that are caused by earthquakes (USGS-provided data used by
the National Weather Service) and structural fire effects from any
source (NIST).
The NEHRP agencies are also aware of the 30+ year history of
organized NEHRP interaction with the earthquake professional community
and state and local governments. This provides much organizational
experience that can be shared with those working in other hazards-
related fields, which typically have not enjoyed long histories of such
cooperation.

Recent NEHRP Activities-Fostering Technology and Knowledge Transfer

The NEHRP agencies have worked both individually and collectively
in recent years to improve the nation's earthquake resilience. Annual
reports on the Program activities can be found at www.nehrp.gov. The
following are brief descriptions of agency roles and accounts of some
of their more prominent recent activities, as reported at the March
2011 ACEHR meeting.

USGS

The USGS is the applied earth science component of NEHRP. USGS
delivers rapid characterization of earthquake size, location, and
impacts; develops seismic hazard assessment maps and related mapping
products; builds public awareness of earthquake hazards; and supports
targeted research to improve monitoring and assessment capabilities.
Noteworthy in 2011 is the USGS role in the U.S.-Japan Natural Resources
Panel for Earthquake Research; this panel will be actively engaged in
analysis of the recent Japan earthquake and its impacts on U.S.
practice.

Monitoring

The USGS has significantly advanced its delivery of comprehensive
earthquake information from monitoring systems, in the U.S. and
internationally. In the U.S., monitoring is accomplished via the
developing Advanced National Seismic System (ANSS), which is now
deployed at about 25% of its planned capacity. Internationally, USGS
works in partnership with NSF and the Incorporated Research
Institutions for Seismology (IRIS) to maintain the Global Seismographic
Network as a tool for earthquake monitoring and research. The USGS
National Earthquake Information Center (NEIC) assimilates all
monitoring data on a 24/7 basis and issues rapid reports of potentially
damaging earthquakes to key Federal, state, and local institutions, and
to an electronic mailing list of over 250,000 users. USGS has
implemented full on-site 24/7 operations at the NEIC and developed
products such as the Prompt Assessment of Global Earthquakes for
Response (PAGER) system that provides rapid (within minutes of
earthquake detection) estimates of population exposure to strong
shaking in earthquakes worldwide and delivers that to aid agencies,
emergency managers, and others who use it to prioritize response
activities. The most recent version of PAGER provides order-of-
magnitude estimates of fatalities and economic losses. The USGS is also
working with the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to install seismic
instrumentation at 27 VA medical centers around the country--this will
provide valuable information on actual building responses in future
earthquakes.

Mapping

In 2008, the USGS released new U.S. national seismic hazard maps
based on the most recent field observations and research results. The
maps show that earthquakes are serious threats to 75 million people in
39 states. The USGS used these updated hazard maps to develop new
``risk-targeted earthquake'' (RTE) design maps for national model
building codes that focus on the likelihood over time of building
collapse due to earthquake ground motions instead of simply focusing on
the likelihood of earthquake ground motions themselves. This has
resulted in a lowering of earthquake design forces for many types of
buildings in the Central and Eastern U.S. The USGS is also developing
more detailed urban hazard maps for various areas; such maps have been
released recently for Memphis and Seattle and are currently underway
for St. Louis and Evansville, Indiana.

Scenario-Based Exercises

In 2008, the USGS, California Geological Survey, and Southern
California Earthquake Center produced a plausible scenario of a rupture
of the southern end of the San Andreas fault that could result in about
1,800 deaths, 50,000 injuries, and economic losses exceeding $200
billion in the greater Los Angeles area. This scenario formed the basis
for the 2008 Great Southern California Shakeout earthquake preparedness
and response exercise. Over five million Southern California residents
participated in the Shakeout, making it the largest public preparedness
event ever held in the U.S. The State of California has begun annual
renditions of the Shakeout exercise across the state. Along with FEMA,
the USGS is supporting similar activities for the Great Central U.S.
Shakeout that will be staged in April 2011.

Central U.S. Activities

The Central U.S. has been a major focus of the USGS and its
partners in the past year, with the approach of the bicentennial of the
1811-12 New Madrid earthquake sequence there, which still ranks among
the most severe earthquakes ever experienced in the U.S. In addition to
its work in support of upcoming Great Central U.S. Shakeout, the USGS
is working to support the FEMA National Level Exercise (NLE) 2011. In
response to recommendations made by the NEHRP ACEHR, the USGS is
working through its National Earthquake Prediction Evaluation Council
(NEPEC) to support an independent evaluation of the hazard posed by the
New Madrid Seismic Zone (NMSZ). The Arkansas Geological Survey and
Center for Earthquake Research and Information at the University of
Memphis, a regional network in the USGS Advanced National Seismic
System, has been actively monitoring the recent swarm of low-magnitude
earthquakes in north-central Arkansas.

NSF

NSF is NEHRP's primary basic research arm, supporting research that
addresses earth science, geotechnical and structural engineering,
lifeline engineering, and the social sciences, and integrating those
disciplines. Following the devastating 2010 earthquakes in Haiti and
Chile, NSF convened workshops to develop consensus reports on research
needs.

Earth Science

NSF supports fundamental research related to seismology, geodesy,
soil and rock mechanics, paleoseismology--the geologic studies of
prehistoric earthquakes--structural geology, and relevant theoretical,
modeling, and laboratory projects. Recent outcomes from these programs
range from explanatory mechanisms for episodic tremor and slip observed
along plate boundaries around the world to insight into the slip
differential across the southern San Andreas Fault. This work has
substantially improved the description and understanding of strain
buildup along major plate boundary faults such as the southern San
Andreas Fault and the southern California San Jacinto Fault.
Following the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, NSF awarded grants
supporting a five year project that installed and maintains 100 field
stations around the Caribbean basin to provide continuous GPS (ground
deformation) and weather monitoring. This new network is known as
COCONet (Continuously Operating Caribbean GPS Observational Network).

NEES

Established in 2004, the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for
Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) provides world-class
experimental facilities at 14 academic institutions across the U.S. The
facilities include seismic shake tables, geotechnical centrifuges, a
tsunami wave basin, large strong-floor and reaction-wall facilities
with unique testing equipment, and mobile and permanently installed
field equipment. The network's cyberinfrastructure technology links the
facilities via the Internet2 grid, forming the world's first prototype
of a distributed ``virtual instrument,'' and includes a national
repository for experimental data, as well as numerical simulation and
collaborative tools.
NEES plays a unique role among NEHRP agency investments for basic
earthquake engineering research, providing diverse experimental
capabilities, substantial user support, emphasis on education and
outreach, and a university environment characterized by openness for
academic, industry, and government use. NEES has promoted change in the
earthquake engineering research culture through open access to
unprecedented experimental capabilities, collaboration with
experimental facility staff to develop formal testing protocols,
archival of all experimental data in a community data repository for
reuse by other investigators, and a new generation of students trained
in advanced experimentation techniques and analytical modeling. NEHRP
agency partners FEMA and NIST, and other Federal agencies, support
projects to transfer NEES research findings into technical briefs for
practitioners, performance-based seismic design (PBSD) guidelines, and
seismic provisions in model building codes.
NSF's Memorandum Concerning Cooperation in the Area of Disaster
Prevention Research with the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science, and Technology enables U.S. researchers to use both
NEES and Japan's Earth Defense (E-Defense) shake table, the world's
largest shake table, to simulate seismic performance on large- to full-
scale models with geotechnical and structural innovations. U.S. and
Japanese researchers meet at least annually to discuss topics of mutual
research interest and have a close collaborative relationship; as a
result, several joint U.S.-Japan projects have now been performed using
the E-Defense facility.
NSF continues to support, along with other Federal agencies, the
Natural Hazards Center at the University of Colorado, Boulder. The
Center's annual July workshop assembles leading U.S. natural hazards
researchers, policy makers, and practitioners. This is the major
national forum for linking the producers of research with appropriate
user communities.

NIST

NIST has devoted significant attention to establishing the NEHRP
program. The Secretariat has established the NEHRP web site
(www.nehrp.gov) that contains much information about the Program, links
to all of the NEHRP agency sites, links to other organizations that are
involved with earthquake-related research and implementation issues,
and an electronic clearinghouse of documents produced by NEHRP
activities.
Through the NEHRP Secretariat, NIST has sponsored a NEHRP-wide
study by the National Research Council (NRC) that will provide a broad
20-year roadmap for the NEHRP agencies to consider as they implement
the NEHRP Strategic Plan. The NRC study assembled a broad panel of
national experts in earthquake risk reduction to identify and
prioritize possible activities that could be considered to achieve the
objectives set out in the NEHRP Strategic Plan, and to estimate the
costs of those activities. The results of the study were released on
March 30, 2011 and are now widely available.
In 2010 and 2011, the NEHRP Secretariat has also worked to support
the U.S.-Japan Natural Resources Panel on Wind and Seismic Effects and
is currently in frequent communication with Japanese counterparts
regarding possible cooperative efforts to survey and analyze the damage
that occurred in the recent Japan earthquake. The NEHRP Secretariat is
also engaged in leading the Federal Interagency Committee on Seismic
Safety in Construction (ICSSC) and currently supports s an independent
study to develop updated standards for seismic evaluation and
rehabilitation of existing Federal buildings.
NIST's technical role in NEHRP is chiefly one of linking the basic
research products that come from NSF-supported university research with
the implementation activities that are largely led by FEMA. Commencing
in 2007 and continuing now, in a strong commitment to the Program, NIST
began strengthening its capabilities in the earthquake research arena,
to bridge the research-to-implementation gap. The NIST earthquake risk
mitigation research program supports several key areas: providing
technical support for the earthquake engineering practice and building
code development process; developing the technical basis for
performance-based seismic design; supporting the development of
technical resources that improve earthquake engineering practice; and,
making developed and evaluated technologies available to practitioners
in the design and construction communities. These activities are
consistent with the NIST mission of serving the measurement and
standards needs of the building and fire safety industries. NIST is a
critical source of metrics, models, and knowledge for predicting the
extent of damage from natural and man-made hazards, mitigating their
impact, and helping to enhance the disaster resilience of communities
and the built environment.
NIST performs about half of its earthquake research via a
contractual partnership with the NEHRP Consultants Joint Venture, which
links NIST with the nation's leading earthquake engineering researchers
and practitioners. Several projects have been completed, and additional
projects are ongoing. In addition, NIST has been building its in-house
capabilities by hiring new earthquake research staff members.
Given the unique nature of the necessary interaction between NIST
and FEMA in fulfilling their respective roles, the two agencies have
formed a special partnership with their programs that involves
complete, frequent exchanges of project information and in some
instances actual direct collaboration on projects that involve
complementary topic areas. The Administration has committed NIST to
support post-earthquake investigations for NEHRP. The President's 2012
budget request includes funding to support the formation of a formal
Disaster and Failure Studies Program at NIST that would include post-
earthquake investigation activities, in addition to field studies in a
number of other hazards areas. Following the 2010 Chile earthquake,
FEMA, NIST, and USGS staff members joined scientists and engineers
sponsored by American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) and the NSF-
supported Earthquake Engineering Research Institute (EERI) Learning
from Earthquakes (LFE) program in surveying the damage to Chilean
infrastructure. Following the field work, NIST co-sponsored a Chile
research needs meeting with American Society of Civil Engineers and the
Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research (PEER) Center that resulted in
NIST's making mid-year programming changes to focus key research
efforts on lessons learned from the Chile earthquake.

FEMA

While the other agencies contribute to NEHRP implementation
efforts, FEMA is NEHRP's primary implementation and outreach arm.

Implementation Activities

FEMA has a prominent NEHRP leadership role in working with the
practitioner community, the ASCE, and the International Code Council
(ICC) to support the development of model building code provisions.
FEMA works with the Building Seismic Safety Council (BSSC) to develop
the next generation of the NEHRP Recommended Provisions for Seismic
Regulations for New Buildings and Other Structures (FEMA P-750) that
was released in early 2010 for use in future ASCE standards and model
building codes. USGS in turn supports the development of the
Recommended Provisions with its hazards mapping activities.
FEMA works directly with the model building code organizations to
assist in the development of new seismic provisions for new editions of
the International Codes, or ``I-Codes,'' that are promulgated by the
ICC. The I-Codes have been adopted in part or whole by all 50 states,
standardizing safe design practices nation-wide. FEMA supports projects
to develop earthquake engineering guidelines for designers and works
closely with NIST in this activity. This partnership and the resulting
development, publication, dissemination, and promotion of building
design and construction materials are signature elements of NEHRP.
FEMA has developed and published over 200 earthquake design
guidance publications on all aspects of earthquake risk mitigation,
including: seismic design and construction of new buildings; evaluation
and cost-effective rehabilitation/retrofit of existing hazardous
structures; and other related structural and non-structural issues.
FEMA has pioneered developmental work that supports the emergence of
Performance-Based Seismic Design of buildings. Basic research supported
by NSF has supported this effort, and, in recent years, NIST has
initiated several knowledge transfer projects that complement the FEMA
activity. PBSD is essential to fostering resilience in the constructed
environment, because it helps engineers to work with building owners to
enhance building performance beyond the basic life safety that is
provided by the prescriptive measures found in model building codes.
FEMA began a significant new public outreach effort in 2008 with
its new QuakeSmart initiative, which is designed to encourage business
leaders and owners in areas that are at risk from earthquakes to take
actions that will mitigate damage to their businesses, provide greater
safety for customers and employees, and speed recovery if an earthquake
occurs. The initiative began with a series of Community Forums in four
cities in the Midwest and on the West Coast. Further forums are
scheduled and FEMA is working with the Home Depot and ServiceMaster
companies to broaden public outreach.

Outreach Activities

To support and increase the adoption of NEHRP earthquake resiliency
measures, FEMA leads NEHRP efforts to maintain strong partnerships with
other earthquake and hazards-related agencies, state and local
governments, academia, the research community, code enforcement
officials, design professionals, and the remainder of the private
sector.
FEMA provides technical and financial assistance to states to
increase awareness of the earthquake hazard and to foster plans to
reduce seismic vulnerabilities. To provide state financial assistance,
FEMA administers the Earthquake Hazards Reduction State Assistance
Program which provides financial support to 33 states and territories.
FEMA also provides grants to support earthquake-related outreach
and educational activities that promote earthquake mitigation and
awareness to a series of multi-state consortia and organizations,
including the Cascadia Regional Earthquake Working Group (CREW), which
serves states in the Pacific Northwest affected by the Cascadia
Subduction Zone and related faults; the Central United States
Earthquake Consortium (CUSEC), which serves the states impacted by the
New Madrid seismic zone; the Northeast States Emergency Consortium
(NESEC), which serves northeastern states on a multi-hazard basis; and
the Western States Seismic Policy Council (WSSPC).
In addition to outreach activities to promote training courses and
publications, to improve education and awareness, FEMA has co-sponsored
series of informational conferences, including the National Earthquake
Conference held in Seattle in April 2008, as well as the 100 Year
Anniversary of the 1906 San Francisco Earthquake. Along with USGS, FEMA
is providing support for the upcoming National Level Exercise (NLE)
2011 and the Great Central U.S. Shakeout. The NLE 2011 will focus on
testing the earthquake catastrophic plan and the emergency response
capacity of the NMSZ states.
In a project closely related to its other NEHRP efforts, FEMA
completed development and publication of its Guidelines for Design of
Structures for Vertical Evacuation from Tsunamis. This document was
jointly funded by FEMA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA). NOAA issues tsunami warnings and leads the
TsunamiReady program, a community preparedness and mitigation
initiative. Tsunami safety is a critical issue for many coastal
communities along the West Coast of the U.S. that are vulnerable to
tsunami. The States of Oregon and Washington have already expressed
interest in using this publication. This publication has taken on added
significance as a result of the recent Japan earthquake and tsunami.

Conclusion

The earthquakes of the past fourteen months--Haiti, Chile, New
Zealand and now Japan--remind us of the persistent nature of the
tectonic forces active within the Earth. There is nothing we can do to
stop these processes, but the impacts of earthquakes, while not
completely avoidable, can be greatly reduced.
Two major lessons from the recent earthquakes can be simply stated:

Devastating earthquakes strike without warning, often
at locations where their size and impacts are not fully
expected.

Earthquake preparedness and resilience measures can
greatly reduce losses of lives, property, economic capacity,
and societal well being.

These lessons seem obvious. But, we have recently seen nature teach
them to us again, at the expense of others less fortunate and
incompletely prepared. There is no need or justification for us to be
forced to re-learn these lessons at home. Our challenge is to see that
the new knowledge and experience gained through NEHRP continues to be
developed and applied to domestic practices and policies that foster a
more resilient American society.
Chairman Quayle and other Subcommittee Members, thank you again for
the opportunity to testify on NEHRP activities. This concludes my
remarks. I shall be happy to answer any questions you may have.

Biography for Dr. Jack Hayes Director, National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program, NIST

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Dr. Hayes.
I now recognize Mr. Jim Mullen, Director, Washington State
Emergency Management Division, and President of the National
Emergency Management Association, to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. JIM MULLEN, DIRECTOR, WASHINGTON STATE

EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIVISION AND PRESIDENT,

NATIONAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION

Mr. Mullen. Thank you, Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Wu
and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee for the
opportunity to testify today regarding earthquake preparedness.
I am President of the National Emergency Management Association
and we represent the state emergency management directors of
the 50 states, territories and the District of Columbia. I have
submitted my written statement for the record already so I will
take advantage of this opportunity to summarize my statement
and leave some time for questions.
The initial phase of an incident, whether it is an
earthquake or a tsunami or a hurricane, usually involves the
lights and sirens of response, and while firefighters, law
enforcement officials and emergency medical personnel bravely
constitute the traditional first responders, emergency managers
provide the all-important function of coordination. Emergency
managers often manage multiple events simultaneously while
preparing for a wide range of hazards from floods and
earthquakes to category 5 hurricanes and terrorist attacks.
The response to an incident usually includes three phases
of escalation. First, the local jurisdiction responds with
immediately available assets. Should the local jurisdiction
become overwhelmed, my counterparts at the state level are
available to provide more robust state capabilities. On
occasion, an event will even overwhelm the state, and this is
usually the only time in which the Federal Emergency Management
Agency is called upon to offer assistance. Without broad
coordination by emergency managers during the response phase
and this escalation of assistance, the transition from response
to recovery would be nearly impossible.
In my written statement, I go into more detail on the
National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program and other
witnesses have and will address it specifically, but I would be
remiss if I didn't stress the importance of Congress
reauthorizing this program. Without adequate authorization and
funding of NEHRP, the collaborative work done by several
federal agencies and institutes could leave communities without
a critical source of research and technical assistance on
earthquake preparedness. This work is invaluable during the
planning for a response, but irreplaceable during a disaster.
Programs such as NEHRP and the response and recovery issues I
just discussed will be on display this May during a national-
level exercise throughout the mid-central United States. This
exercise is sponsored by FEMA, and through the simulation of a
major earthquake on the New Madrid Seismic Zone will test the
policies and doctrines of the Federal Government and eight
states. This endeavor will involve thousands of government
officials at the federal, state, local and tribal levels,
members of the private sector and the general public. Once this
exercise is complete, I am quite sure the Committee will be
interested in any after-action report FEMA can make available.
Exercises, and programs such as NEHRP only go so far,
however, in establishing a baseline capability for response and
exercise efforts. Each year, Congress supports one of the most
critical programs the Federal Government has to offer. The
Emergency Management Performance Grants, or EMPG, allow state
and local emergency managers the ability to enhance their
capability to protect lives and property. This coordination
between state and local emergency managers is critical prior to
an event. Since inception, EMPG has required a 50 percent non-
federal match, and many state and local jurisdictions regularly
overmatch.
To give you an idea of the impact of EMPG, consider the
following examples. In 2009, 59 disasters occurred which
required a Presidential Declaration and federal assistance. At
the state level, however, 180 disasters required a
gubernatorial declaration but no federal assistance, and
another 122 events required State resources but no declaration.
Without solid capabilities at the state and local levels
afforded through EMPG, these events normally not requiring
federal action could need significant federal expenditures.
As you can see, the emergency management process is
complicated, and while I strayed somewhat from earthquakes
specifically, this demonstrates the need to be prepared for a
wide range of events from the initial response to the
transition to recovery to the various levels of support FEMA
can offer and the programs such as EMPG and NEHRP help states
stand on their own. There is much we can accomplish if that
program continues.
The emergency management team stands ready to continue
assisting you in Congress in ensuring the safety and security
of millions of Americans against a broad range of hazards and
threats.
I thank you for this opportunity to testify and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mullen follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. Jim Mullen, Director, Washington State
Emergency Management Division and President,
National Emergency Management Association

Introduction

Thank you Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Wu, and distinguished
Members of the Subcommittee for the opportunity to testify today
regarding earthquake preparedness and efforts undertaken each and every
day by dedicated emergency management professionals to help protect
lives and property.
Emergency management is far more complex, however, than discussing
specific response and recovery efforts of just one hazard. We often
manage multiple events simultaneously while preparing for a wide range
of hazards from floods and earthquakes to Category 5 hurricanes and
terrorist attacks.
While other witnesses today have highlighted the attributes of the
National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program (NEHRP), I will go over
general response and recovery issues, current efforts underway to
simulate a massive earthquake in the Mid-Central region of the country,
and recommend the best way you can support your state and local
emergency managers.

Response & Recovery

A major event involving multiple disciplines is complex and
difficult to manage. While firefighters, law enforcement officials, and
emergency medical personnel often constitute the traditional first
responders, emergency managers provide the all important coordination
function. This coordination far exceeds the initial response as
emergency managers also maintain responsibility for the transition from
the lights and sirens of response into the complex and often long-term
efforts of recovery.
Once an event occurs, the response is a three-tiered process of
escalation where the level of support is directly related to the need
of the impacted jurisdiction. The initial response is at the local
level where first responders and local emergency managers provide
assistance. Should the incident exceed the capacity of those local
responders, the state may offer assistance in myriad ways including
personnel, response resources, financial support, and mutual aid. On
rare occasions, an event will even overwhelm the state's ability to
mount an effective response. This is usually the only time in which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is called upon to offer
assistance.
FEMA assistance is triggered by a direct request from the Governor
to the President. Should the President deem the event worthy of federal
assets, a Presidential Disaster Declaration is declared and FEMA can
provide assistance such as assets from the Department of Defense,
financial aid, and expertise.
Disaster assistance from FEMA traditionally comes in one of three
forms. The first is the Public Assistance (PA) Program which provides
supplemental financial assistance to state and local governments as
well as certain private non-profit organizations for response and
recovery activities required as a result of a disaster. The PA Program
provides assistance for debris removal, emergency protective measures,
and permanent restoration of infrastructure. Federal share of these
expenses are typically not less than 75 percent of eligible costs. The
PA Program encourages protection from future damages by providing
assistance for Hazard Mitigation Measures pursuant to Section 404 of
the Stafford Act during the recovery process.
The next level of assistance is the Individual and Family Grant
Program or Individual Assistance (IA) which may provide money and
services to eligible individuals in the declared disaster area when
losses are not covered by insurance and property has been damaged or
destroyed. Assistance for Individuals and Households may include cash
grants for housing assistance and other needs assistance. Homeowners
may use these grants for essential repairs to make their residence
safe, secure, and livable. IA is designed to help with critical
expenses not already covered by other means.
Finally, the federal government can provide assistance to prevent
damage from occurring in the future through the Hazard Mitigation Grant
Program (HMGP). HMGP provides funding to local communities for projects
and plans to reduce damages, losses, and suffering in future disasters.
Hazard mitigation is the ongoing effort to lessen the impact disasters
have on lives and property. Coupled with HMGP, FEMA sponsors programs
including Flood Mitigation Assistance Program (FMA) and Predisaster
Mitigation Program (PDM). Such measures could include communities
removing homes from flood-prone or landslide-prone areas, elevating
houses, tornado safe rooms and community shelters, and other projects
that may help reduce the impact from the next inevitable disaster.
While FEMA can provide all these forms of assistance after a
disaster, part of the preparedness puzzle is learning how we all work
together in forming a seamless response and recovery effort. As
emergency managers, we best practice through the use of regular
exercises and after-action reviews.

New Madrid National Level Exercise

After a significant event, the question is often asked ``Can this
happen to us?'' In the case of the recent earthquake in Japan, the
answer is most certainly ``yes.'' In fact, one of the most severe
earthquakes in history occurred in 1812 along the New Madrid Seismic
Zone (NMSZ) in the Mid-Central United States.
This year, FEMA is sponsoring National Level Exercise 2011 (NLE
2011). The purpose of NLE 2011 is to prepare and coordinate a multiple-
jurisdictional integrated response to a national catastrophic event--
specifically a major earthquake in the central United States region of
the NMSZ.
The exercise will involve thousands of government officials at the
federal, state, local, and tribal levels, members of the private
sector, and the general public. Participants will conduct simultaneous,
related exercise activities at Command Posts, Emergency Operation
Centers and other locations in the Washington DC. area and the eight
affected central U.S. states including Alabama, Arkansas, Illinois,
Indiana, Kentucky, Mississippi, Missouri, and Tennessee. NLE 2011 will
offer agencies and jurisdictions a way to validate their plans and
skills in a real-time, realistic environment and to gain the in-depth
knowledge only available through experience.
NLE 2011 is also an opportunity to continue highlighting to the
public their need to be prepared for earthquakes, and specific steps
they can take to be ready. Exercises only go so far, however, in
establishing a baseline capability for response and exercise efforts.
Each year Congress supports one of the most critical programs the
federal government has to offer. The Emergency Management Performance
Grant (EMPG) Program allows state and local emergency managers the
ability to enhance the capability to protect life and property.

Emergency Management Performance Grants

Often referred to as the ``backbone of the nation's emergency
management system,'' EMPG allows state, tribal, and local governments
to make key investments in building capacity and enhancing the
capability of states and localities to respond to disasters.
EMPG stands as the only source of federal funding directed to
state, local, and tribal governments for planning, training, exercises,
and key professional expertise for all-hazards emergency preparedness.
In addition, EMPG supports emergency operations centers, which are the
coordination hubs for all disaster response and to conduct risk and
hazard assessments. The program also provides public education and
outreach, enhanced interoperable communications capabilities, and the
ability to manage statewide alerts and warnings.
Since inception, EMPG has required at least 50 percent non-federal
match. This partnership recognizes every level of government as having
an interest in building emergency management capacity nationwide. Even
during these tough economic times, state and local governments continue
to demonstrate a commitment to building capacity by contributing far in
excess of the required 50 percent contribution.
EMPG allows states and local jurisdictions to respond to or support
emergency incidents involving threats to life or property. Direct
support includes activation of emergency operations centers, deployment
of personnel, and the mobilization of resources. In order to illustrate
the impact of EMPG throughout the emergency management community, it is
significant to call attention to the many disasters occurring each year
not requiring a presidential disaster declaration.
For example, in 2009, 59 disasters occurred requiring a
presidential declaration and federal assistance. At the state level,
however, 180 disasters required a gubernatorial declaration but no
federal assistance, and another 122 events required state resources but
no declaration. According to a recent joint survey we conducted with
the International Association of Emergency Managers (IAEM), more than
44,637 actual local and tribal emergency response incidents, including
19,571 state response incidents, were supported utilizing EMPG funds.
Without solid capabilities at the state and local level afforded
through EMPG, events normally not requiring federal action could
realize significant federal expenditures.

National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program

While other witnesses have discussed NEHRP, I would be remiss if I
did not also make mention of the program in this testimony. Since
Congress established NEHRP in 1977, the building code standards,
technical guidance, education, and research have been critical to
reducing risks to life and property resulting from earthquakes. FEMA
works in a support role to the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) which is the lead agency under NEHRP. The emergency
management community relies heavily on the actionable data provided by
the program.
One of the key responsibilities of FEMA is supporting public-
private partnerships to help inspire and sustain disaster-resilient
communities. By providing estimates of potential losses due to seismic
hazards to decision makers on the State and local level, FEMA leverages
the work supported by NEHRP allowing communities to develop earthquake
resistant design, public outreach and education programs, and
construction standards and building codes.
Without adequate authorization and funding of NEHRP, the
collaborative work done by NIST, National Science Foundation, FEMA, and
the U.S. Geological Society could leave communities without a critical
source of research and technical assistance. The information
disseminated by NEHRP partner agencies inform public education efforts
and this outreach can help communities across the country understand
seismic risks and use this understanding to take action by mitigating
their homes and businesses.
For example, in my home State of Washington, we utilize NEHRP to
conduct seismic needs assessments of public schools with the aim of
developing a methodology to assess all public schools for seismic
safety throughout the state. We are also creating a plan for improving
our resilience to damaging earthquakes through the Resilient Washington
State Initiative. Due to the success of this initiative, Oregon has
also recently passed a resolution to complete a similar resiliency
project.
We remain thankful of FEMA Administrator Fugate's continued support
of the use of hazard and risk data developed by NEHRP and other similar
programs used to inform mitigation decisions throughout the emergency
management community. He also consistently discusses the need to invest
in mitigation on the early and often to alleviate response and recovery
efforts and costs after an incident occurs. As we learned following the
catastrophic disaster in Japan last month, even the best mitigation
efforts cannot prevent damage or loss of life from an earthquake but it
unequivocally reduces the risk and helps a community recover sooner as
a sustainable and safer place to live and do business.

Conclusion

As you can see, the response and recovery from any hazard, not just
earthquakes, is complex and fraught with potential pitfalls. The
continued support from Congress can provide emergency managers the
assets to continue effectively managing these events in order to
protect lives and property. EMPG, NEHRP, and the range of response and
recovery programs constitute an invaluable toolbox of options for
emergency manager. As you continue to explore these issues, we offer
NEMA as a resource.

Biography for Mr. Jim Mullen, Director, Washington State Emergency
Management Division and President, National Emergency
Management Association

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Mullen.
I now recognize Mr. Chris Poland, Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer, Degenkolb Engineers, and Chairman of the
NEHRP Advisory Committee, for five minutes to present his
testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. CHRIS POLAND, CHAIRMAN AND

CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, DEGENKOLB ENGINEERS

AND CHAIRMAN, NEHRP ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Mr. Poland. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the
Committee. I appreciate the opportunity to testify on behalf of
the American Society of Civil Engineers.
Over the course of my structural engineering career that
began in the early 1970s, the goal of seismic design has
undergone a radical change. When I started working, it was all
about keeping people safe. Since then, the primary goal has
expanded to also include protecting communities so that they
can recover quickly, and that is a much more complicated
problem. This transition brought with it the need to design
parts of the community to be undamaged and immediately usable,
other portions to be usable while being prepared, and the
majority be usable after repair. The communities' lifeline
systems need to be designed so that they can be restored
quickly and support recovery.
Achieving this goal is the focus of the current national
strategic plan for the NEHRP program. We believe it is in the
federal interest to continue pursuing resilience for the sake
of national security, interstate commerce, public safety,
economic strength and community restoration. I would also like
to point out that this work will stimulate jobs and protect
neighborhoods, protect people and the small businesses that
serve them.
You have asked us to comment on whether we think we are
prepared, and what I can say as a structural engineer is that
depends. We are certainly more prepared than Haiti was
prepared. But at the same time, we know that we are nowhere
near as prepared as Japan was prepared, and we know what
happened in Japan.
For me, I don't think we are prepared as a Nation to face a
major earthquake and the impacts it will have. The vast
majority of our building stock and utility systems in place
today were not designed for earthquake effects, let alone given
the ability to recover quickly from strong shaking and land
movement. The tools and process we have available to achieve
those goals are honestly too expensive to implement.
Each earthquake brings different styles of shaking, and new
insights into the performance of the built environment. Each
event reminds us that there is a lot of uncertainty about what
causes failures and that generally leaves the profession
developing conservative solutions to the problems the observe.
That is what causes the very expensive price tag. Continuing
and expanding the significant ongoing research will lead to
engineering tools and processes that will allow the needed
cost-effective solutions to be developed and implemented.
Last week, the National Research Council of the National
Academies released a study that recommends a roadmap of what
needs to be done to implement the NEHRP strategic plan. The NRC
list of needed activities is comprehensive and it certainly
justifies the reauthorization of the NEHRP program. They have
called for a 20-year program that moves at a much faster pace
than NEHRP is currently proceeding. On behalf of my clients who
seek to achieve resiliency at an affordable level, I fully
support the NRC recommendations and call for a faster pace. We
need to accomplish resiliency in our Nation, and at the pace we
are going, we are not going to accomplish it maybe ever.
I recognize the NRC programs address four fundamental needs
of resiliency. They point out that we need to significantly
increase our ability to gather information, data, catalog it
and store it on what happens. Extensive instrumentation is
needed to understand how strong the earthquake shakes
everywhere after an event. We know the shaking is different in
every block of a city. You can tell that by the damage that
occurs, and right now we only have a handful of instruments in
each city to tell us what is happening.
In addition to that, a network of operation centers is
needed to record, catalog and maintain information related to
the impacts on society and their response. Just cataloging how
a community responds to and recovers from an earthquake, that
process has never been done in a coordinated matter. We need
that information.
We need a framework that defines resilience in terms of
what is needed to recover. Resiliency is more about
improvisation, adaptation and redundancy than about how any
single building or system performs. We design single buildings
and systems but we need resilient communities. We should not
spend money on things that we can improvise around. A
consistent national framework for measuring, monitoring and
evaluating community resilience is needed to guide the
development of the new tools and processes. This is a
fundamental need that we have. We need social science research
to quantify the role of improvisation and adaptation and to
determine how decisions are made.
Achieving earthquake resilience requires a community-based
holistic approach to response that includes decisions and
actions that are based on overarching goals, a clear
understanding of the built environment, rapid and informed
assessment data, and planned reconstruction and recovery.
Research on the gathered data will allow lessons to be learned
in one community and transferred to the next. That is a process
that doesn't go on right now.
Finally, we need to develop performance-based engineering
design tools that can be used nationwide. For the past decade,
the engineers have been developed performance-based standards
but these early efforts have been severely limited by
insufficient data on building performance, insufficient
analysis tools to predict performance, and inadequate training
in the use of developing techniques. Basic research, extensive
full-scale testing, applied research and implementation
programs are needed to complete the development of the
standards that will make achieving resilience affordable and
cost-effective.
I appreciate the opportunity to present our views and urge
you to recognize the value of the work, the extraordinary work
that needs to be done and to reauthorize the NEHRP program. I
would be very happy to answer any questions you have. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Poland follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. Chris Poland, Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer,
Degenkolb Engineers and Chairman, NEHRP Advisory Committee

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee: I am Chris Poland and I
am testifying on behalf of the 140,000 members of the American Society
of Civil Engineers (ASCE). At ASCE, I am Chairman of the Infrastructure
and Research Policy Committee. Additionally, I serve as Chairman,
Degenkolb Engineers; and I serve as Chairman of the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) Advisory Committee.I am registered
civil and structural engineer, and have worked for more than 35-years
as an advisor on government programs for earthquake hazard mitigation
and in related professional activities.
My professional experience includes projects of all construction
types, ranging from new design to seismic retrofit and rehabilitation
and historic preservation. I was the founding co-chair of the NEHRP
Coalition for Seismic Safety and chaired the ASCE Standards Committee
on Seismic Rehabilitation and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
Advisory Committee on Structural Safety. I am a member of Boards of the
San Francisco Chamber of Commerce and the San Francisco Planning and
Urban Research Association and elected as a member of the National
Academy of Engineering in recognition of my career long work in support
of Performance Based Earthquake Engineering. I served on the Board of
the Earthquake Engineering Research Institute (EERI) for ten years in
two separate roles, first as the Secretary and then as the President
from 2001 to 2002.
ASCE, founded in 1852, is the country's oldest national civil
engineering organization representing more than 140,000 civil engineers
in private practice, government, industry and academia dedicated to the
advancement of the science and profession of civil engineering. ASCE is
a 501(c)(3) non-profit educational and professional society. Research
in civil engineering, properly conceived, conducted and implemented,
should assure significant advances in the quality of life of
individuals by providing essential service with minimal adverse effects
on the environment by applying the principle of sustainable development
and disaster resilience.
ASCE is pleased to offer this testimony before the Technology and
Innovation Subcommittee on the House Science, Space and Technology
Committee on the hearing, ``Are We Prepared? Assessing Earthquake Risk
Reduction in the United States''.

Shift from Safety to Resilience

During my career as a Structural Engineer and Earthquake
Professional, the focus and goal of seismic design work has undergone a
radical change. As the result of the damage and economic impact that
occurred during major earthquakes and other natural disasters over the
past 20 years, the primary goal of hazard reduction has shifted from
one aimed at protecting people to one that also seeks to protect the
built environment to the extent necessary to allow rapid recovery. This
transition brought with it the need to design portions of the built
environment to be immediately usable without interruption, other
portions to be usable while being repaired, and the majority to be
usable after repair. This change in performance expectation is often
referred to as a change from a life safety goal to a resilience goal.
Achieving this goal is the focus of the current strategic plan for the
National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program (NEHRP 2008). This is new
territory and the basic research, applied research, and guidelines that
are needed for success are in a formative stage.
It also must be recognized that resilience is not just about the
built environment. It starts with individuals, families, communities,
and includes their organizations, businesses, and local governments. In
addition to an appropriately constructed built environment, resilience
includes plans for post event governance, reconstruction standards that
assure better performance in the next event, and a financial roadmap
for funding the recovery. This new style of planning and implementation
must be tailored to the socioeconomic and cultural aspects of each
community. Resilient communities form resilient regions and states
which in turn will create a resilient nation. While the nation can
promote resilience through improved design codes and mitigation
strategies, implementation and response occur at the local level.
Making such a shift to updated codes and generating community support
for new policies are not possible without solid, unified support from
all levels of government.
The federal government needs to set performance standards that can
be embedded in the national design codes, be adamant that states adopt
contemporary building codes including provisions for rigorous
enforcement, provide financial incentives to stimulate mitigation that
benefits the nation, and continue to support research that delivers new
technologies that minimize the cost of mitigation, response, and
recovery. Regions need to identify the vulnerability of their lifeline
systems and set programs for their mitigation to the minimum level of
need. Localities need to develop mandatory programs that mitigate their
built environment as needed to assure recovery. (ACEHR 2009)

Are we prepared?

No.
The vast majority of our building stock and utility systems in
place today were not designed for earthquake effects let alone given
the ability to recover quickly from strong shaking and land movement.
Earthquake Engineering is a new and emerging field and only since the
mid 1980s has sufficient information been available to assure safe
designs. Design procedures that will assure resilience are just now
being developed. Strong, community destroying earthquakes are expected
to occur throughout the United States. In most regions outside of
California, little is being done about it. While modern building codes
and design standards are available, they are not routinely implemented
on new construction or during major rehabilitation efforts because of
the complexity and cost. Many communities do not believe they are
vulnerable and if they do accept the vulnerability, find the demands of
seismic mitigation unreachable.
The problem of implementation and acceptance does not just lie with
the public, but also with the earthquake professionals. Because this is
an emerging area of understanding, conservatism is added whenever there
is significant uncertainty. Earth Science research has made great
strides in identifying areas that will be affected by strong shaking.
Unfortunately, each earthquake brings different styles of shaking and
building performance. This leaves many structural engineers generally
uncertain about what causes buildings to collapse, and unwilling to
predict the extent of damage that will occur, let alone whether a
building will be usable during repairs or if lifeline systems can be
restored quickly enough. Resilience demands transparent performance and
significant earthquake science and earthquake engineering research and
guideline development is needed to bring that ability to communities.

Recommend areas that need Federally Sponsored Research

The NEHRP was originally conceived to provide the knowledge, tools,
and practices needed for earthquake risk reduction and has steadily
made progress toward that goal. Many argue that the research that is
needed to assure safety is complete. While that is debatable, it is
certainly not the case for the research and tools needed to provide
resilience. The 2009-2013 NEHRP Strategic Plan represents a broad-based
and comprehensive statement of what activities are needed to achieve
resilience through basic research, development of cost effective
measures to reduce impacts, and sponsorship of implementation programs
at all levels. It was developed over a three year period with input and
review by the earthquake professional community and represents
consensus about what needs to be done by the Federal Government through
the core Federal Agencies.
Last Week, the National Research Council of the National Academies
(NRC 2011) released a study that recommends a road map of national
needs in research, knowledge transfer, implementation, and outreach
that will provide the tools needed to implement the NEHRP Strategic
Plan and achieve its vision of a nation that is earthquake resilient in
public safety, economic strength, and national security. The NRC study
stands on a foundation of numerous similar reports that have been
produced over the past 20 years and have persistently outlined what is
needed. The list of references in the NRC report includes a complete
listing of the available studies and recommendations. The list of
needed activities is comprehensive, and the extent of work needing to
be accomplished is long. It is an outstanding list of what can be done
and what eventually needs to be done. The nation needs to continue
stepping toward resilience, and the goals objectives and tasks outlined
in the NEHRP Strategic Plan need to be achieved. The reauthorization of
the NEHRP program is a mandatory minimum step to maintain the momentum
that has been developed. Accelerating the pace of achieving the goals
of that plan will bring many benefits and the value is well documented.

Key areas in need of improvement that are supported by the Federal
Government

The NEHRP Strategic Plan is recognized as an appropriate plan for
achieving national resilience. The NRC Road Map is a detailed
assessment of what needs to be done in the next 20 years to implement
the plan. As a practicing Structural Engineer and Earthquake
Professional, I recognize the need for every effort and my clients will
benefit significantly from the resulting work. From my perspective,
they are all a part of the following four key areas that must benefit
from federally supported research if we are to have the knowledge and
tools to become resilient:

(1)  Comprehensive worldwide monitoring and data gathering
related to earthquake intensity and impact.

Extensive instrumentation is needed to adequately record the
size and characteristics of the energy released and the
variation in intensity of strong shaking that affect the built
environment. We are lucky if we obtain a handful of records for
entire cities but in reality thousands are needed to record the
dramatic differences that occur and to understand the damage
that results. In addition, the geologic changes that occur due
to faulting, landslides, and liquefaction need to be surveyed,
recorded, and used to understand the future vulnerability of
the built environment to land movement. A network of
observation centers is needed to record, catalogue and maintain
information related to the impacts on society, and the factors
influencing communities' disaster risk and resilience. At
present, earthquake engineering is based more on anecdotal
observations of damage that are translated into conservative
design procedures without the benefit of accurate data about
what actually happened. In my mind, expanded monitoring is the
single most important area that will reduce the cost of seismic
design and mitigation that will allow us to achieve greater
resilience.

(2)  Overarching Framework that defines resilience in terms of
Performance Goals

Resiliency is all about how a community of individuals and
their built environment weather the damage, respond and
recover. It is more about improvisation and redundancy than
about how any single element or system performs. Buildings and
systems are designed one structure at a time for the worst
conditions they are expected to experience. This approach
worked well when life safety was the goal, and there was no
need to consider the overall performance of the built
environment. Resiliency, however, demands that performance
goals and their interdependencies are set at the community
level for the classes of structures and systems communities
depend during the recovery process.

Facilities providing essential services during post
earthquake response and recovery must function without
interruption. Electric power is needed before any other system
can be fully restored. Emergency generators can only last a few
days without additional deliveries of fuel. Power restoration,
however, depends on access for emergency repair crews and their
supplies. Community level recovery depends on neighborhoods
being restored within a few weeks so the needed workforce is
available to restart the local economy. People must be able to
shelter in place in their homes, even without utilities, but
cannot be expected to stay and work after a few days without
basic utility services. To ensure that past and future advances
in building, lifelines, urban design, technology, and
socioeconomic research result in improved community resilience,
a framework for measuring, monitoring and evaluating community
resilience is needed. This framework must consider performance
at various scales-e.g., building, lifeline, and community-and
build on the experience and lessons of past events.

Only the Federal government can break the stalemate related
to setting performance goals that if left alone will eventually
cripple the nation.

(3)  Social Science Research to quantify the role of
improvisation and adaptation, how decisions are made at all
levels and the need for rehabilitation.

American cities are an eclectic collection of buildings and
lifeline systems built over the life of a city. The vast
majority were built before adequate design codes and standards
were available to assure the needed durability and performance.
Achieving earthquake resilience requires a community-based,
holistic approach that includes decisions and actions that are
based on overarching goals, a clear understanding of the built
environment, rapid and informed assessment data, and planned
reconstruction and recovery.

Communities build based on traditional standards and when
affected by major earthquakes respond and recover based on
intuition, improvisation, and adaptive behaviors that are drawn
from the individuals available to participate. The lessons
learned in one community and event rarely translate to the next
community affected. In a perfect world, all buildings and
systems could be rehabilitated to the needed level to assure
resilience. In reality, the majority will not be rehabilitated
unless financial incentives are provided. Such incentives are
only appropriate and affordable when the subsequent action will
contribute to a community's resilience. Only through social
science research will the balance between mitigation and
response be understood.

(4)  Performance-Based Earthquake Engineering design tools

Earthquake engineering is done every day based on the
available building codes, design standards, industry best
practices and intuition of the nation's earthquake
professionals. Engineers traditionally have not been asked to
disclose how buildings will perform, only whether or not they
``meet the code''. For most buildings, that means nothing with
regard to their safety or usability after a major event.

For the past decade, engineers have been developing performance-
based standards, but these early efforts are severely limited by
insufficient data on building performance, insufficient analysis tools
to predict performance, and inadequate training in the new techniques
that are under development. New standards that support resiliency are
needed throughout the seismic regions of the nation and need to be
included in the development of national design and rehabilitation
codes. Basic research, extensive full scale testing, applied research
and implementation programs are needed to make the necessary seismic
mitigation efforts affordable and cost effective.

Summary

In conclusion, ASCE supports research, practices and policies that
identify earthquake hazards and mitigate earthquake risks, including:

Continuance and expansion of the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and similar initiatives.

The use of state-of-the-art performance standards for
existing critical, essential, educational and disaster-recovery
facilities, such as hospitals, schools and emergency shelters.

Targeting buildings that are likely to collapse in
major earthquakes for mandatory retrofit, reduced occupancy,
reconstruction or demolition.

Improvements of collaborative community preparedness
and their related civil infrastructure with vulnerable regions
so that they are economically resilient to earthquake hazards.

Development of nationally accepted consensus-based
standards for evaluation and retrofit of existing buildings;

Development of national seismic standards for new and
existing lifelines.

Improvement of seismic mitigation applications
focusing on low cost techniques; and

Improvement of large risk mitigation programs at
organizations, including at state Departments of
Transportation, and at utilities.

Thank you for the opportunity to present our views, I would be
happy to answer any questions you might have and to provide the
Committee with further information.

References

Achieving National Disaster Resilience through Local,
Regional, and national Activities. Advisory Committee on
Earthquake Hazard Reduction. www.nehrp.gov, February 2010.

Strategic Plan for the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program, Fiscal Years 2009-2013. Interagency
Coordinating Committee of NEHRP. www.nehrp.gov. October 2008.

National Earthquake Resilience: Research,
Implementation, and Outreach. National Research Council of the
National Academies. www.nap.edu. Prepublication Version.
Biography for Mr. Chris Poland, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer,
Degenkolb Engineers and Chairman, NEHRP Advisory Committee

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Poland.
I now recognize our final witness, Dr. Vicki McConnell,
Oregon State Geologist and Director, Oregon Department of
Geology and Mineral Industries, for her testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. VICKI McCONNELL, DIRECTOR, OREGON DEPARTMENT
OF GEOLOGY AND MINERAL INDUSTRIES

Dr. McConnell. Thank you, Chair Quayle and Mr. Wu, and I
really appreciate the opportunity to be able to speak with you
today, and thank you for this opportunity to comment on the
state of earthquake risk reduction in the United States to
discuss the importance of the coordination between federal,
state and local stakeholders and for emergency preparedness and
allowing me to recommend improvements to federal programs.
As stated, my name is Vicki McConnell and I am the Director
of the Department of Geology and Mineral Industries for Oregon.
We work in close partnership with several federal programs that
are focused on earthquake hazards characterization and risk
reduction. We implement those programs at the state and local
level.
I am also representing the Western States Seismic Policy
Council, whose mission is to develop seismic mitigation
policies and share information to promote those programs
intended to reduce earthquake-related losses through 13 western
states, three U.S. territories and western Canada. This council
serves as a shining example of FEMA- and USGS-funded programs
through NEHRP that assist in reducing earthquake risk in the
United States.
And even though I am the Oregon State Geologist, I want to
just remind you as a geologist that earthquakes and the hazards
caused from earthquakes care little about state or national
boundaries. You have to really look at the full geologic
regions and we have to think about national investments in risk
reduction.
First and foremost, I want to stress that the return on
investment made by building resilient communities is
tremendous. By definition, resilient communities spring back
and they cost much less. The cost is minimized to get everyone
back up and running. So my primary recommendation to you is to
maintain robust federal programs within the National Science
Foundation, NOAA, NIST, NASA, FEMA and the USGS that address
earthquake and tsunami hazard research, mitigation and
preparedness, particularly the cooperative federal-to-state and
local programs that implement those federal missions and goals.
It is now estimated that the fatalities in Japan from the
Tohoku earthquake and tsunami may reach 25,000, and the
economic damage may reach $300 billion, and as has been stated
before, our hearts go out to everyone in Japan and our
condolences for their losses.
We did not escape unscathed here in the United States,
though. We had tens of millions of dollars in damage in Hawaii,
Oregon and California, and we had one fatality, all of that
from the tsunami from the earthquake. Although it is going to
take time to assess what has happened in Japan, it is clear
that Japan's research and development, their technology and
preparedness saved hundreds of thousands of lives and damages
that would have gone into more billions from that earthquake,
something that we need to take a lesson from them.
And as Mr. Wu summarized, we have very similar geologic and
seismic areas off the northwest coast of the continental United
States and the coastline of Alaska. We have in historic times
witnessed a 9.0 magnitude earthquake on the Cascadia Subduction
Zone in 1700 as well as the 1964 9.2 magnitude Aleutian-Alaska
Subduction Zone earthquake. We also now realize that magnitude
8 and higher earthquakes can occur along these same areas, and
the reason we know that is because of the NSF and USGS funding
opportunities for basic earthquake science.
I want to quickly go through some of the programs that are
important for what we see: NSF's research at universities to
understand and monitor earthquakes, the USGS Advanced National
Seismic Network, our crucial seismic network, the USGS
Earthquakes Hazards Program, which has external grants that
bring in local expertise in science and engineering, and the
NOAA Tsunami Warning Program and the National Tsunami Hazard
Mitigation Program, which really is our leading edge for
understanding and mitigating tsunami hazards. Finally, don't
forget about the NASA fleet of earth-observing satellites and
their help with these.
I want to thank you again for this opportunity to comment
on the Nation's earthquake preparedness and the federal
programs that assist building resilient communities. I would be
happy to answer any questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. McConnell follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. Vicki McConnell, Director, Oregon Department
of Geology and Mineral Industries

My name is Vicki S. McConnell. I am the Director of the Oregon
Department of Geology and Mineral Industries (DOGAMI), an executive
branch agency in the State of Oregon. I serve Governor Kitzhaber and
the state as the Oregon State Geologist. The agency is tasked by
statute to be the centralized source of geologic and geoscientific data
and geologic hazard data for the State of Oregon. As such we work in
close partnership with several federal programs that are focused on
earthquake hazards characterization and risk reduction. We implement
those programs at a state and local level. My testimony will focus on
the state of these programs, how they do or do not accomplish their
goals of earthquake risk reductions, and recommendations for
improvement.
I am also representing the Western States Seismic Policy Council
(WSSPC) whose mission is to develop seismic mitigation policies and
share information to promote programs intended to reduce earthquake-
related losses throughout the 13 western states, three U.S.territories,
a Canadian territory and a Canadian province, and liaisons to seven
western state seismic safety councils and commissions. WSSPC is a
501(c)(3) non-profit organization and is funded by the Department of
Homeland Security's Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). Headquartered in Sacramento, California,
members are the State Geological Survey and Emergency Management
Directors.
Thank you for this opportunity to comment on the state of
earthquake risk reduction in the United States, discussing the
importance of coordination between federal, state, and local
stakeholders for emergency preparedness, and allowing me to recommend
improvements to federal programs.
Although I will be providing examples about how Oregon is working
toward earthquake risk reduction and identifying and mitigating the
hazards associated with earthquakes I want to stress that earthquake
faults, seismic hazards, tsunamis, and seismic-induced landslides care
little for state or national boundaries. When considering the effects
of these hazards and how to reduce those effects we must consider the
geologic regions and think about national investments in risk
reductions.
First and foremost, I want to stress that the return on investment
made by building resilient communities is tremendous; resilient
communities spring back quickly with rapid economic recovery; with
infrastructure from schools to roads reoccupied and with the need for
state and federal assistance minimized. My primary recommendation to
you is to maintain robust federal programs within the National Science
Foundation, NOAA, NIST, NASA, FEMA, and the USGS that address
earthquake and tsunami hazard research, mitigation, and preparedness
particularly the cooperative federal-to-state and local programs that
implement the federal missions and goals.
Some examples of these federal programs include the USGS Earthquake
Hazard Program, the NIST-administered National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program and the NOAA administered National Tsunami Hazards
Mitigation Program. These are federal programs that build resilient
communities and do so through collaboration with experts outside the
federal government. Through competitive and other grants, federal
agencies work with scientists, engineers and local-area experts to
understand the hazard, prepare communities, reduce losses and keep the
local economy on track after a natural disaster hits.
We must continue to observe and understand hazards, prepare for
hazards, mitigate potential losses and respond to hazardous events.
These long-standing federal programs and partnerships provide the
foundation for resilient communities. While the events in Japan are
tragic, the fatalities, injuries and losses could have been orders of
magnitude worse if not for Japan's attention to research, technology
and preparedness leading to some of the most resilient communities in
the world.
I offer four examples of work being conducted in Oregon that is
crucial to developing resilient communities. These projects were
possible because of federal assistance from NEHRP and other programs.
My written testimony provides references to all four if you would like
further information.

Oregon is the first state in the nation to conduct an
evaluation of the seismic vulnerability of all public schools
and emergency response facilities statewide and to develop a
grant program to assist with seismic rehabilitation of the most
vulnerable facilities. While these are primarily state funded
programs both relied on data and guidance provided by NEHRP. By
funding overarching development standards and guidelines, the
national program assists the states with developing
comprehensive research and science and engineering
evaluations.1

Portland METRO Multi-Hazard Project. Through a collaborative
effort of DOGAMI and USGS Earthquake Hazard Program, USGS
Landslide Hazard Program, and National Cooperative Geologic
Mapping Program a series of hazard maps for the Portland Oregon
metro area are being developed. These maps will be used to
drive the development of local land use planning and building
codes for the Portland urban growth zone. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ To view the final seismic vulnerability report go to: http://
www.oregongeology.org/sub/projects/rvs/default.htm. To view the results
of the rehabilitation grant programs go to: http://www.oregon.gov/OMD/
OEM/plans--train/SRGP.shtml

Oregon's Department of Transportation published in 2009 the
Seismic Vulnerability of Oregon State Highway Bridges:
Mitigation Strategies to Reduce Major Mobility Risks. This
study incorporates FEMA HAZUS risk assessment modeling funded
by NEHRP as well as NEHRP soil conditions data to determine
peak ground acceleration (PGA). Their findings indicate that
38% of state-owned bridges in western Oregon would fail or be
too heavily damaged to be serviceable after a magnitude 9.0
earthquake and that repair or replacement would take 3-5 years
essentially cutting the Oregon coastal communities off from the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
rest of the state.

The Oregon Lidar Consortium is using an excellent modern
technology called light detection and ranging (or lidar) to
identify and locate faults and related hazards throughout
Oregon. Lidar allows us to image the bare earth by removing
vegetation, so we can see fault structures, old landslides and
other features that define hazards. Lidar was developed through
research and development, led primarily by researchers funded
through the National Science Foundation and the U.S. Geological
Survey. It is now an essential tool for research and for land-
use planning. See Figure 1 for an example of bare earth lidar
imagery of fault scarps or go to: http://www.oregongeology.org/
sub/projects/olc/default.htm

It is now estimated that the fatalities in Japan from the Tohoku
earthquake and tsunami may reach 25,000 and the economic damage may
reach $300 billion. Across the Pacific Ocean--there was $30 million in
damage in Hawaii, $7 million in damage in Oregon, and one death and
more than $50 million in damage in northern California. Most of the
death and damage in Japan and beyond Japan can be attributed to the
tsunami. Although it will take more time to assess what has happened in
Japan, it is clear that Japan's R&D, technology and preparedness saved
hundreds of thousands of lives and billions of dollars in damages from
the massive earthquake and also probably from the ensuing massive
tsunami.
We have similar geologic and seismic areas off the northwest coast
of the continental United States and the coastline of Alaska as they do
off the coast of Japan. The Pacific Plate and other smaller plates are
subducting beneath the North American Plate and in all three areas
history has recorded very large magnitude megathrust earthquakes
followed by massive tsunamis. These include a magnitude \2\ 9.0
Cascadia Subduction Zone earthquake in northwestern United States in
1700, a magnitude 9.2 Aleutian-Alaska Subduction Zone earthquake in
Alaska in 1964, and the recent magnitude 9.0 Tohoku earthquake.
Additionally, we now realize that these subduction zones are prone to
magnitude 8.0 and higher earthquakes occurring as frequently as ten
times the magnitude 9.0 and larger earthquakes. See Figure 2 at the end
of this testimony for a timeline of Cascadia Subduction Zone
earthquakes over the last 10,000 years.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Earthquake magnitudes are expressed in the moment magnitude
scale.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Are we ready for another Cascadia Subduction Zone earthquake? Or an
earthquake on the Portland Hills Fault similar to the recent New
Zealand earthquakes? No we are not; however we have made great strides
toward understanding and mitigating for such natural disasters through
state implemented programs funded in partnership with federal agencies
or that use data gathered by federal agencies.
Your Subcommittee and the Full Committee can help to ensure that
the federal programs are there to help the states develop resilient
communities across the nation. My colleagues here today are explaining
the excellent work that NIST and FEMA are conducting and I bring your
attention to several other federal agency programs whose mission is to
reduce earthquake risk..
NSF supports research at universities to understand and monitor
earthquakes and tsunamis. NSF's EarthScope-US Array experiment, which
has been deploying a network of seismic instruments that are moving
across the country, has demonstrated how useful a robust national
seismic network could be. For example, the U.S. Array instruments
helped to detect several low magnitude seismic swarms in Oregon. While
not directly hazardous, this previously undetected seismic activity
indicates areas in the state that need additional hazard
characterization and research. Unfortunately, most communities cannot
afford to maintain the U.S. Array instruments so they have been pulled
out as NSF's experiment moves east. The remaining USGS-supported
regional seismic network can no longer detect the smaller events that
would help us understand earthquakes or that might be critical for an
early warning system for many urban areas throughout the country.
The USGS 's Advanced National Seismic System (ANSS) is crucial for
developing earthquake resilience. It includes a backbone network, a
global information center, a strong ground motion network and 15
regional networks. When an earthquake strikes, ANSS delivers real-time
information, providing situational awareness for emergency-response
personnel. The Pacific Northwest regional array in my area is operated
jointly by the University of Washington and the University of Oregon.
USGS support of a national seismic and geodetic network, with
collaboration from state and university-based regional networks, is
vital to understand and mitigate the hazards related to earthquakes.
Without greater support for these networks they may deteriorate,
leaving us highly vulnerable to earthquake hazards (essentially blind
to earth movements). We recommend that the USGS work closely with their
state and local stakeholders to design the information tools and
seismic hazard maps that are useful to land use planning and emergency
response.
The USGS Earthquake Hazards Program is also vital to earthquake
resiliency. The external Earthquake Grants program, which has
successfully engaged leading scientists and engineers through a peer-
reviewed grant process brings local expertise to basic and applied
earthquake research. We recommend that progress to build a prototype
earthquake early warning system be evaluated and continued. This system
would warn people within seconds after a major earthquake starts to
shake the ground, in time for many people to take cover, protect their
children, and automatically implement electronic safety measures (such
as opening firehouse doors, slowing trains, and backing up computers).
Japan already has a functional system in place, but the President's
budget calls for the United States to stall its efforts. The system
that we need would surely save lives and facilitate a rapid recovery
after an earthquake strikes. The Earthquake Hazards Program also needs
funding to take advantage of new technologies (such as better seismic
instrumentation, more geodetic measurements, and more use of lidar in
mapping faults) that are improving our abilities to reduce risks from
earthquakes.
The NOAA Tsunami Warning Program and the National Tsunami Hazard
Mitigation Program in concert with federal earthquake programs and in
partnerships with state efforts is essential to understanding and
mitigating tsunami hazards. While we did have death and damage in the
United States resulting from the Tohoku earthquake and tsunami it would
have been much, much worse without the federal programs designed to
track distance tsunami activity, model and calculate the waves' path
and arrival times, advise and warn state and local communities, and
most importantly empower communities to prepare and respond. Developing
resilient communities depends on understanding the social and
demographic factors that affect how individuals and communities respond
to natural disasters and to best deliver the message that, ``Yes, you
can plan for and survive an earthquake or tsunami.'' Oregon has 7
communities and 3 counties that have been declared ``Tsunami Ready''
through NOAA's Tsunami Ready program.
It is important to require federal programs and their stakeholders
to coordinate their activities and missions to optimize the investment.
An example of this coordination is the Advisory Committee on Earthquake
Hazards Reduction (ACEHR) that guides and advises the many NEHRP
programs.
Finally above all of these coordinated activities in R&D and
technology is the NASA fleet of Earth-observing satellites. These
satellites provide information about the land, ocean and atmosphere
before and after an event. DESDyNI, which stands for Deformation,
Ecosystem Structure and Dynamics of Ice is under development and would
observe deformation from earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and
landslides, among other things. It would include InSAR and lidar to
follow earth movements. It would be helpful to support the development
of this satellite without too much delay because of budgetary concerns.
(http://science.nasa.gov/missions/desdyni/)
Thank you, again, for this opportunity to comment on the Nation's
Earthquake Preparedness and the federal programs that assist building
resilient communities.

Biography for Dr. Vicki McConnell, Director, Oregon Department of
Geology and Mineral Industries

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Dr. McConnell, and thank you to
all the witnesses for their testimony. We are going to enter
into the question portion of this discussion, and I want to
remind Members that Committee rules limit questioning to five
minutes. The Chair will at this point open the round of
questions, and I recognize myself for five minutes.
Dr. Hayes, I want to start with you. In your testimony, you
talked about the importance of collaboration and linkages
amongst NEHRP partners. There is an interagency coordinating
committee, an external advisory committee on earthquake hazards
reduction, and four federal agencies that have responsibility
for long-term risk reduction; is there any redundancy in these
efforts or do all agencies play a distinct role in NEHRP?
Dr. Hayes. That is a good question. In my written
testimony, I actually posted what has infamously been referred
to as the wiring diagram for NEHRP. I understand from our
legislative affairs people that NIST has never used such a
figure in testimony before but it is a good, graphic
representation of what NEHRP is and what it does. I don't think
there is any duplication of effort among the agencies. I think
that there are complementary activities at the four agencies.
The National Science Foundation is responsible for basic
research, but it is also responsible for training the next
generation of leaders in this area for our country, and that is
a really, really important part of what they do.
FEMA, on the other hand, is at the other end of the
spectrum, if you will, and FEMA is responsible for the
implementation efforts, and FEMA works very, very closely with
the national model building code organizations, particularly
the American Society of Civil Engineers and the International
Code Council, to get the results of NEHRP research into the
national model building codes and then get adopted by states
and localities around the Nation.
In the middle, USGS plays an extremely important role in
the whole process with its monitoring program, its hazard
mapping program, the work that it is now doing in the early,
early stages of trying to understand how early warning might be
implemented. It is an extremely valuable part of the process
that is not duplicated in any other agencies.
Finally, my agency is responsible for doing applied R&D, if
you will, to bridge the gap between the basic research done at
the National Science Foundation and the really applied work
that is done at FEMA.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you.
Mr. Poland, in your testimony you compared the different
results of the earthquakes that occurred in Haiti and Japan,
and even what happened in the Northridge quake, and the quake
that occurred in San Francisco. You mentioned that it would be
cost-prohibitive to retrofit buildings across the United
States. What is your suggestion to minimize the repercussions
of an earthquake? Do you mostly look at where different
communities lie along faults? For example, a city is close to
the San Andreas fault, you obviously take different things into
account than cities in middle America located away from the New
Madrid fault line.
Mr. Poland. As I mentioned, the biggest problem we have is
that the built environment that we have right now in the
country has not been designed for earthquake effects, both in
terms of public safety and in terms of being able to recover
and resiliency. And so the biggest problem we have is, what do
we do with 85 or 90 percent of our buildings and systems that
are not adequate for the kind of performance that we want. When
I spoke about it being cost-prohibitive, I was speaking about
retrofitting those buildings and those systems so that they can
perform properly, and that is what costs so much money. The
most important thing is to not fix or retrofit anything that
doesn't need to be fixed and not to do it too much. I can say
that.
Okay. How do we stop doing it too much? The first thing is
that the earth science research has to continue to move forward
to expand our understanding of how strong the ground is going
to shake, what the damage to the land is going to be and what
the impact on the buildings is going to be, so that needs to
continue so that we can better understand where the pockets of
shaking are going to occur. Right now we consider huge areas
that are going to shake very hard and in reality when we look
at the damage and we look at the instrumentation that is
available, we see that there are pockets of damage that occur
so there is a whole body that needs to be done there.
Secondly, it is just the techniques we use to analyze
buildings and determine how much they need to be retrofitted.
It is based on anecdotal evidence that we gather from our field
reconnaissance. We go out and we look at earthquake damage. We
see broken buildings, don't really know how strong the ground
was shaking and determine what we need to do to stop that.
Through full-scale testing and basic research and applied
research, we can learn and have learned a lot about how to
improve building performance just enough, and it is this just-
enough idea that will bring the cost down and make it
affordable.
Chairman Quayle. You were talking about community
awareness; since you don't want to do too much, is your goal to
focus on one specific pocket that will resist a certain level
of earthquake so that the area can be up and running post
earthquake and basically prioritizing different pieces of
infrastructure so that cleanup and repair work can happen in a
much more efficient manner?
Mr. Poland. That is correct, and the focusing is really
around the systems and buildings that are needed for the
recovery. The buildings that you need during the emergency
response period need to be running all the time. The big issue
that we have right now is we recognize that our workforce, the
neighborhoods need to be restored within a few months in order
for the economy to come back to life and so the systems that
support the neighborhoods and the small businesses need to be
taken care of next, and then the commercial districts and the
industrial areas need to be taken care of after that, an
orderly process of doing that, and then, as you said,
recognizing in the community what areas are inherently safer
than others, don't shake as hard, and focusing attention in
those areas is one of the keys.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Wu for five minutes.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. McConnell, you mentioned in your testimony--this is
really a question for all of the witnesses. You mentioned that
one study found that up to 38 percent of Oregon's highway
bridges would fail in the case of a magnitude 9.0 earthquake
and that it would take potentially five years to repair or
replace these damaged bridges, and this would leave some
communities, especially coastal communities, cut off from the
rest of the state for a number of years. Can you all comment on
how we are trying to design resiliency into crucial lifelines,
and as Mr. Poland has said, also work on work-arounds for some
of these where we cannot design in survivability in the first
round?
Dr. McConnell. Chair Quayle and Mr. Wu, I appreciate that
question and the comment. That particular study was designed
and taken and carried forth by the Oregon Department of
Transportation, and they did use the data and information that
was gleaned from NEHRP whenever they developed their scenarios,
so that is very important to bring this back around is how are
we using the information and data that is coming out of NEHRP
for very practical questions like are the bridges going to be
there if we have that type of earthquake. It doesn't matter if
the roads are there if you can't get across the bridge.
So what I would like to say in answer to your question is,
in building resiliency, and, as Mr. Poland said, you must
recognize and prioritize those infrastructure, those buildings,
those parts of the community that you really need to have there
both during and immediately after. So yes, it would take us
three to five years to fix every one of those bridges but not
every one of those bridges need to be fixed right off. What we
need to do is recognize where are those priority lifelines and
particularly the ones to the coast that need those bridges
fixed, and those are the ones you start. Those are the ones you
focus on. And we are actually working with--and I say ``we'',
the State of Oregon, working with the Department of
Transportation, emergency management, a variety of other
agencies and working with our federal partners toward
developing those type of identifying the infrastructure that
really needs the first look at and to try to fix those first as
we work through these kind of projects. Because otherwise you
look at it and you just say this is going to cost so much and
it is going to take so long, we can't get our arms around it,
but we absolutely can. You just have to think strategically.
And it engages everyone, not just the earthquake, not just
these programs that work on earthquake and work on earthquake
science but the Department of Transportation. Those types of
agencies as well need to be incorporated into these
discussions.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much.
Mr. Poland? Well, it is fine if you have nothing further to
add.
Mr. Poland. I have nothing further to add.
Mr. Wu. Okay. Terrific.
Dr. Hayes, your agency works on developing some model
codes, and that applies to buildings, I believe, and also
potentially to bridges and other structures. Do you want to
comment on this from the perspective of critical
infrastructure?
Dr. Hayes. We don't do work on bridges and those kinds of
structures. The Federal Highway Administration is primarily
responsible for that work. We do focus on the building side of
the problem, if you will. I don't think there is any doubt that
we have a long way to go to have a completely coordinated
approach to our lifelines in virtually every major city in the
United States. That is an area that I think that the advisory
committee that Mr. Poland chairs, as well as this NRC report
that he referred to, have mentioned as an area that we really
need to be looking at as we go into the future. It is an area
that is not as well established as the buildings area is. There
is no question about that.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much, Dr. Hayes.
My second question, before my time runs out, is that we do
have a number of nuclear reactors that are sitting on active
seismic zones, and I believe one of them is on the West Coast.
Can you all comment on what can be done to build resiliency and
recovery into these nuclear facilities? You know, what we found
in Japan is that it wasn't the earthquake, it was the tsunami
and the loss of electricity and it affected both the reactor
itself and the fuel that was stored in pools on top of the
reactor facility. Can you all comment on how we can do a better
job with our own nuclear facilities?
Dr. Hayes. You are looking at me, so I will give you a
short answer. NEHRP itself does not address the nuclear
facilities in the United States. That is the responsibility of
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Department of Energy.
So we really don't directly get engaged with that. However, we
have frequent communications with the folks over in Rockville
at NRC, and in fact, the day before the horrendous earthquake
in Japan hit, we had a staffer from the NRC briefing the NEHRP
advisory committee on the activities there. There are many
interactions that occur between the USGS and the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission that are tied to examining the ground
motions and the propagations of those motions following an
earthquake, so there is interaction there but it is not a
formal responsibility of the program.
Mr. Poland. I would just like to add that the design
process that has been done for nuclear power plants since their
inception has been extraordinarily rigorous and much more
detailed and much more carefully done than for any other kind
of construction by many orders of magnitude. Our facilities,
our nuclear facilities from a standpoint of strong shaking are
the safest buildings that we have in the Nation.
The problem in Japan, as you mentioned, had to do with the
tsunami, and it wasn't that they didn't think they were going
to have a tsunami. They had a wall. The wall wasn't tall
enough. The backup systems didn't work as well as they thought
that they would. All of that would be factored into the
programs that we have now just like they are being done, and
that extra level of redundancy will be added. Our nuclear power
plants are designed with many, many levels of redundancy, and
you have to look at what the worst cases are. They do a better
job of that. Looking at our power plants that are on the West
Coast, it is my understanding that we are not facing that same
kind of tsunami issue but it is causing a reevaluation and
consideration of what is being done. I just wanted to add that
this is a much higher level of consideration and sophisticated
design than is done anywhere else.
Mr. Wu. I may follow up later.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Smith, for five minutes.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, let me
thank you and particularly the Full Committee Chairman for
scheduling such a timely hearing, given what has occurred
recently in Japan, and let me confess at the outset that my
first question is directed towards Dr. Hayes and my second
question is to Mr. Poland, and confess that it is a very
provincial question, so I hope you will excuse that, and it is
this. Over the last several weeks, the Texas Advanced Computing
Center in Austin, which is part of my district, came to the
assistance of Tokyo's Earthquake Research Institute and other
scientists in Japan, who reached out to them when Japan's own
high-performing supercomputers, used to research earthquake
tremor scenarios and radiation disbursal simulations, were
knocked offline due to power outages.
So the question, Dr. Hayes, is this. How much does the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program, which you
manage, rely on supercomputing capabilities and how much do you
invest in supercomputing capabilities for earthquake research?
Dr. Hayes. I can't give you a quantitative answer because I
have never actually attempted to gather that specific
information, but much of the work that is being sponsored by
the National Science Foundation and by USGS involves the use of
supercomputers. I would have to find out more specific
information for you. Obviously where it is appropriate to use
them, they are being used in the research that is being
performed.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Dr. Hayes, thank you.
Mr. Poland, second question is, does your advisory
committee find the current level of investment in
supercomputing adequate, and given the tight budgets, in what
research areas would you recommend a higher or lower level of
investment for earthquake research?
Mr. Poland. Quite honestly, our advisory committee has not
considered or discussed the investment in supercomputers.
Mr. Smith. Maybe I am giving you and Dr. Hayes some new
ideas here today. Do you think you will get to that?
Mr. Poland. I do believe that we will. I think that
supercomputing gives us the ability to do community-wide
simulation and detailed building simulation and simulation of
systems. They are necessary to do the kind of estimation of
what the damage is going to be. I think that that level of
simulation is going to be very necessary for us to move forward
and figure out what we need to do to make our systems more
resilient.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Now, let me know what additional research
you do on that subject, if you would.
Last question is this. It has to do with the budget. And
let me ask each of the panelists if they would to give a very,
very quick response. You don't necessarily have to limit it to
good or bad, but be as brief as you can.
In the fiscal year 2012 budget request currently before
Congress, the President's Office of Management and Budget
canceled NASA's Deformation, Ecosystem Structure and Dynamics
of Ice satellite mission, which would monitor for and
anticipate earthquakes, volcanoes, landslides, glacial ice
sheet changes and other practical applications, in favor of
other NASA satellite missions to monitor greenhouse gases. How
will that cancellation affect earthquake research? And Dr.
Hayes, let us just go down real quickly, if you could.
Dr. Hayes. Sir, I will have to find out more information
for you on that. Since NASA is not a part of the NEHRP program,
we don't directly deal with that. We were known of that
cancellation. Actually it was made aware to the advisory
committee about three weeks ago, and----
Mr. Smith. Maybe I should make it easy for you. Can the
cancellation be good? I mean, there is some common sense
involved here too.
Dr. Hayes. Well, I don't mean to be evasive but I am a
structural engineer like Mr. Poland is, and so I don't know a
good answer to that question. I will be glad to find out for
you.
Mr. Smith. We will go to Mr. Mullen then. Thank you.
Mr. Mullen. Sir, I can only say that I am a consumer of
research. It is best if I don't try to produce too much. Any
information I get, I will be happy to use as an emergency
manager.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Poland?
Mr. Poland. As I mentioned, one of the biggest
uncertainties we have is when and where and how strong the
earthquakes are going to occur. We are looking forward to the
day when we have clear information. There is reason to believe
that satellite observation is going to give us some of that
information. That is a hope. In that sense, it is important.
How much will it affect our work today? Not very much.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
And Dr. McConnell?
Dr. McConnell. Thank you. The satellite you mentioned here
with the acronym DESDynI is of great interest to looking at
building baseline topographic information for areas that may be
vulnerable to earthquakes, volcano hazards, etc. You can then--
because what you are looking at both InSAR and LIDAR, which are
acronyms for types of digital imaging, is are there changes,
are there subtle changes in the topography that may be
indicating that we have stresses building up or that we have
inflation occurring in volcanic areas. These are things we are
very sensitive to when we are doing hazards monitoring, and
this particular satellite would be of great interest to
broadening our monitoring capabilities and looking at what we
call interferometry.
Mr. Smith. Good to hear. Thank you, Dr. McConnell.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Smith. Before I recognize
our next questioner, I just wanted to let everybody know that
there actually has been another earthquake off the east coast
of Japan just an hour and a half ago, magnitude about 7.5. We
have just been notified. So our thoughts and prayers are
definitely with the people of Japan right now.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Sarbanes, for five minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
panel.
If all of the measures you would like to see put in place
with resiliency and preparation and recovery and so forth
represent, say, 100 on a scale of 1 to 100, where would you say
we are on that scale as a Nation right now? Anybody want to try
to quantify that?
Mr. Poland. One to 100. We are talking about here with the
federal investment involved in developing tools and knowledge
and implementation programs. I would think we are down in the
25 range. We have a fair set of tools that are expensive to
use. We have a set of implementation programs that would help
states and regions become more resilient but they are not
really being implemented right now and so we are really at a
very low level.
Mr. Sarbanes. So we are in the 20s out of 100 in terms of
investing our attention and resources to the problem, but in
terms of our preparedness as a Nation, according to the
standards you would set to be enough prepared for the kinds of
scenarios that you model, where are we on that scale from 1 to
100?
Mr. Poland. I guess they are going to let me talk. I would
say it is even lower, maybe 10.
Mr. Sarbanes. Okay.
Mr. Poland. Let me just say quickly that in areas of very
high seismicity in California, Oregon and Washington, there
have been building codes in place for 20 years that are going
to help people be safe. Other parts of the country that we talk
about, those things are not in place.
Mr. Sarbanes. Well, that was the next question I wanted to
ask you. I assume that the West Coast would be higher on the
scale than other places, so California, where would you put
that?
Mr. Poland. From a scale of safety, I believe that
California will maybe 50 or 60. On a scale of resilience to be
able to recover quickly and not have a significant impact on
the national economy, we are still down in the 10-20 range.
Mr. Sarbanes. Okay. Humans are notoriously shortsighted
about everything, and even with the earthquake activity of
recent days, we will get back to being shortsighted even on
this question, and I wonder if you could speak to--I mean, I
would imagine if you went to any budget hearing at a local
level, at a city, municipality level or at the state level if
earthquake preparation and resiliency was even on the budget
document, it would be on the last page on the last line because
there are so many other things obviously that are pulling on
our resources and our attention. So it makes me wonder how
much--and I think you have spoken to this a little bit, but the
opportunity to piggyback the kinds of things you want to see
done onto other kinds of initiatives that are out there that
have greater priority in the minds of planners and budgeters
and all the rest of it so that you can kind of come along with
a little bit, of leverage and not so much add a cost, say,
well, as long as you are doing X, Y and Z, why not add this
into the mix, and that can go to codes and building standards
and so forth. But it also could go particularly well with
community resiliency planning, and I wonder if you could speak
to that and maybe throw in whether sort of green building codes
and sustainable building codes are ones where there can be some
added elements with respect to resiliency and so forth. Thank
you.
Mr. Mullen. Sir, let me try to help with some of that. I
will tell you that on the West Coast, there are significant
discussions taking place in local communities about earthquakes
and tsunami threats and measures that should be taken. One of
the things we haven't really talked about is the importance of
the general public understanding not only the risk they face
but the measures they can take to protect themselves. I am very
enthusiastic about getting a warning about something that might
be coming like the tsunami warning we got a few weeks ago
really helped us but the type of events, the no-notice events
that we would deal with in the central Puget Sound or in Oregon
or on the coast, they are not going to get a lot of warning for
an earthquake. One of the things that we need to do is make
sure people are prepared to take the protective steps that they
need immediately. They need to be able to drop cover and hold.
They need to know that they have got--that they need to have
some resources for themselves. And on the coast, we have been
working hard with the communities about their evacuation
programs, knowing what it means to move quickly. The ground
motion in an earthquake that is right off our coast is your
signal. We also have an elaborate system of warning systems
that we can activate to tell people to move to high ground.
The difficulty we have, the challenge that communities have
as they prepare with us and they have worked with us is there
is not a vertical evacuation site that is necessarily readily
available to every community, and so we have been trying to
plan for the type of vertical evacuation structure that would
be necessary on the coast in the Port of Los Angeles or Long
Beach or Ilwaco where those folks can get to a place of safety
which may not be the warmest, driest place but it will at least
be above any kind of potential wave. That is an important step.
There is no such structure right now but the communities are
planning with it.
I think the key to this whole thing that you are getting at
in terms of where people are, and I would not hazard a guess
about the scale because I would just be making something up. I
will tell you if you educate people about the risks that they
face and you level with people about what they can do to
protect themselves and their families, whether it is the
average citizen, someone running a business or the emergency
management community or the local elected officials, you begin
to generate the kind of interest that will get people looking
at this as another issue that they have to deal with and move
it up on that committee agenda. The national-level exercise I
spoke of in my testimony is an attempt in the Midwest, in eight
Midwestern states to begin to educate people at the same time
that we are determining whether our doctrines and plans are
going to work for us or not. That will be an extremely
challenging exercise. We expect failure to occur because we
want to find out what our condition is. So we are very eager to
find out where we are weak, where we have got strengths and
make sure we capitalize on the strengths and shore up the
weaknesses.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes the Chairman of the Full
Committee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hall.
Chairman Hall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you for
inviting a very capable group of witnesses here, and don't
judge our interest or our appreciation of you by empty seats
here because it is kind of a desperate time up here. Right now
we are all looking for a bus ticket home or how long we are
going to have to stay here. But in this day and time with the
hurricane, the tsunami, the earthquake and other vicissitudes
of nature, your testimony is very timely and very important to
us, and we have probably the hardest working man in the entire
hearing room that sits to my left here, and he is taking down
everything that is said, and all these Members will be given
copies of your answers, and you are not in vain when you are
talking to our very capable Chairman and Ranking Member and a
few of us here. So I thank you for that. That is all I really
want to say.
We had a hearing some 15 years ago on asteroids, and with
the thought in mind of getting everybody in the world to work
together to determine whether or not--and I learned at that
hearing something that I didn't know then and hadn't even heard
of it. An asteroid had just passed Earth and by their
testimony, only missed us by about 15 minutes sometime in the
1980s. And those are things that people like you live with
every day and know about that we don't know about, and we cast
our legislation based on the testimony of folks like you that
are kind enough to prepared yourself, leave your offices, come
here and give us your testimony, and I thank this good Chairman
and Mr. Wu for gathering such a good group here and asking
proper questions, and I yield back my time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, and the Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Fleischmann, for five
minutes.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Wu. This
is a particularly pertinent Subcommittee hearing and topic, and
I appreciate the opportunity to participate.
And also Chairman Hall, I want to thank you. I am one of
those freshmen to the witnesses, and it has been a great
privilege. I serve on three committees and I represent the Oak
Ridge area, so I have got the lab and Y12, but the hearings
that we have been having in Science, Space, and Technology and
the tremendous leadership from Chairman Hall and I think
bipartisan cooperation has been outstanding on these issues, so
I thank you for being here.
Our thoughts and prayers go out to the people of Japan. I
was unaware of the additional earthquake Mr. Chairman. I am
very sorry to hear that.
I have some questions. I think I will start with Dr. Hayes,
if I may. Dr. Hayes, what is NEHRP's relationships with other
countries, and what are other countries federal earthquake
research and development programs? How are they different or
similar to ours?
Dr. Hayes. I don't know that there is another country that
does it quite the way we do it. I think that that is largely
because different governments are organized in different ways.
But we really have many international partnerships within the
National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program. Probably right at
the moment, what would be most of interest to all of you all is
the fact that we work very closely with the Japanese. There are
two bilateral committees or panels that are involved with
earthquake-related issues between the United States and Japan.
One is in the seismological area. It is called, the basic title
of it is Earthquake Research, and the other is in the
engineering area, wind and seismic effects. We are in close
contact with the Japanese. My counterparts on the Japanese part
of the committee that I co-chair for the United States and I
have been in frequent contact for the last several weeks since
the earthquake hit there. We fully anticipate that we will be
going over there once things have passed into a study stage
from where they are now still response and recovery and the
radiation issues are resolved. We will be working closely with
them.
The National Science Foundation works very closely with
their Japanese counterparts. The world's largest experimental
facility, what we call a shaking table that you can build
models on and actually subject them to earthquake effects is
just outside of Kobe, Japan, between Kobe and Kyoto, and we
actually have cooperative projects where U.S. funded projects
are placed on that shaking table and U.S. and Japanese
researchers work literally side by side on those projects and
we typically meet every September to review the kinds of
technical issues that are being performed. At the moment, there
is a group from the American Society of Civil Engineers with
one person from NIST in New Zealand examining some of the
damage that occurred in the Christchurch earthquake a few weeks
ago as well.
USGS has far more bilateral arrangements of that kind
because the ground issues are the same no matter what national
border is in place whereas the built environment can depend
greatly upon the society in which you are examining the issues
and so USGS does a lot more with the other countries than the
rest of us, but we work with many other countries all the time.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, sir. I appreciate that.
Dr. McConnell, how, if at all, do the costs of preparing
for earthquakes diminish as you become more prepared? Once a
community reaches a certain level of preparation, can its
annual investment be reduced? And how do you measure a
community's level of resilience?
Dr. McConnell. Well, I guess I will tackle that last one
first as I am not sure that we have an ability to quantify how
you measure a community's level of resilience. What we would
look at--what we would really look at is, have they met certain
goals depending on what their hazard is that they are looking
at, and I will use an example of coastal communities that
have--on the Oregon coast that have both the earthquake hazard
from the Cascadia Subduction Zone and impending tsunami, both a
local tsunami and distant tsunamis as we see that they had to
deal with after the Tohoku earthquake.
So as you invest in your infrastructure and your built
environment based on good earthquake research and tsunami
research, where are the areas that are in the inundation zones,
where are your building codes and where is your land-use
decision making, as you build up that infrastructure in the
built infrastructure, what you really need to shift your work
on and that we are realizing is, as Mr. Mullen said earlier, is
on the outreach and the education because the demographics of
our communities aren't that everyone is there, that they have
seen everything that has happened, that their grandparents live
in the same community that they live in and that this kind of a
level of awareness is ingrained in the communities. So yes, you
would invest less in your infrastructure and you would begin to
invest more in continuing that education and outreach so that
you stay resilient.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Fleischmann.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Wu for a quick follow-up.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much, and with that request for a
quick follow-up and the good example of the Full Committee's
Chair, I will submit a question about codes for the record and
ask the witnesses to respond.
Just a quick follow-up on the nuclear power issue. The
reactors that we have at San Onofre and Diablo Canyon and I
believe at Hanford are all pressure reactors and require
electricity to circulate water through them, and I realize now
that this is an NRC issue but there is significant contact.
There is a different model for reactors, and I believe that
Oregon State University has been working on this for quite some
time and also a couple of other research centers, and this is a
passive circulation system that doesn't require electricity,
and I know that you all are not experts in this field but in
terms of resiliency and the conversations about resiliency that
we have had, if you all care to address this, and if not, we
will forward this question on to someone else. If you would
care to address this, I would assume that these smaller
reactors that are very similar to the reactors that are in
nuclear-powered ships and submarines, that a passive
circulation system that does not require electrical power to
circulate the coolants, that would be an inherently more
resilient system, especially if they can be distributed in,
say, five reactors rather than one highly powered, high-
pressure reactor. That is the question.
Dr. Hayes. What I would like to offer is to pass the
question to my counterparts at NRC and get a well-informed
answer for you. Anything I would say would be strictly
speculative. But I will be happy to try to help with answering
the question by doing that.
Mr. Wu. That is absolutely terrific, and Mr. Chairman, I
think--well, I am not going to go there about Committee
jurisdiction. But I find that answer very helpful. Thank you
very much.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you.
And I want to thank the witnesses for their valuable time
and testimony and the Members for their questions. The Members
of the Subcommittee may have additional questions for the
witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to those in writing.
The record will remain open for two weeks for additional
comments and statements from Members. The witnesses are
excused.
Thank you all for coming. The hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:12 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Responses by Dr. Jack Hayes, Director, National Earthquake Hazards
ReductionProgram, NIST

Responses by Jim Mullen, President of the National Emergency
Management Association (NEMA)

Questions submitted by Representative Ben Quayle

Q1.  In your opinion, what areas of directed research are the most cost
effective to pursue in reducing earthquake vulnerabilities? Are there
areas of research and development that have not been focused on, but
should be, to result in cost savings?

A1. As emergency managers, we benefit greatly from the research
produced by groups such as those funded by NEHRP. Reference
publications are published based on NEHRP research and utilized by
states to provide practical information and guidance for earthquake
mitigation. Some recent examples which have been of assistance to
states include Techniques for Seismic Rehabilitation of Existing
Building (FEMA 547) and Seismic Considerations for Steel Storage Racks
Located in Areas Accessible to the Public (FEMA 460). These documents
are made available to public, private, and non-governmental
organizations to provide specific information earthquake design and
mitigation. The documents are distributed whenever the state conducts
training on earthquake mitigation.
NEHRP participation in post-earthquake building and infrastructure
investigations, like those conducted for the recent Japan, New Zealand,
Chile, and Haiti earthquakes, provide valuable information on the
performance of facilities in earthquakes. The findings from these
investigations are used to inform U.S.building code revisions, building
practices, and earthquake mitigation procedures.

Questions submitted by Representative Randy Neugebauer

Q1.  What do you see as the United States' greatest flaw in its current
earthquake hazard reduction strategies, and what can be done to address
that? How much would improving the strategy rely on additional federal
funding?

A1. The greatest flaw in the current earthquake reduction strategy is a
lack of integrated hazard reduction measures across the suite of FEMA
programs and divisions. By implementing hazard reduction programs
within a single division, FEMA has not leveraged the unique work done
in the other parts of the agency in order to build capabilities for
earthquake mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery.
NEHRP activities carried out by FEMA are housed within the
Mitigation Directorate but should also incorporate preparedness,
response, and recovery aspects as well-which would help approach hazard
reduction in a holistic way. Better integration of earthquake hazard
reduction programs into the other areas of the agency would leverage
the resources already at their disposal, allowing the agency to
accomplish more with limited funds.
When programs operate independently of one another, efforts may be
duplicated which wastes precious federal, state, and local money. In
addition, risk reduction measures can often be implemented with many
different types of hazards in mind. By understanding the connection
between a bridge built to withstand an earthquake, and a bridge built
to withstand a bomb blast, limited mitigation and preparedness dollars
can be spent efficiently and effectively.
In 2009, NEMA wrote a white paper with numerous other stakeholders,
including FEMA, and the paper articulated suggestions for necessary
elements of a mitigation strategy. ``If the discussion of mitigation of
future loss was embedded in a wider variety or policy and public choice
discussions, then decisions that inadvertently increase risk would
either be avoided or, at least, acknowledged in an open and transparent
dialogue. (For example, an opportunity would have been a requirement to
include hazard mitigation measures, or at least their consideration, in
the project guidance for the Infrastructure Investment Act of 2009).''

Questions submitted by Representative Chip Cravaack

Q1.  The United States is in the middle of a financial crisis. In the
coming months, Congress is going to have to make some very hard
decisions about the priorities of this nation. Why should Congress
consider the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program a priority
and what are some recent accomplishments of this agency that justifies
the millions of dollars that Congress has invested in this program?

A1. By funding the National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program
(NEHRP), Congress has the opportunity to invest in the safety and
security of vulnerable communities. NEHRP has provided the resources
and leadership leading to significant advances in understanding the
risk earthquakes pose and the best ways to counter them. Through NEHRP,
the federal government has engaged in seismic monitoring, mapping,
research, testing, engineering and related reference materials for code
development, mitigation, and emergency preparedness. NEHRP has served
as the backbone for protecting U.S. citizens, their property, and the
national economy from the devastating effects of large earthquakes.
Although NEHRP is well known for research programs, it is also the
source for hundreds of new technologies, maps, design techniques, and
standards that are used by design professionals every day to mitigate
risks and save lives, protect property, and reduce adverse economic
impacts.
Each state approaches public outreach and education campaigns
differently, relying on proven techniques which communicate best with
their constituents. The State of Alaska, for example, has benefited
from NEHRP and the corresponding NETAP (National Earthquake Technical
Assistance Program) in the following ways:

NEHERP state assistance is currently being used to
develop and install earthquake safety education kiosks in three
communities where there were fatalities in the 1964 Great
Alaskan Earthquake. The kiosks will present 1964 survivor
interviews, earthquake science information and safety
instruction. These kiosks target residents and the large
tourist populations which visit the State every year and
include practical life saving information on earthquakes.

NETAP provided qualified instructors for the hospital
seismic mitigation course that was attended by facility leaders
from both the private non-profit and for-profit hospitals in
the South-central Alaska area.

NEHERP assistance to state's program provided funding
to complete an active earthquake fault database for the State
which coordinates with the USGS fault database and provides
fault location information for builders and infrastructure
planners as well as the general public.

In Washington State, NEHRP funding has been instrumental in the
conduct of a pilot project to assess seismic vulnerability of school
buildings in two local jurisdictions which may prompt more widespread
attention by school districts across the state, using the methodology
in the pilot. NEHRP funds are also being used to assess critical
interdependencies as part of the Resilient Washington initiative.
As mentioned before, each state approaches earthquake risk
reduction in a unique way, and the NEHRP website contains many success
stories to illustrate their work.

Q2.  Looking forward, I expect all federal agencies to do more with
less. This is simply the fiscal reality. Can all of you talk about ways
that NEHRP can be reformed so it can work more efficiently and still
accomplish its core mission?

A2. NEHRP activities carried out by FEMA are housed within the
Mitigation Directorate ofthe agency but should also incorporate
preparedness, response, and recovery aspects as well which would help
approach hazard reduction holistically. Better integration of
earthquake hazard reduction programs into the other areas of the agency
would leverage the resources already at their disposal allowing the
agency to do more with their limited funds. This integration already
occurs at the state and local levels where earthquake programs and
initiatives are coordinated across division lines often incorporating
multiple areas of the agency to fully accomplish mission assignments.
When programs operate independently of each other, efforts can be
duplicated, wasting precious federal, state, and local money. In
addition, risk reduction measures can often be implemented with many
different types of hazards in mind. By understanding the connection
between a bridge built to withstand an earthquake, and a bridge built
to withstand a bomb blast, limited mitigation and preparedness dollars
can be spent efficiently and effectively.
In 2009, NEMA wrote a white paper with numerous other stakeholders,
including FEMA, and the paper articulated suggestions for necessary
elements of a mitigation strategy. ``If the discussion of mitigation of
future loss was embedded in a wider variety or policy and public choice
discussions, then decisions that inadvertently increase risk would
either be avoided or, at least, acknowledged in an open and transparent
dialogue. (For example, on opportunity would have been a requirement to
include hazard mitigation measures, or at least their consideration, in
the project guidance for the Infrastructure Investment Act of 2009).''
By embedding mitigation across the spectrum of disaster related
activities, duplication of effort and funding can be avoided.

Q3.  Can you speak to the interactions that NEHRP has with local
governments? What types ofinformation does NEHRP share with local
entities and how is this information communicated?

A3. NEMA specifically represents the state emergency management
directors of all 50 states, Territories, and the District of Columbia.
Therefore, while NEMA works closely with our local counterparts, it
would be imprudent for us to comment specifically on the relationship
between NEHRP and local governments.

Q4.  There is a great deal of expense that the federal government must
endure when a natural disaster such as an earthquake occurs. Can you
discuss the costs and benefits of hazard mitigation spending?

A4. To quantify the effectiveness of mitigation projects, Congress
commissioned two studies. One study, conducted by the National
Institute of Building Sciences in 2005, reported for every $1 spent on
various mitigation activities, $4 in response and recovery costs are
saved.
In September 2007, the Congressional Budget Office evaluated the
Predisaster Mitigation Grant Program (PDM) in a report titled
``Potential Cost Savings from the Pre-Disaster Mitigation Program.'' In
the report, compiled disaster data suggests that for every $1 spent on
mitigation projects, losses from future disasters are reduced by $3. As
the years pass, the return on investment grows since development in
risky locations continues. While comprehensive studies remain valuable
and very effective in accurately analyzing facts and figures, the
success of mitigation projects are often best seen in pictures of
property improvements, and in personal stories of community survival.
NEMA has worked with States to compile success stories of mitigation
projects completed to address many different types of hazards, from
flooding to ice storms and these examples exist in every state and
their benefits can be seen after each disaster.
The value placed on hazard mitigation projects differ from state to
state, and are certainly considered more vital in areas of the country
where disaster relief dominates state and local spending; but the
understanding that prevention is more effective and responsible than
reacting after a catastrophic event is universal. To realize cost
saving as budgets become more constrained contributing to mitigation
grant programs are wise investments for state and local officials.
Although natural disasters receive the most news coverage when they
create the significant damage, successful mitigation projects by
definition create non-events. The value of mitigation funds are judged
by what does not happen, rather than what did. While comprehensive
estimated cost-benefit examples are important figures to consider when
deciding the relevance and effectiveness of mitigation programs, more
telling are the dramatic real life stories of mitigation projects
fulfilling their purpose and truly changing how States and localities
are affected by disaster.

Responses by Mr. Chris Poland Chris Poland, Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer, Degenkolb Engineers and Chairman, NEHRP
Advisory Committee

Questions submitted by Representative Ben Quayle

Q1.  Looking forward, what are your thoughts on the reauthorization
legislation of the National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program being
coupled with the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program.

A1. I support reauthorization legislation that couples NEHRP with NWIRP
as was done during the last session in HR 3820. While the technical
issues related to mitigating the effect of earthquakes and wind are
quite different, the programs needed to define pre-event mitigation,
response and recovery activities are quite similar. The two programs
will benefit from independent advisory committees of professionals
expert in the respective hazards. At the same time, oversight of both
programs by a common Interagency Coordinating Committee is needed to
avoid duplication and the development of inconsistent practices. Both
programs need to carry sufficient authorization levels to carry out
their activities at a much faster pace than currently funded.

Q2.  In your opinion, what areas of directed research are the most cost
effective to pursue in reducing earthquake vulnerabilities. Are there
areas of research and development that have not been focused on, but
should be, to result in cost savings?

A2. The NEHRP Strategic Plan and the recently published NRC Report
outline the work that needs to be done. Among those recommendations, I
believe that the following three areas of directed research will be the
most cost effective in the long run.

(a)  Development of a set of nationally applicable performance
goals for buildings and lifeline systems that support
resilience at all levels. Quantification of the role of
improvisation and adaptive behavior is needed to understand how
badly a community can be damaged and still recover quickly
enough to maintain its cultural and economic viability. That
should be the basis of the minimum standards for all
construction. Up to now, these performance goals have been set
by engineers focused on life safety, one building at a time,
and defined in a non-transparent manner. Resilience must be
approach from a community basis, involve all related
stakeholders and perspectives, and remain transparent
throughout.

(b)  Development of national design guidelines for all lifeline
systems that deliver the specific and transparent performance
standards established for national resilience. Damaged regions
cannot begin significant recovery until transportation routes
for repair crews and are open, electric power, fuel and water
are available, and waste water handling systems are
operational. At present there is no overarching performance
standard available or even agreement on what the restoration
timeframes and priorities should be.

(c)  Development of affordable and enforceable standards for
the rehabilitation of existing buildings and lifeline systems.
Most of the research to date has focused on the development
design standards for new construction. That's good, but the
vast majority of the infrastructure is already in place and not
due for replacement for decades. The needed systematic upgrade
of the in-place construction to the resilience level will only
occur when the cost is significantly reduced and enforceable,
mandatory programs are developed.

Responses by Dr. Vicki McConnell, Director, Oregon Department of
Geology and Mineral Industries

Questions submitted by Representative Ben Quayle

Q1.  Looking forward, what are your thoughts on the reauthorization
legislation of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program being
coupled with the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program?

A1. I can see the applicability of including the two natural hazard
reduction programs under the umbrella of one act whose mission is to
reduce impacts of natural hazards. There may be overlap in certain
agency charges regarding both hazards (e.g., in NIST and NSF charges)
and it is possible that some of the basic research in developing tools
to assess vulnerability and communicate risks may be applied to
multiple hazards. I have concerns about the dilution of efforts and
funding to characterize, monitor, and mitigate for very different
hazards if the two acts become more entwined. We do not monitor for
wind storms like we monitor for earthquakes, nor does the basic or
applied research for these hazards have much in common. The benefits to
hazard mitigation reduction of both programs could be impacted.

Q2.  In your opinion, what areas of directed research are the most cost
effective to pursue in reducing earthquake vulnerabilities. Are there
areas of research and development that have not been focused on, but
should be, to result in cost savings?

A2. In my opinion, basic research into understanding earthquake
processes and applied research into identifying and characterizing
earthquake hazards returns high value for the investment. It is
critical to understand and quantify the problem before you begin
designing for or mitigating to reduce vulnerability. Investment in
basic research that develops models and tools to assess vulnerability
and risk from multiple hazards would also assist states in implementing
mitigation and local land use decision making thus helping to build
resilient communities. For example, presently we cannot compare the
relative risk a community faces between earthquakes, floods, volcanoes,
or other natural hazards making it difficult for communities to develop
reasonable response and recovery plans that are comprehensive.

Questions submitted by Representative Chip Cravaack

Q1.  The United States is in the middle of a fiscal crisis. In the
coming months, Congress is going to have to make some very hard
decisions about the priorities of this nation. Why should Congress
consider the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program a priority
and what are some recent accomplishments of this agency that justifies
the millions of dollars that Congress has invested in this program?

A1. This program should be considered a priority because the products
from the four agencies that are tasked with implementing the program
reduce the national vulnerability to potentially catastrophic
earthquakes, and in the long run save the nation money. The program
funds research into understanding the hazard (NSF and USGS), assessing
the vulnerability (NSF and FEMA), monitoring (USGS), determining the
risk, and developing standards and methods to reduce that risk (NIST).
This targeted approach allows full consideration of how to mitigate the
hazard, and through cooperation with state and local experts actually,
reduces the risk. Too often federally funded programs only address one
or two aspects of natural hazard risk reduction, such as only basic
research, but that will not get the nation to resiliency.
I offer two examples of recent work toward earthquake risk
reduction to which NEHRP funding has contributed. Both examples
incorporate and study the effect of the multiple hazards that an
earthquake can cause over space and time, and both examples show how
coordination and cooperation spanning federal, state, and local
agencies and the private sector can leverage the greatest benefit for
cost of informing and educating our citizens, and building strong
communities. First is the Great Southern California Shakeout earthquake
drill that was first activated in 2008. Through the USGS Earthquake
Hazards Program and NEHRP funding, the USGS Multi-Hazards Demonstration
Project developed the most likely earthquake scenario for southern
California. In cooperation with NSF, FEMA, and a host of state, local
and private sector co-sponsors the scenario became the basis of full
response earthquake drill. The results from such activities help
identify gaps in the ability to respond and recover from a natural
hazard, thus helping communities understand if they are facing a
disaster or a catastrophe. The full drill is now in its third year of
activity, and the concept has been expanded to the central U.S. and the
Madrid Fault Zone. I refer you to the data and information-rich website
if you are interested in reviewing the many publications and outreach
products of this project: http://www.shakeout.org/.
In the Pacific Northwest, the USGS Earthquake Hazard Program and
state and local agencies have taken a slightly different tack to
accomplish similar goals of understanding and developing mitigation
tools to reduce the risk of the multiple hazards posed by an earthquake
in the Portland Oregon and Seattle Washington metropolitan areas. Here,
scientists are using state-of-the-science high resolution lidar data to
identify and locate earthquake fault scarps and landslides. That
information is combined with comprehensive bedrock and surface geologic
mapping to develop digital spatial maps of the potential hazard zones.
Lidar data and susceptibility maps are being developed that will
indicate areas in communities that are vulnerable to earthquake-induced
landslides, liquefaction, and ground acceleration. Understanding the
extent of the hazard, and identifying the vulnerable areas will allow
for risk reduction through better land use planning, emergency response
plans, and recovery strategies.

Q2.  Looking forward, I expect all federal agencies to do more with
less. This is simply the fiscal reality. Can all of you talk about the
ways NEHRP can be reformed so it can work more efficiently and still
accomplish its core mission?

A2. I commend the original concept for implementing NEHRP by
incorporating the purpose and goals of the program into the already
existing agencies that were conducting similar work, instead of
creating yet another federal agency silo. Improvements and streamlining
can always be made to increase efficiency, and certainly all four
agencies should look closely at their missions and charges, and reduce
or eliminate overlaps and redundancies. I refer you to the recently
published National Research Council's evaluation of the NEHRP: National
Earthquake Resilience: Research, Implementation and Outreach. One
recommendation of the NRC committee would be ``to consider that an
analysis to determine whether coordination among all organizations that
contribute to NEHRP could be improved would be useful and timely.''
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/13092.html

Q3.  There is a great deal of expense that the federal government must
endure when a national disaster such as an earthquake occurs. Can you
discuss the costs and benefits of hazard mitigation spending?

A3. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has researched this
question in light of their charge to prepare for natural disasters, as
well as respond to them. Determining the benefit-to-cost of investing
in mitigation for a natural disaster such as an earthquake is complex,
yet some excellent work has gone into quantifying the benefits and
costs. FEMA models have been developed in conjunction with engineers,
public officials, and economists, and are generally accepted on making
public decisions for mitigating natural hazards. Analysis of the hazard
mitigation grants awarded from 1993--2003 indicate that 1.5-to-1
benefit on average is derived from mitigation of earthquake hazards. An
important factor with benefit-to-cost analysis of earthquake hazard
mitigation is that such mitigation is anticipated to reduce the loss of
life and injury by as much as 62%, much higher than other mitigation
for other natural hazards, such as floods or wind (http://
bechtel.colorado.edu/porterka/Rose-et-al-2007-NHR-BCA.pdf).

Appendix II

----------

Additional Submitted Statements for the Record

Submitted Statement by Representative Randy Neugebauer, Member,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this full Committee
hearing to examine the United State's level of preparedness for
earthquakes and how we can continue to reduce the related
risks. The recent earthquake off the coast of Japan has had
devastating consequences for the Japanese people, economy, and
environment, and it is appropriate for us to consider how
prepared our nation is for a natural disaster of that
magnitude.
Thank you.



