- GREEN JOBS AND RED TAPE: ASSESSING FEDERAL EFFORTS TO ENCOURAGE EMPLOYMENT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

GREEN JOBS AND RED TAPE:

ASSESSING FEDERAL EFFORTS TO

ENCOURAGE EMPLOYMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS AND

OVERSIGHT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 13, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-14

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-701                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DAVID WU, Oregon
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 PAUL D. TONKO, New York
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JERRY McNERNEY, California
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
Tennessee                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight

HON. PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
Wisconsin                        ZOE LOFGREN, California
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             JERRY McNERNEY, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, April 13, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Paul C. Broun, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................     7
Written Statement............................................     8

Statement by Representative Donna F. Edwards, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Witnesses:

Dr. Kenneth Green, Resident Scholar at the American Enterprise
Institute
Oral Statement...............................................    12
Written Statement............................................    15

Dr. David Kreutzer, Research Fellow in Energy, Economics, and
Climate Change, The Heritage Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    29
Written Statement............................................    31

Dr. Josh Bivens, Economist, Economic Policy Institute
Oral Statement...............................................    38
Written Statement............................................    40

Dr. David W. Montgomery, Vice President, NERA Economic Consulting
Oral Statement...............................................    54
Written Statement............................................    55

Mr. William Kovacs, Senior Vice President, Environment,
Technology, & Regulatory Affairs, U.S. Chamber of Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................    62
Written Statement............................................    65

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Kenneth Green, Resident Scholar at the American Enterprise
Institute......................................................   158

Dr. David Kreutzer, Research Fellow in Energy, Economics, and
Climate Change, The Heritage Foundation........................   162

Dr. David W. Montgomery, Vice President, NERA Economic Consulting   164

Mr. William Kovacs, Senior Vice President, Environment,
Technology, & Regulatory Affairs, U.S. Chamber of Commerce.....   167

GREEN JOBS AND RED TAPE:

ASSESSING FEDERAL EFFORTS TO ENCOURAGE EMPLOYMENT

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 13, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:05 p.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Paul Broun
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS AND OVERSIGHT

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Green Jobs and Red Tape:

Assessing Federal Efforts to

Encourage Employment

wednesday, april 13, 2011
2:00 p.m.--4:00 p.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

Purpose

The Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight meets on April 13,
2011 to examine the issue of green jobs and efforts to create them. The
term ``green jobs'' generally refers to employment in the alternative
energy and energy efficiency industries. One of the primary goals of
the recent growth in federal incentives and funding for alternative
energy sources and energy efficiency industries has been the creation
of green jobs.
The hearing will examine international efforts to create green
jobs, as well as historical efforts domestically, including the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. In light of the
Administration's recently announced ``Winning the Future'' initiative,
the Subcommittee will explore the effectiveness of loan guarantees,
subsidies, tax incentives, regulations, mandates, research, and other
federal efforts to create green jobs. Under House Rules, the Committee
has jurisdiction over all energy research, development, and
demonstration projects; all environmental research and development; as
well as the commercial development of energy technologies.

Background

Pre-2009 Incentives
Prior to enactment of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009 (ARRA), the federal government provided a series of tax incentives
for users and producers of green energy. These incentives were
continued, and in many cases, expanded with the enactment of ARRA.
These pre-existing incentives included tax credits for:

Biofuel production

Solar and fuel cell investments

Energy efficient appliances

Energy efficient commercial buildings

Energy efficient new homes

Renewable energy production

Residential solar and fuel cell installation

A range of tax credits for alternative fuel
automobile technologies

In addition to tax incentives, renewable energy portfolio mandates
are also a means by which the public sector attempts to create green
jobs. Currently, there is no federal renewable energy portfolio
mandate, but 43 states have renewable energy portfolio mandates set by
their State Public Utility Commissions that require a percentage of
each state's energy usage to be generated by renewable energy sources
such as solar, wind, biomass and hydroelectric. For example, the state
with the biggest long-term commitment, Maine, will require 40 percent
of its energy to be generated by renewable sources by 2017 while the
state with the lowest long-term commitment, Pennsylvania, will require
only eight percent by 2020. Seven states have either non-binding
targets or non-percentage goals.
Similar to mandates, regulations are often used as a method of
encouraging green jobs development. By placing restrictions and
limitations on certain energy sectors, governments can artificially
influence the market by creating a disincentive for certain energy
sources and technologies, therefore making others more financially
viable. This increased demand creates jobs in a new sector, but as some
argue, this comes at the detriment of employment in the regulated
sector. Proponents of regulation as an incentive for job growth argue
that the market is already unbalanced when it fails to adequately take
into account externalities such as environmental impacts, and
regulations simply force the market to account for those externalities.
Loan guarantees are yet another way the federal government attempts
to bring about green jobs. Created as part of the Energy Policy Act of
2005, the program leverages federal dollars by allowing the Department
of Energy to guarantee the debt of privately owned clean energy
developers and manufacturing companies instead of investing directly
into these companies through grants or tax subsidies.
Additional federal efforts aimed at increasing green job growth
include subsidies, direct expenditures, and research and development.
Subsidies and direct expenditures seek to directly affect the energy
industry by providing funds to producers or consumers of energy.
Federal research and development spending focuses on a variety of
goals, such as increasing U.S. energy supplies, or improving the
efficiency of various energy production, transformation, and end-use
technologies. Research and development expenditures do not directly
affect current energy production and prices, but, if successful, they
could affect future production and prices.

ARRA Funding
ARRA contained over $60 billion in tax credits and grants to fund
various federal, state, local, and private sector efforts related to
alternative energy and energy efficiency including $21.6 billion in tax
credits for renewable energy and $45.2 billion for direct
appropriations. These funds were in addition to pre-existing tax
incentives and federally funded research and development efforts in the
same areas. ARRA funding and incentives for alternative energy and
energy efficiency had several purposes:

Research and development by public and private
scientists to develop new sources of energy and to lower the
cost of existing technologies

Reductions in overall energy usage through tax
incentives and grants to reward particular actions and
investments

Commercialization of alternative energy technologies

Job creation in these sectors of the economy

ARRA tax credits expanded pre-existing incentives for renewable
energy and created several new ones, resulting in more projects
becoming financially feasible. ARRA direct appropriations were used for
significantly more research and development, increased block grants to
states for weatherization of residential properties and consumer
purchases of energy efficient appliances, federal grants for advanced
battery manufacturing, alternative fueled vehicles, increases in
federal building energy efficiency, smart grid development, and loan
guarantee programs. The vast majority of the jobs created by ARRA are
believed to be in weatherization projects of residential homes.
To address concerns that new funding benefit Americans, Section
1605 of ARRA contained a ``Buy American'' provision that required
stimulus funds to be spent only on American steel, iron, and
manufactured items, subject to three exceptions for non-availability,
unreasonable cost, and inconsistent with the public interest. The
Department of Energy's Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
(EERE) is responsible for issuing these waivers. To date, EERE has
issued 44 non-availability categorical waivers and three public
interest waivers, two of which are no longer in effect. The categorical
waiver items cover a range of items, from specific products such as LED
lamps for television studio lights to broad categories such as all
Energy Star rated in-wall air conditioners. It appears that no
statistics have been collected to determine how many jobs have been
created overseas as a result of these categorical waivers, some of
which cover broad areas of manufacturing. In addition, large scale wind
projects have turned to wind turbines in Europe and China to build
American wind farms. These projects have received project waivers to
allow the importation of foreign manufactured wind turbines.

FY12 Budget Proposal
This February the Administration released its ``Winning the
Future'' initiative, as well as the ``Strategy for American
Innovation,'' and the ``Startup American'' campaigns. The goal of these
proposals is to ``bring greater income, higher quality jobs, and
improved health and quality of life to all citizens.'' Some of the main
goals outlined in these agendas include:

The development of a Clean Energy Standard which
would call for 80 percent of the nation's electricity from
``clean'' sources by 2035

Increased funding for the Advanced Research Projects
Agency--Energy (ARPA-E)

The creation of three Energy Innovation Hubs

The Reauthorization of the Clean Energy Manufacturing
Tax Credit

Funding to reach the goal of one million advanced
technology vehicles on the road by 2015

Two $1 billion initiatives for investing in early-
stage seed financing and other incentives to invest in high-
growth startups

Permanent extension of the Research and
Experimentation Tax Credit

Issues

Defining and Calculating Green Jobs
Jobs are typically considered ``green'' when they involve
alternative energy or increased energy efficiency. More uncertain is
how to count jobs that are somewhat related such as the truck drivers
who deliver solar panels across America, the state employees who
process the tax credits for energy efficient appliances, and the
consultants that advise cities and states on how to improve energy
efficiency. At its broadest scope, green jobs could include:

Factory workers that manufacture solar panels, wind
turbines, etc.

Architects and engineers who design these
manufactured goods

Construction workers who increase the energy
efficiency of existing homes and buildings by installing
insulation, caulking doors, and installing new more efficient
windows

Factory workers who manufacture the same insulation,
caulk, and windows

Truck drivers who deliver energy efficient appliances
to job sites

Construction workers that install solar panels, wind
turbines, etc.

However, many of these jobs would still exist even if they were not
``green'' in nature. Architects and factory workers would still be
needed to design and build components for coal mines and natural gas
plants. Less efficient windows still need to be manufactured by the
same workers, delivered by the same truck drivers, and installed by the
same construction workers. Coal miners would be as in demand as they
were before, if not more so, should alternative energy projects not be
subsidized to the extent they are today.

Energy Savings
A great deal of uncertainty surrounds the energy savings resulting
from the ARRA funding. Initially, ARRA grant applicants were required
to estimate the energy savings that would result from their proposed
projects. However, the Department of Energy's Office of Inspector
General found that original estimates for the energy savings due to
ARRA projects were wildly overestimated:
For example, the sum of the state's estimates for anticipated
energy savings was 88 billion MBtus based on their initial proposed SEP
projects. However, our review of this estimate found that it contained
a number of errors and inconsistencies. Management agreed, pointing out
that the estimate was not realistic or achievable since the United
States' total energy consumption is estimated at 100 billion MBtus.
The Department is no longer collecting energy savings estimates.

Regulatory Impediments and Underutilized Authority
The creation of jobs that also benefit the environment is a goal
shared by many. Unfortunately, the ability to create green jobs can be
stymied by regulatory and legal challenges. For example, a wind energy
project proposed to be located off Cape Cod called Cape Wind originally
filed for its permits in 2001 and has repeatedly faced legal challenges
from those opposed to the location of wind turbines offshore. Finally
in January 2011, the Army Corps of Engineers issued one of the last
permits required for construction to proceed.
Other projects related to green energy such as the construction of
Midwestern transmission lines to deliver wind power to large cities
have also faced strong opposition. The U.S. Chamber issued a report in
March 2011 entitled, Project No Project, highlighting permitting
problems and legal challenges faced by energy projects nationwide.
In addition to regulatory hurdles, a number of existing authorities
relating to green jobs are underutilized. U.S. government agencies have
the authority to enter into energy savings performance contracts
(ESPCs) under which private sector entities pay to improve the energy
efficiency of federal buildings in return for keeping the savings to
pay for their investments with some profit. ESPCs require minimal
federal funding and shift the costs of upgrading energy efficiency in
federal buildings to the private sector.

Additional Issues
Additional questions relative to green jobs include the following.

Do incentives actually produce a net increase in
jobs?

Are they an efficient way to increase jobs?

Are jobs the correct economic output the country
should be measuring?

On a job-for-job basis, should green jobs be
subsidized more than non-green jobs?

Could the same amount of money spent on creating
green jobs be more effective in creating jobs in other ``non-
green'' industries?

Could federal funds spent on renewable projects have
a greater employment and environmental impact if the same funds
were spent on other energy projects?

Will these newly created jobs be permanent or will
they remain in existence only until subsidies for them expire?

Are these jobs created domestically, or overseas?

Can these international jobs statistics be accurately
tracked?

Are we borrowing money to create these investments
and create these jobs?

Where are we borrowing this money from?

Are we funding foreign companies?

Are domestic companies doing this work overseas?

Have U.S. subsidies and incentives helped foreign
countries expand their own industries to the detriment of the
U.S.?

How does the growth of foreign green industries
impact the U.S.?

What metrics should decide whether federal funding
related to green jobs is successful and a wise use of scarce
federal funds?

Should federal funding be shifted more towards basic
research and development?

Witnesses

Dr. Kenneth P. Green, Resident Scholar, The American
Enterprise Institute

Dr. David Kreutzer, Research Fellow in Energy
Economics and Climate Change, The Heritage Foundation

Dr. Josh Bivens, Economist, Economic Policy Institute

Dr. David W. Montgomery, Vice President, NERA
Economic Consulting

Mr. William Kovacs, Director of Environment,
Technology & Regulatory Affairs Division, U.S. Chamber of
Commerce
Chairman Broun. The Subcommittee on Investigations and
Oversight will come to order. Good afternoon. Welcome to
today's hearing entitled, ``Green Jobs and Red Tape: Assessing
Federal Efforts to Encourage Employment.'' You will find in
front of you packets containing our witnesses' panel written
testimony, biographies, and truth in testimony disclosures.
I recognize myself now for five minutes for an opening
statement. The economic crisis of 2008, provided a new
Administration with the opportunity to expand government's role
in a number of different areas. One of the most prominent was
the energy sector.
This expansion was meant to be, ``timely targeted and
temporary,'' yet spending is still ongoing today. One of the
highlights of the Stimulus Bill's energy agenda was the goal of
creating green jobs that would spur employment, aid the
environment, make us most secure, and keep us competitive.
With the President's 2012, budget, the President is asking
Congress to double down on that strategy. The Start-up America
Campaign, the Clean Energy Initiative, and the Strategy for
American Innovation extends and expands many of the same
initiatives put forth in the Stimulus Bill.
In the course of reviewing the President's FY '12, budget,
the Science, Space, and Technology Committee heard from a
number of agency officials about the importance of maintaining
and expanding these green economy investments. This hearing is
the first opportunity to hear perspectives from outside
entities.
It is important to realize the context that we are
assessing these proposals. When the President took office, the
average price of gasoline was $1.84 a gallon. Today the average
price is around $3.79 a gallon. This should come as no
surprise. In 2008, before he became the Secretary of Energy,
Dr. Stephen Chu, stated, ``Somehow we have to figure out how to
boost the price of gasoline to the levels in Europe.'' Gasoline
in Europe is roughly $8 a gallon.
In a 2008, interview with the San Francisco Chronicle,
President Obama, then candidate Obama, stated that, ``Under my
plan of a cap and trade system, electricity rates would
necessarily skyrocket.'' Necessarily skyrocket. That is what he
wants to do.
It seems as though this Administration's energy and green
jobs agenda are both built less upon stimulating our economy
and creating domestic jobs and more on picking winners and
losers and financing foreign investment and production.
On one hand, the Administration is limiting development of
oil production in the outer continental shelf. On the other
hand it is promoting the development of oil off the coast of
Brazil. On a recent trip to Brazil President Obama stated
Americans, ``want to help with technology and support to
develop these oil reserves safely, and when you are ready to
start selling, we want to be one of your best customers.''
On one hand the President advocates for federal investments
and green technologies as an economic stimulus and jobs
creator. On the other hand U.S. taxpayer dollars are purchasing
renewable energy equipment manufactured in Europe and in Asia.
A 2010 report by the Investigative Reporting Workshop found
that more than $1.6 billion in Stimulus funds were used to buy
foreign-manufactured products. If the goal is to create jobs
here in America, I am not sure that this is the right method.
It seems to me that the left hand does not know what the far
left hand is doing.
There are a number of important policies that will ensure
economic prosperity here in the United States. A competitive
tax policy that maintains and entices corporate activity, a
legal system that respects contracts and patents, thereby
rewarding innovation, a stable regulatory environment that both
protects public health and safety and encourages economic
activity, and a highly-educated and trained workforce capable
of meeting 21st century challenges are all imperative to
prosperity.
Unfortunately, we find ourselves with the highest corporate
tax rate in the developed world, an Administration that stated
it seeks to, ``share all intellectual property as much as
possible,'' and an ever-expanding regulatory system strangling
small businesses and killing jobs.
Today we will hear from outside experts on what role
government incentives such as loan guarantees, subsidies, tax
incentives, mandates, R&D, and regulations can or should play
in augmenting these principles.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Broun follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Paul Broun
The economic crisis of 2008 provided a new Administration with the
opportunity to expand government's role in a number of different
areas--one of the most prominent was the energy sector. This expansion
was meant to be ``timely, targeted, and temporary,'' yet spending is
still ongoing today. One of the highlights of the stimulus bill's
energy agenda was the goal of creating green jobs that would spur
employment, aid the environment, make us more secure, and keep us
competitive.
With the President's FY12 budget, the President is asking Congress
to double down on that strategy. The Startup America Campaign, the
Clean Energy Initiative, and the Strategy for American Innovation
extends and expands many of the same initiatives put forth in the
stimulus bill. In the course of reviewing the President's FY 12 budget,
the Science, Space, and Technology Committee heard from a number of
agency officials about the importance of maintaining and expanding
these green economy investments. This hearing is the first opportunity
to hear perspectives from outside entities.
It is important to realize the context that we are assessing these
proposals. When the President took office the average price of gas was
around $1.84 a gallon. Today the average price is around $3.79 a
gallon. This should come as no surprise. In 2008, before he became the
Secretary of Energy, Stephen Chu stated ``Somehow we have to figure out
how to boost the price of gasoline to the levels in Europe.'' Gasoline
in Europe is roughly $8 a gallon. In a 2008 interview with the San
Francisco Chronicle, President Obama (then Candidate Obama) stated that
``under my plan of a cap and trade system electricity rates would
necessarily skyrocket.'' It seems as though this Administration's
energy and green jobs agendas are built less upon stimulating our
economy and creating domestic jobs, and more on picking winners and
losers and financing foreign investment and production.
On one hand, the Administration is limiting development of oil
production in the Outer Continental Shelf. On the other hand, it is
promoting the development of oil off the coast of Brazil. On a recent
trip to Brazil, President Obama stated Americans ``want to help with
technology and support to develop these oil reserves safely, and when
you are ready to start selling, we want to be one of your best
customers.''
On one hand, the President advocates for federal investments in
green technologies as an economic stimulus and jobs creator. On the
other hand, U.S. taxpayer dollars are purchasing renewable energy
equipment manufactured in Europe and Asia. A 2010 report by the
Investigative Reporting Workshop found that more than $1.6 billion in
stimulus funds were used to buy foreign manufactured products. If the
goal is to create jobs here in America, I'm not sure that this is the
right method.
There are a number of important policies that will ensure economic
prosperity here in the U.S.A competitive tax policy that maintains and
entices corporate activity, a legal system that respects contracts and
patents thereby rewarding innovation, a stable regulatory environment
that both protects public health and safety and encourages economic
activity, and a highly educated and trained workforce capable of
meeting 21st century challenges are all imperative to prosperity.
Unfortunately, we fmd ourselves with the highest corporate tax rate in
the developed world, an Administration that stated it seeks to ``share
all intellectual property as much as possible,'' and an ever expanding
regulatory system strangling small business and killing jobs.
Today we will hear from outside experts on what role government
incentives such as loan guarantees, subsidies, tax incentives,
mandates, R&D, and regulations can or should play in augmenting these
principles.

Chairman Broun. Now the chair recognizes my Ranking Member,
Ms. Edwards, for an opening statement. Ms. Edwards, you are
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses today.
Interesting hearing that we have. The idea that government
cannot make public investment choices that benefit the country
actually flies in the face of our Nation's actual history.
Canals, railways, roads, ports, highways, airports, the
electrical grid, and the Internet are all products of
government activities. The government has used different tools
at different times to encourage these investments, but all of
it was accomplished through government initiative.
Building our current infrastructure created jobs and
established the base for a national economy that has been among
the most creative and productive in the world. As we see new
competitors rise around the world and as we face new
environmental challenges and energy supply issues, we need to
make sure we step up and prove that we are just as innovative
and dynamic as the Americans who came before us.
The collapse of the housing market bubble in 2008, brought
the country to the edge of an economic disaster with high
unemployment and drying up of capital for businesses to meet
their day-to-day expenses, much less look for opportunities to
expand. And while we like to think that the normal, that normal
economic times find consumer demand the bedrock of our economic
prosperity, in the months after September, 2008, the times were
hardly normal. Consumers reeled from collapsing value in their
homes and investments, high unemployment left even those with a
job feeling deeply insecure about their financial future, and
when faced with these real conditions, it would be foolish to
think that consumer demand alone was going to pull the economy
out of a nosedive of what could have been a full-blown
depression.
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act or Recovery Act
was adopted by Congress and signed into law by President Obama
with the twin goals of getting America back to work and funding
projects that would create a more modern, robust
infrastructure, 21st century infrastructure, to support
economic growth for future generations.
The fact that the infrastructure could also reduce our
dependence on imported oil and help reduce our carbon
emissions, producing a cleaner environment and fighting global
climate change was actually an added social benefit, and
despite the investments of the Recovery Act, much still remains
to be done. We are no longer officially out of the--we are
officially out of the recession, but we need to create almost
14 million jobs in order to get Americans back to work.
I believe that we have to make sustained commitment to
public investment in our infrastructure and our research
enterprise, and in supporting innovation. I don't believe that
government is incapable of choosing wisely about public
investments, and I do not believe that the government has no
effective role in the face of high unemployment. Congress can't
just sit on its hands while people are losing their jobs, their
security, their homes, and their future. The government has
many tools at its disposal to help.
I am particularly interested in seeing the research and
development tax credit made permanent and to increasing the
domestic production activities deduction for property
manufactured in the United States, which was the result of
research and development done here. In fact, I have introduced
along with my colleague from Maryland and colleague on the full
committee, Roscoe Bartlett, H.R. 689, the 21st Century
Reinvestment Act, that would do just that.
The Information, Technology, and Innovation Foundation
issued a report in 2006, that found that the U.S. had gone from
offering the most generous research and development tax credit,
that we had dropped to number 17 by 2004. An effective way to
get people back to productive work and to reward innovation is
to reward companies that innovate and create jobs here in
America domestically.
I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses as we
explore these issues today, less investigation and oversight
and much more in exploration.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Edwards follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Donna Edwards
The idea that the government cannot make public investment choices
that benefit the country flies in the face of our nation's actual
history. Canals, railways, roads, ports, highways, airports, the
electrical grid and the internet are all the product of government
activities.
The government has used different tools at different times to
encourage these investments, but all of it was accomplished through
government initiative.
Building our current infrastructure created jobs and established
the base for a national economy that has been among the most creative
and productive in the world.
As we see new competitors rising around the world, and as we face
new environmental challenges and energy supply issues, we need to make
sure we step up and prove that we are just as innovative and as dynamic
as the Americans that came before us.
The collapse of the housing market bubble in 2008 brought the
country to the edge of economic disaster with high unemployment and a
drying up of capital for businesses to meet their day-to-day expenses,
much less look for opportunities to expand.
While we like to think that normal economic times find consumer
demand the bedrock of our economic prosperity, in the months after
September, 2008, the times were hardly normal. Consumers reeled from
collapsing value in their homes and investments. High unemployment left
even those with a job insecure about their financial future.
Faced with these real conditions, it would be foolish to think that
consumer demand was going to pull the economy out of the nose dive of
what could have become a full-blown depression.
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) was adopted by
Congress and signed into law by the President with the twin goals of
getting American's back to work and funding projects that would create
a more modern, robust infrastructure to support economic growth for
future generations.
The fact that the infrastructure could also reduce our dependence
on imported oil and help reduce our carbon emissions producing a
cleaner environment and fighting global climate change was an added
social benefit.
Despite the investments of ARRA, much remains to be done. While we
are no longer officially in a recession, we need to create almost 14
million jobs to get all Americans back to work.
I believe that we need to make a sustained commitment to public
investment in our infrastructure, in our research enterprise and in
supporting innovation. I do not believe that the government is
incapable of choosing wisely about public investments. I do not believe
that the government has no effective role in the face of high
unemployment. Congress cannot just sit on its hands while people are
losing their jobs, their security, their homes and their future.
The government has many tools at its disposal to help. I am
particularly interested in seeing the R&D tax credit made permanent and
increase the domestic production activities deduction for property
manufactured in the U.S. which was the result of R&D done here. With
bipartisan support, I have introduced a bill, H.R. 689, that would
accomplish all this.
The Information Technology and Innovation Foundation issued a
report in 2006 that found the U.S. had gone from offering the most
generous R&D tax credit, we had dropped to number 17 by 2004. An
effective way to get people back to productive work, and to reward
innovation, is to reward companies that innovate and create jobs in
America.
I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses.

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Ms. Edwards. If there are
members who wish to submit additional opening statements, your
statements will be added to the record at this point.
At this time I would like to introduce our panel of
witnesses. Dr. Kenneth Green is a Resident Scholar at the
American Enterprise Institute. Dr. David Kreutzer, is that
correct? Kreutzer. Okay. I can't spell, and I can't pronounce
my name. It is Broun spelled with a U, but anyway, Doctor, I
apologize. Dr. Kreutzer is the Research Fellow in Energy,
Economics, and Climate Change at the Heritage Foundation. Dr.
Josh Bivens is an Economist with the Economic Policy Institute.
Dr. David Montgomery is a Senior Vice President at NERA
Economic Consulting, and Mr. William Kovacs is a Senior Vice
President for Environment, Technology, and Regulatory Affairs
at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
I welcome all of you all here today and appreciate you all
coming and participating. As our witnesses should know, spoken
testimony is limited to five minutes each, so, please, we are
facing some votes here shortly, so if--we want to try to get
through this and not be here all afternoon. If you all would
try to limit your spoken testimony to five minutes or less.
Your full written testimony will be put in the record. And then
each committee member will have five minutes to ask questions.
It is the practice of the Subcommittee on Investigations
and Oversight to receive testimony under oath. Do any of you
have any objections to taking an oath?
[No audible response.]
Chairman Broun. Dr. Montgomery, I don't see--okay. Let the
record reflect that all witnesses are willing to take an oath
by shaking their head that they had no objections to doing so.
You also may be represented by counsel. Do you, any of you
have counsel with you here today?
[No audible response.]
Chairman Broun. Okay. Let the record reflect that all
witnesses indicated they have no counsel. Now, if all of you
would please stand and raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Broun. Thank you very much, gentlemen. Let the
record reflect that all the witnesses participating have taken
the oath.
Now I recognize our first witness, Dr. Kenneth Green, of
the American Enterprise Institute. You are recognized for five
minutes. Dr. Green.

STATEMENT OF DR. KENNETH GREEN, RESIDENT SCHOLAR AT THE
AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Mr. Green. Thank you, Chairman Broun, Ranking Member
Edwards, members of the subcommittee, for having me here today.
At the end of my testimony I have appended a pertinent study
that I recently completed for AEI titled, ``The Myth of Green
Energy Jobs: The European Experience.'' Much of my testimony is
derived from that paper.
My testimony represents my personal views only, and should
not be construed as the official position of AEI or any other
person or organization.
The question of green job creation is simply a variant on
the general question of whether or not government creates jobs
by intervening in the marketplace. The question has been
debated since at least the 1850s, when Frederic Bastiat, a
French journalist and politician, wrote, ``What is Seen and
What is Not Seen,'' an essay that should be mandatory reading
for anyone interested in public policy.
Bastiat framed the idea of government creation in the
broken windows fallacy. As he explained, imagine some
shopkeepers have their windows broken by a boy throwing rocks.
At first, everyone is horrified, and they blame the boy. But
then someone points out that, well, it is not really all that
bad because now jobs have been created for the window makers,
the glass blowers, glaziers. And so really there was no loss
because you have new jobs in making windows.
But, of course, did the child do a public good by breaking
the window, the baker's window, and making a job for the
glaziers? And the answer is, no, because beforehand the baker
would have used his money perhaps to expand his bakery, put on
a coffee shop, hire a new baker, and instead he used the money
to replace a perfectly good window. So the village as a whole
has lost the value of the window and has not gained any new
jobs as a result.
So let's look at--the analogy holds just as well when the
government breaks jobs in one sector, breaks windows in one
sector of the economy and uses the money it takes from there to
create jobs elsewhere.
When they pick product A over product B, what is seen is
the new sales of product A. What is not seen are the loss of
sales of product B and the associated job losses.
So to look at our possible green future, let's look at what
happened in Europe recently where they have been very
aggressive in pushing for green energy on the premise that it
will create green jobs, green technologies, and green economy.
I will start with Spain.
In March of 2009, researchers at the Universidad Rey Juan
Carlos released a study examining what happened in Spain as a
result of their push into green energy. The study calculates
that from 2000 to 2009, it cost them $815,000 each to create a
green job, rising to $1.5 million to create a green job in the
wind industry.
And they calculate that for every job created in the green
energy industry, 2.2 jobs were destroyed elsewhere in the
general economy.
Now to Italy, where a study performed by the Bruno Leoni
Institute, found an even worse experience. They found that
because green jobs were so expensive to create in Italy, that
for every green job created in the green energy sector, five to
seven jobs could have been created in the general economy for
the same amount of money.
They also found that the majority of these green jobs were
temporary, following through on existing plans they calculated
for 2020, would create, indeed, create quite a few jobs, up to
112,000, but 60 percent of them would be temporary.
Now, the United Kingdom. A recent report by the consultancy
Verso Economics found that for every job created in the United
Kingdom in renewable energy, 3.7 jobs were lost in the general
economy. What is interesting about that particular study is it
uses a methodology that the Scottish government itself uses to
calculate job losses as a result of taxes, of taxation. It uses
a model that the other studies I mentioned were criticized for
not using and yet it comes up with the same result as the other
two studies.
Before I conclude, I was asked to comment a bit about the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, and its
effectiveness in creating green jobs. A news article in 2010,
September, pointed out that only 20 billion of the 92 billion
allocated for renewable energy projects had been spent, and
according to the Department of Energy, as was mentioned
earlier, much of that was spent abroad, creating green jobs in
China, Spain, and South Korea.
For example, a report by the American University found that
11 U.S. wind farms used their Stimulus grants to buy wind
turbines made abroad, 695 out of about 1,000 wind turbines
purchased with Stimulus grants were made elsewhere. The
Department of Energy reports that for some green stimulus
projects, 80 percent of the spending was abroad.
So given that most of the green stimulus is unspent and
much of what has been spent has been spent elsewhere, it is
hard to see how it had a significant impact on creating green
jobs here in the United States. And don't take only my word for
it, April 11, 2011, the EPA put out an at-a-glance form, and
this report says that they are unable to determine what the
results were of their Stimulus spending, whether it created any
jobs at all because while they can track having spent the
money, they could not figure out what was done with it. So it
is unlikely that we have seen an explosion of green jobs.
In conclusion, the idea that government can create jobs on
net in the economy is a myth, and painting the myth green
doesn't make it any less of a myth. The experience of Europe,
which has preceded us in the quest for a new economy, is
uniformly negative and is proving unsustainable, with subsidies
being cut back and feed-in tariffs reduced.
And, not to discount American exceptionalism and ingenuity,
there is absolutely no reason to believe that things would
happen differently here. Green energy requires significant
subsidization. By definition, that means that jobs in the wind
and solar industry will be more expensive to create than those
in the general economy and that means less jobs on net.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Green follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Kenneth Green, Resident Scholar, The American
Enterprise Institute

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Dr. Green.
I now recognize our next witness, Dr. David Kreutzer.
Mr. Kreutzer. I will read my statement here. It says, my
name is David Kreutzer.
Chairman Broun. Kreutzer.
Mr. Kreutzer. And I have to confess that I had to call your
receptionist to figure out how to pronounce your name. I hope I
get it right.
Chairman Broun. You are recognized for five minutes,
Doctor.
Mr. Kreutzer. Okay. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF DR. DAVID KREUTZER, RESEARCH FELLOW IN ENERGY,
ECONOMICS, AND CLIMATE CHANGE, THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Mr. Kreutzer. I am Research Fellow in Energy Economics and
Climate Change at The Heritage Foundation. The views I express
in this testimony are my own and should not be construed as
representing any official position of The Heritage Foundation.
Chairman Broun, Ranking Member Edwards, and distinguished
members of the committee, thank you for giving me this
opportunity to discuss the employment impacts of federal energy
and climate policies.
I would like to make two fundamental points today. The
first is that government regulation is costly. The second is
that government spending is costly. Both of these statements
are true whether the economy is at full employment or in a
recession.
Now, let me also say that government spending and
regulation can have benefits, but we need to compare those
benefits to the costs instead of pretending that there are no
costs.
Too often proponents of spending and regulation focus on
the jobs and income going to those who receive the government
money or who provide the necessary goods and services for
compliance with the regulations. They ignore the losses to the
other parts of the economy that are needed to finance these
jobs.
A report by the Blue Green Alliance and the Economic Policy
Institute sets out an analogy to try to explain why an
apparently ineffective Stimulus program was actually effective
but undersized. Though probably not the intent of the authors,
and I believe in a few minutes we will hear about that, the
analogy captures the flawed logic of virtually every green jobs
study I have seen.
Here is the quote from that report. ``A good metaphor for
this controversy is the temperature in a log cabin on a cold
winter's night. Say the weather is forecast for the temperature
to reach 30 degrees. To stay warm you decide to burn three logs
in a fireplace. You do the math and chemistry and calculate
that burning these three logs will generate enough heat to
bring the inside of the cabin to 50 degrees or 20 degrees
warmer than the ambient temperature. But the forecast is wrong,
and instead of--and instead temperatures plummet to 10 degrees,
and burning the logs only results in a cabin temperature of 30
degrees. Has log burning failed as a strategy to generate
heat?''
The flaw in this analogy is that there isn't any woodshed.
The only available logs come from the walls of the cabin. It
would be no surprise that burning more of the wall does not
make the cabin warmer. Likewise, there is no money shed from
which the government can finance all the green subsidies and
programs. These resources are extracted from other parts of the
economy. They do not and cannot come from outside of the
economy.
Yes, when firms receive government subsidies, there may be
additional jobs with those firms, just as it may get warmer
right by the fireplace when more logs are torn from the wall
and burned. But just as the overall cabin temperature will
plummet, the overall economy suffers as resources are taken
from better uses and put to less valued ones.
There is no money shed to finance the cost of complying
with a cap-and-trade regime such as Waxman-Markey. Indeed,
Heritage analysis estimated that such legislation would reduce
national income as measured by gross domestic product by nearly
$9 trillion over the first 25 years of the program can cause
employment losses of nearly 2.5 million jobs.
There is no money shed to pay compliance costs of EPA
regulations. There is no money shed to subsidize loan
guarantees. Let me just use one example of the examples from my
written testimony. The case of Solyndra. In the fall of 2009,
Solyndra, a solar panel manufacturer, received a loan guarantee
of $535 million. That is in the fall of 2009. In the spring of
2010, half a year later or less, Solyndra failed to
successfully complete its initial public offering because an
independent audit questioned the viability of the company as
people weren't going to buy the stocks. In the fall of 2010,
Solyndra actually closed one of its manufacturing facilities
that had been in operation when they got the loan.
There is no money shed to finance green Stimulus programs.
Even in a time of recession with under-utilized resources there
are costs to government expenditure whether it is purchasing
military jets, building highways, or subsidizing green energy
projects.
But even if government spending can stimulate the economy,
and that doesn't mean there are no costs, but if the government
can stimulate the economy, the spending needs to be correctly
timed, and the targets should be those with the best return for
the money. Spending that raises electricity rates does not fit
this bill.
Figure six from the Blue Green Alliance Economic Policy
Institute report, reproduced in my written testimony, purports
to show that GDP, consumption, and employment all improved
after the enactment of the ARRA Stimulus Bill.
However, using the measures offered in the chart, okay,
rates of change at an annualized rate, it clearly shows that
all three measures of economic activity were turning the corner
months before any Stimulus spending started.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kreutzer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. David Kreutzer, Research Fellow In Energy,
Economics, and Climate Change, The Heritage Foundation

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Dr. Kreutzer. Is that better?
Thank you, Dr. Kreutzer.
Our next witness is Dr. Josh Bivens with Economic Policy
Institute. You are recognized for five minutes, Doctor.

STATEMENT OF DR. JOSH BIVENS, ECONOMIST, ECONOMIC POLICY
INSTITUTE

Mr. Bivens. I would like to thank the chairman and members
of the committee for the opportunity to testify today. I am
Josh Bivens. I am an economist at the Economic Policy
Institute. Today's testimonies reflect only my own views.
I would make a couple relatively quick points about the
efficacy of what we are going to call green investments. I
mean, essentially they have two benefits. One is in the short
run we have a pressing problem of very high unemployment rates,
and the reason why we have those high unemployment rates is
because there is a shortfall in demand for goods and services
in the economy. Green investments will help plug that
shortfall, bring down the unemployment rate in the short run.
In the longer run the reasons why you undertake green
investments is because it is recognized that we need to
transition to a cleaner energy economy for many reasons, one
just for the health of citizens of the United States, coal-
fired power plants are very bad for that health, and also to
deal with the effects of climate change.
Let me take these in order. Obviously the most pressing
problem facing the U.S. economy over the short-time horizon is
high rates of unemployment, and we know why unemployment is
high today. There is a shortfall of demand in the economy
because an $8 trillion bubble in home prices destroyed
household balance sheets, made households cut back on spending,
destroyed the residential construction industry, cascaded
throughout the economy, had businesses cutting back their
capital spending because customers stopped coming through the
door. Essentially, it is clear why unemployment is high today.
There is a shortfall of demand in the U.S. economy.
The shock to private sector demand stemming from the
bursting housing bubble is actually larger than the shock that
led to the Great Depression. A key reason why we didn't have a
second depression is that we allowed fiscal support, debt
finance, increases in spending, and decreases in taxes to act
as a shock absorber. Until the economy reaches pre-recession
unemployment rates, further fiscal support would provide
similarly welcome downward pressure on the unemployment rate.
For the simple purpose of propping up demand in our economy
hit by a negative spending shock, you know, most kinds of
spending and transfer payments are going to be as good as the
others, but the architects of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act, since we decided to make sure that many of
these investments are long-term gains as well, and so they
essentially were dedicated to providing a down payment on
making a needed transition to a clean energy economy.
The effects of ARRA have become controversial among
policymakers, and that is really odd because these effects are
not controversial at all among professional economic
forecasters. People in the private sector and the public sector
whose salary depends on knowing what is going to happen in the
economy over the next couple of years are unanimous that the
Recovery Act boosted GDP, jobs, and reduced the unemployment
rate.
The argument against the effectiveness of RA is kind of
through a simple feat. It didn't work because we know it cannot
work. It essentially says that any money borrowed by the
government to finance Stimulus takes money out of the hands of
households and businesses who will spend less.
You know, this is just wrong. The recession happened
because households and businesses were saving too much to
generate enough demand to keep unemployment low. If the
government didn't do anything, that would be the end of the
story. We would be stuck at a high unemployment economy for
quite some time.
If the government instead decided to accommodate the
savings that households and businesses were already doing, the
savings was already there, if they just accommodated the
savings by swapping money for treasury bonds and then spending
the money on public sector investments to generate demand, then
you would put more people to work, and that is exactly what has
happened.
Essentially, opponents of Stimulus want to argue that
public spending chases away private spending by competing with
it for scarce resources, but scarce resources are not the
problem in the U.S. economy right now. Labor, not scarce. There
is four and a half unemployed workers for every job in the
economy. Corporations are sitting on record amounts of cash
ready to finance investment. The problem is not scarce
resources. The problem is demand, and green investments help
solve that problem.
In the longer term, say longer than five years, assuming
once, again, we get to some tolerable unemployment rate, the
primary benefit of green investments isn't in boosting the net
number of jobs in the U.S. economy, rather the benefits are in
making the U.S. economy more productive and better poised to
meet the demand of transitioning to a cleaner energy economy in
the future.
In my written testimony I go over the evidence that says a
larger stock of public capital, public investments would do
much to boost U.S. productivity. I won't rehash that here.
Last, I just want to sort of address the argument that
green investment is just picking winners that the private
sector is somehow by definition better at doing. Yeah. I don't
think that is right. I mean, one, policy failures have so far
not given the private sector the right price signals to
incentivize green investment. You know, greenhouse gas
emissions are free for individual emitters, but they are very
costly for other stakeholders in the economy until this
externality is priced, you know, the best way to price it would
be through market-based programs like cap-and-trade. I know
that is not going to happen soon. There is going to be stunning
incentive for the private sector to undertake the optimal
amount of green investment so the government has to step in and
do some of it.
And further, many of these green investments are for public
goods, goods that are less viable, less excludable than private
goods, and or have features of natural monopolies. This is the
textbook example of goods that should be provided by the
government, not the private sector, so the idea that we are
chasing away the private sector from providing these goods and
services I think is pretty clearly wrong.
So I would like to just thank you again for the opportunity
to testify, and I am happy to answer any questions you might
have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Bivens follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Josh Bivens, Economist, Economic Policy
Institute

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Dr. Bivens.
Our next witness is Dr. David Montgomery with NERA Economic
Consulting. I recognize you for five minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF DR. DAVID W. MONTGOMERY, VICE PRESIDENT, NERA
ECONOMIC CONSULTING

Mr. Montgomery. Thank you, Chairman Broun and Ranking
Member Edwards. I am honored, again, by your invitation to
appear before the subcommittee.
I have recently joined NERA Economic Consulting as a Senior
Vice President, but today I am testifying entirely on my own
behalf. These are my own independent opinions and conclusions,
do not necessarily represent the positions of my employer or
any of its clients.
I have two primary recommendations. First, stop using green
technology as an engine of macro-economic policy. That approach
takes resources away from R&D that could lead to fundamental
technology advances, it increases the cost of meeting
environmental goals, and it is inferior macro-economic policy
as well.
Second, take some of the resources now being spent
unnecessarily on demonstration and deployment and put them to
work cushioning real research and the onset of the inevitable
and necessary era of fiscal austerity.
It would also be helpful to create new institutional
arrangement to assure continuity of energy R&D funding and
prevent that funding from being starved in the future by the
huge budgetary demands of large-scale demonstrations of unready
or excessively costly technologies.
As you consider reductions in spending it is critically
important to preserve the current levels of funding for basic
and applied energy research. All the rest of the direct
funding, subsidies, loan guarantees, and standards to promote
large-scale technology, demonstration, and deployment need to
be examined critically because most can go without sacrificing
either environmental goals or--and at a great saving to the
taxpayer.
Why are reductions in basic research so harmful? It is not
possible to get the best science and technological advances
with stop, go, stop funding. Good researchers will not tolerate
being torqued around. They will go back to fields of research
where that does not happen, and the flow of discovery that is
required for breakthrough applications will stop.
And why can reducing direct support for green energy be so
beneficial? That support is a solution in search of a problem.
Cost-effective environmental programs apply directly to the
emissions that cause harm. That is what we environmental
economists have been trying to teach our students at least for
the 30 years I have been in the game. Tilting the playing field
to favor specific technologies only forces American industry to
adopt more costly ways of meeting the requirements of
environmental laws and regulations.
There is already every incentive for industry to choose the
most cost-effective means to meet those requirements, and I
cannot understand how we now think that energy is a public good
since it has been provided cost effectively by the private
sector for centuries.
The only virtue green technologies can claim is superior
performance and identifiable environmental dimensions. So
environmental programs, not technology subsidies and mandates,
should guide their adoption. In some specific cases particular
kinds of support for technology demonstration might be
justified.
But history and economics make it clear that these are the
exceptions, and allowing the exceptions also opens the door to
a flood of rent-seeking pleas for support and earmarks.
Government funding for basic and applied research is still
needed to provide the flow of discoveries on which cleaner and
cheaper technologies will be based. Every prior--unfortunately,
every prior Congress that has been faced with the choice has
sacrificed the unquestioned long-term benefits of R&D to
maintain jobs through fundamentally-unnecessary and wasteful
subsidies for existing technologies.
I urge you to change that dismal record.
I haven't used up much of my time. I would be happy in the
future to debate some points of macro-economic policy, but I
wanted to focus on R&D.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Montgomery follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. David W. Montgomery, Vice President, NERA
Economic Consulting
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee:
I am honored by your invitation to testify today. I am an economist
and have recently joined NERA Economic Consulting as Senior Vice
President. I will start with a brief word about my qualifications.
I have studied energy R&D and energy technology programs since the
late 1 970s, when as a member of the faculty at Caltech I participated
in a major study of the economics of R&D supported by the National
Science Foundation. More recently I was coauthor of a statement of
principles for energy R&D policy with some of the most distinguished
academic experts in the field. At the Congressional Budget Office I was
deeply involved in all the issues of this hearing, as my Natural
Resource and Commerce Division was continuously active in analyzing
Federal R&D programs and industrial policy. I have published many
papers in peer-reviewed journals on related subjects, and I was honored
by the Association of Environmental and Resource
Economists with their 2004 award for a ``publication of enduring
quality'' for my pioneering work on emission trading. I taught
environmental economics at the California Institute of Technology and
economic theory at Caltech and Stanford University. I was Assistant
Director for Natural Resources and Commerce at CBO and until recently I
led the group at Charles River
Associates that developed a pioneering set of economic models and
used them in studies of virtually every major proposal for climate and
energy policies over the past decade.
My testimony today will take a broad view of the subject. I will
address the common-sense economics of federal efforts to create green
jobs through federal R&D funding and through the use of loan
guarantees, standards, subsidies, regulations, and tax incentives to
promote ``green'' technologies. My statements in this testimony
represent my own opinions and conclusions and do not necessarily
represent positions of my employer or any of its clients . . .

Summary

It is a fundamental error in policymaking and economics to design
or justify federal support for new energy technologies as a jobs
program. It subverts the entire purpose of government involvement in
R&D, and is the greatest single cause of the continued failure of
energy technology programs.
Some advocates claim that Federal spending on green technologies is
a ``triple winner;'' instead, it is at best a ``triple also-ran.'' \1\
No single policy tool can at the same time and in a cost effective way
develop new energy sources, protect the environment, and reduce
cyclical employment. A closer look shows that current efforts to do
these three things at once must, lead to doing none of them well or
even adequately.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Jason Walsh, Josh Bivens and Ethan Pollack Rebuilding Green
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act and the Green Economy, Blue-
Green Alliance and Economic Policy Institute, February 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Promoting new energy technology: The federal government has a
limited but vital role in the quest for new energy technology. But the
right division of labor between public sector and private sector is
absolutely crucial to success. Government should focus on basic and
applied research. There, its intervention is essential; yet it is in
these activities that the U.S. government traditionally allocates the
smallest part of the Energy R&D budget. The policies promoting use of
current green technology starve needed research in favor of
demonstration and deployment of high cost current technology. The
stimulus package tilted the balance still farther in the wrong
direction.
2. Cost-effective environmental protection: Current programs to
promote a Green economy actually raise the costs of reaching
environmental goals. Well-designed environmental policies would provide
incentives to choose least-cost means of compliance. In contrast,
current green jobs policies mandate use of specific technologies; yet
these may often not be the most cost-effective means to the desired
end. Some current policies even use subsidies to tilt the playing
field. If such schemes work at all, they do so by encouraging the
choice of needlessly costly means while shifting the added costs onto
the taxpayers.
3. Stimulus: To be efficient, energy R&D and investment incentives
must be predictable, consistent, and sustained over a long period of
time. But in a recession, fiscal policy experts all agree that the most
effective jobs program spends its funds as quickly as possible and
phases out the funding as the economy improves. Thus, energy research
and investment are strikingly ill-suited to the task of leading the
economy out of a down turn. The attempt to force these activities into
so inapt a role is bound to frustrate the goals of both energy policy
and economic stimulus.

Purposes of government intervention:

Efforts to use government spending to create ``Green'' jobs lose
sight of the real objectives of government intervention in energy
technology and R&D. Economists call these reasons ``externalities,''
but they can be viewed simply as the problems that government
intervention is designed to solve. There are two areas in which markets
cannot be expected to bring about the most socially desirable outcomes
without some fonn of government intervention, and these are R&D and
environmental protection. There is less complete agreement among
economists about the appropriate role of government in dealing with the
business cycle, but for my testimony today I will assume that a third
policy goal, more rapid recovery from the recession, is also relevant.
The current mix of subsidies for technology deployment through the use
of loan guarantees, standards, subsidies, regulations, and tax
incentives has only a haphazard relationship to these three
externalities, and cannot do a good job of dealing with any of them.

R&D

Government must play a role in R&D because it is impossible for
researchers and innovators to capture for themselves the full value of
the information that their activities provide to society.This spillover
effect is a positive externality, but it also implies that without
active government intervention there will be less R&D than is socially
optimal. The market failures associated withR&D are greatest in the
early stages of basic and applied research: as activity moves into
demonstration of technologies and their commercial deployment there are
increasingly effective ways to protect intellectual property--including
patents, trade secrets, and in-house development-- for innovators and
investors to appropriate an adequate share of the gains their
innovations provide to society. Thus government's role should be
greatest in funding of basic and applied research and fade away as
projects move toward large scale demonstration. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  In support of this point, see Richard Newell, A U.S.
Innovation Strategy for Climate Change Mitigation. The Brookings
Institution Discussion Paper 2008-15 December 2008 p. 20 ff.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In all sectors of the economy except energy, U.S. government
funding is concentrated in basic and applied research as theory and
experience demonstrates that it should be. Energy R&D programs tend to
take too few risks, because they concentrate funding on pre-selected
potential ``winners'' that are carried forward long after they have
ceased to warrant continued government support. In large part, these
failings can be directly attributed to the widespread perception of
energy technology funding as a ``jobs'' program.
A statement written by a number of the most distinguished experts
in the economics of R&D described the kinds of policies that would be
effective in promoting technological advances in energy: \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  ``A Statement on the Appropriate Role for Research and
Development in Climate Policy'' Kenneth J. Arrow, Linda Cohen, Paul A.
David, Robert W. Hahn, Charles D. Kolstad, Lee Lane, W. David
Montgomery, Richard R. Nelson, Roger G. Noll and Anne E. Smith.
Economists Voice, February 2009, Vol 6, No. i.

Government R&D policy should encourage more risk-taking and
tolerate failures that could provide valuable information. This can be
accomplished by adopting parallel project funding and management
strategies and by shifting the mix of R&D investment towards more
``exploratory'' R&D that is characterized by greater uncertainty in the
distribution of project payoffs. The single greatest impediment to an
R&D program that is directed at achieving a commercial objective is
that it will be distorted to deliver subsidies to favored firms,
industries, and other organized interests. The best institutional
protections for minimizing these distortions are multiyear
appropriations, agency independence in making grants, use of peer
review with clear criteria for project selection, and payments based on
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
progress and outputs rather than cost recovery.

The idea of parallel approaches is very important, and as I will
discuss later it is rarely seen in Federal energy R&D. Studies of
successful R&D show that a parallel approach, in which many early-
stage, high-risk projects are funded with the expectation that most
will fail, would be provide far more information than the current
approach, and would increase the likelihood of breakthrough
discoveries.
The statement also emphasized that commitments must be long-term
and stable:

Policy commitments must be stable over long periods of time.
Climate change is a longrun problem and will not be solved by
transitory programs aiming at harvesting available short-run
improvements in energy efficiency or low-carbon energy. A much more
stable commitment to funding and incentives for R&D is required to do
better than the limited results of energy R&D efforts in the 1970s and
80s.

What should be equally clear is that a series of temporary,
politically unstable, targeted subsidies, financial incentives, or even
mandates for deploying specific green technologies will not provide
adequate incentives for the R&D that would bring about large-scale
technological change.

Environmental and other externalities of energy production and use

Another rationale for energy R&D comes from externalities
associated with energy production and use. Effective programs to
address these externalities--such as the Clean Air Act Title IV program
that through a cap and trade program put a price on sulfur emissions
from utilities--created clear incentives for the private sector to
develop and deploy new control technologies. One of the few things that
most economists agree on is that a clear, credible, consistent and
stable policy that puts a price on C02 emissions will lead to cost-
effective technology deployment and provide a demand-driven inducement
to innovation. Federal support for energy R&D motivated by these
externalities also needs to be concentrated on basic and applied
research, as existing environmental regulations and new policies
focused on the direct causes of environmental concern--such as
greenhouse gas problems--provide the incentives for innovators to take
these research findings into commercial demonstration and deployment.
Even energy security is dealt with most efficiently by programs
that directly increase domestic production of crude oil and reduce
consumption oil consumption in a balanced way. The ideal in terms of
cost-effectiveness is an import fee, not a set of targeted subsidies
and mandates for costly or technologically unavailable substitutes for
oi1. \4\ Production of more fossil fuels is a direct and--on an
appropriate scale--more cost-effective way to reduce oil imports than
promotion of non-petroleum fuels through regulation (Renewable Fuels
Standards) or subsidies (ethanol).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ D. Bohi and W. D. Montgomery. Oil Prices, Energy Security, and
Import Policy. With Washington, DC: Resources forthe Future, 1982.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many of the environmental consequences of energy production and use
are already extensively regulated. Greenhouse gas emissions have not
been regulated until now, but are the subject of proposed EPA
regulations and much legislation. Development of new--and indeed
radically new--energy technologies is critical to our ability to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions sufficiently to stabilize temperatures at some
level without unacceptable economic harm. For other externalities, this
is less clear. Development of new technologies for production and use
of fossil fuels or other forms of energy is already motivated by a
perceived need for more cost-effective options for compliance with
policies that address other externalities.

Recovery

Recovery from the recession is a policy problem distinct from
either R&D or energy externalities, and requires its own distinct
toolkit. Economists differ seriously about the best strategy to pursue
to address an economic downturn like the one we have faced. All agree
that monetary policy in some form is necessary, but many are critical
of using government spending to stimulate the economy because of the
long-term consequences of increased debt and the difficulty of making
the spending be effective and timely. Too often fiscal measures are so
slow to get money into the economy that they only ramp up funding after
the economy is well on its way to recovery, so that rather than
reducing unemployment deficit spending ends up increasing inflationary
pressures. Moreover, temporary stimulus programs create constituencies
that lobby to keep the spending going long after stimulus is no longer
needed.
The basic principles of public finance for reducing cyclical
unemployment are to choose methods of spending that get money into the
economy as quickly as possible. Public works projects that have already
been chosen as desirable investments by passing through the
authorization process are good candidates. But the projects must be
ones that can be ramped up quickly and also ramped down without waste
or diminishing their value or effectiveness. Technology development
that requires this kind of long term and stable funding does not
satisfy these criteria.
Another basic principle is that the stimulus comes from spending,
and many different programs offer the same opportunity for job creation
if they receive the money. Thus job creation does not serve to justify
one form of spending over another. Choosing which among many competing
uses of funds should be the recipient of stimulus funding is not
different from normal authorization and appropriations, except for the
need for speed to avoid missing the window when stimulus is needed. A
program that cannot pass a normal cost-benefit test has no business
being chosen as a recipient of stimulus funding.

Why Energy R&D and Green Economy programs achieve none of the policy
goals well

There is no such thing as a ``triple winner'' in economic policy.
Economists have long observed that as many different instruments are
required as there are distinct externalities. Using one policy
instrument to address three different market failures assures that none
will be addressed well or cost-effectively.

Energy R&D failures are largely attributable to an inability to resist
treating technology investment as a jobs program

R&D is carried out by governments, for-profit and not-for-profit
entities, and national and multinational institutions. These
institutions perform a wide variety of R&D as illustrated in Table 1.
This suggests that the problem of appropriability is greatest in basic
research, important in applied research, and smaller in development and
later stages of demonstration, commercialization and deployment.
Perhaps the most striking feature of the government's energy
spending is the relatively low priority that it accords to R&D in
general and basic and applied research in particular. In fact, in terms
of total spending, deployment subsidies dominate. The following figure
shows the relative resource commitments and the relatively modest role
of basic and applied research in the Federal program. Thus even before
the stimulus package, Federal funding was highly biased toward
development where the private sector is capable of handling a much
larger role if the technologies being advanced to that state promise to
be commercially successful. Federal funding for this stage has been
needed largely because too many unpromising technologies are advanced
beyond basic and applied research.

These funding patterns can be attributed to three serious failings
in the total energy technology program:

Large scale demonstration projects that provide ``jobs'' in
politically influential regions drain funds from basic and applied
research,

Deployment subsidies that benefit specific constituencies are
rationalized as creating ``jobs'' even if the technologies are not
cost-effective, and

Failing projects are not cancelled because of the ``jobs''
involved.

And each of these failings arises because of favoring jobs'' over
the most effective way of promoting technological advance.
It is not surprising, therefore, that energy R&D had a long history
of waste and failure. Cohen and Noll describe a dynamic based on
incentives of executive agency staff and Congressional incumbents that
leads to the conclusion that R&D programs will investigate too few
risky alternatives in the early stages of research, commit prematurely
to large scale demonstration, and continue to fund large scale projects
long after their failure has become evident. \5\ This is exactly the
opposite of the stable, long-term research program required to
stimulate breakthrough research and introduce game-changing
technologies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  Linda R. Cohen, and Roger G. Noll (With Jeffrey S. Banks,
Susan A. Edelman, and William M. Pegram). The Technology Pork Barrel.
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1991.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Newell, in the study cited earlier, expands on this point:

A number of specific market problems have been suggested as
rationales for technology deployment policies. These market problems
include information problems related to energy-efficiency investment
decisions, knowledge spillovers from learning during deployment,
asymmetric information between project developers and lenders, network
effects in large integrated systems, and incomplete insurance markets
for liability associated with specific technologies (Newell 2007b).
Although such problems are often cited in justifying deployment
policies, these policies in practice often go much farther in promoting
particular technologies than a response to a legitimate market problem
would require. Therefore, while conceptually sound rationales may exist
for implementing these policies in specific circumstances, economists
and others tend to be skeptical that many of them, as actually proposed
and implemented, would provide a cost-effective addition to market-
based emissions policies. Critics also point out deployment policies
intended to last only during the early stages of commercialization and
deployment often create vested interests that make the policies
difficult to end .
. . . the most notable failures in government energy R&D funding
(e.g., the Synthetic Fuels Corporation, Clinch River Breeder Reactor)
tend to be associated with large-scale demonstration projects-using up
large portions of limited R&D budgets in the process (Cohen and Noll
1991). The recent experience with the FutureGen Initiative for clean-
coal power tends to reinforce this perspective. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  Newell, ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The nature of the electoral process biases authorization and
appropriation processes against basic and applied energy research.
Supporting R&D projects that yield large, but diffuse, net benefits and
those only after a long time, is a poor re-election strategy. However,
when an R&D project reaches a large enough scale, it begins to have
distributive significance. At that stage, the project may become
politically relevant to legislators interested in re-election (Cohen et
al 1991).
Energy R&D managers also exhibit an unwillingness to propose a
sufficiently wide range of risky alternative approaches to achieve real
breakthroughs. High-risk approaches with high potential may not come to
their attention, since in the early stage of R&D there are significant
agency problems in communicating the nature and potential of an
approach (Cohen et al 1991).
Career advancement is also more likely to come from successful
projects rather than accumulation of useful information about
approaches that do not work. This limits the set of alternatives
considered for funding and leads to far too little risk-taking in
government R&D and too narrow a view of possible avenues of approach.
This dynamic introduces a series of perverse incentives.
First, it encourages officials to move technologies too swiftly to
the phase of large-scale demonstration. As a result, these projects
often run into technical problems that could have been resolved much
more cost-effectively at a smaller scale, and to end up having chosen
the wrong route overall.
Second, congressional involvement has often led to poor projects
surviving long after they should have been terminated. Representatives
gain electoral credit for continued funding of local facilities and
lose almost no electoral credit because the funding is accomplishing
nothing.
Third, the excess resources that demonstration projects consume,
either because they are launched prematurely or because they linger too
long on political life support, are likely to crowd out more valuable
earlier phase research. In effect, projects at the early stage of
development are not politically appealing because further work on them
is not expensive enough to have distributive significance.
Fourth, the rush to demonstration may distort the selection of
technologies toward those that are more mature rather than toward those
that are more promising. Where there is path dependency in technology
selection such distortions may have long-term consequences.
In addition to the effects of the high political discount rate on a
premature rush to demonstration at high cost, choosing the location and
design of projects by earmarking to benefit influential constituents is
unlikely to lead to the choice of the best qualified and most cost-
effective organization to carry out an R&D project.
All of these characteristics are found in the expanded set of
programs that were introduced in the stimulus package and are
rationalized as a program to create a ``Green Economy.'' The history of
energy R&D suggests that they will not promote technological advance
effectively and that they will lead to waste of taxpayer's resources.

Green energy subsidies raise the cost of environmental policy

Cost-effective environmental policies lead to a choice of
technologies that achieve the goals of the policies at minimum cost. A
price on pollution -like the price of sulfur or NOx allowances--
motivates every emitter to choose methods of reducing emissions that
cost less per ton removed than the price of allowances. With a fixed
cap on emissions, the allowance market causes the price of allowances
to adjust until sufficient investments are made in pollution control
that the cap is achieved. Introducing mandates for specific ``Green''
solutions, such as a Renewable
Portfolio Standard or credits for manufacturing renewable energy
equipment, only forces utilities to choose more costly renewable energy
technologies over less costly solutions, because the cap will be met in
either case.
A performance-based emission standard does not achieve the broad
cost-minimization that an emission trading system would do, but it does
provide an incentive for regulated entities to choose the method of
compliance with the standard that minimizes cost. A good example is the
reformulated gasoline standard, which allows flexible choice of fuel
components as long as the required emission performance is achieved.
Adding a set of renewable fuel standards on top of the reformulated
gasoline emission standards only increases the cost of meeting the
emission standards, because the renewable fuel standards require that
gasoline already compliant with emission standards be replaced with a
much more costly alternative fuel that in some cases actually makes
compliance with the emission standard more difficult.
This is a general phenomenon. Regulations or incentives that deal
directly with the emissions, or more generally the externality, in
question are always more cost-effective than incentives or subsidies
that tilt the playing field in favor of one set of technologies that
would not have been chosen as an environmental solution without the
subsidies. And the cost is absorbed by the taxpayer.

Energy R&D and technology investment have none of the characteristics
of the optimal policy to create jobs in a recession

First, they ignore the timing of proposed policies relative to the
business cycle. One of the first principles of fiscal policy to counter
recessions is to make sure that funds are expended quickly, and the
most common political mistake is to authorize spending that will only
hit its peak after the economy is well on the way to recovery. That
mistake in timing means that the opportunity to help the economy out of
the recession is missed, and that when spending does occur it fuels
inflation and drives out other, more productive investments. Current
regulatory programs and subsidies and loan guarantees for green
technology fail this test. Even if some spending in these programs did
ramp up quickly, most of the expenditures would still largely be made
after even pessimists think the economy will be well on the way to
recovery. In that case, workers supported by green technology subsidies
will have to be drawn away from other jobs, just as the mandated
investment will be drawn away from other areas where it would
contribute to economic growth. The total result is no net job gain and
an overall drag on the economy.
Even if the expenditures for green technology were timely, they
cannot take credit for the benefits of economic stimulus. As even Green
Jobs advocates admit, about the same job benefits can be expected to
come from any additional stimulus spending, so that job benefits do not
differentiate between different kinds of spending. This kind of job
analysis is a sheer waste of time and resources, because every proposal
for more expenditure can make identical claims. In a slack economy, any
increase in spending will create some jobs. The way to get the most out
of fiscal stimulus is by putting additional spending into the areas in
which a temporary funding increase provides the greatest return to the
economy overall, and that does not include R&D or investment that
requires stable and permanent incentives.

Conclusion: What About the Green Economy

There are serious reasons of public policy for federal support of
basic and applied research that could lead to breakthroughs in energy
technology and for policies that deal with environmental protection and
global climate change. Very specific kinds of measures are appropriate
for each.
Federal R&D funding deals with the market failure in R&D that leads
to less than optimal R&D effort across the board in the economy.
Programs like Title IV sulfur trading deal cost-effectively with SOx
emissions, and a carbon tax could address greenhouse gas emissions at
lower cost than any set of subsidies and standards. But even the best-
designed regulatory , programs have costs, as I have discussed in four
previous appearances before House and Senate Committees in the past two
months. They do not create additional jobs for the economy as a whole,
but they do raise energy costs and lower worker compensation and the
standard of living of the average household. Ideally, environmental and
climate policies will be designed so that the benefits of addressing
various forms of pollution and global climate change will exceed their
costs.
Energy R&D has the potential of leading to future technologies that
can lower the cost of energy, but R&D has a cost as well. R&D requires
both money and, more importantly, an adequate supply of qualified
scientific researchers. Shifting the direction of research toward
energy diverts dollars and researchers away from other fields, unless
there is both a net increase in total R&D funding and additional
investment in education and training.
What, then, is the purpose of programs to promote a ``Green
Economy?'' The vast majority of ``Green Economy'' funding is not going
to basic and applied research, it is going to loan guarantees,
standards, subsidies, regulations, and tax incentives for demonstration
and, mostly, deployment of current technology. Environmental
regulations and climate policy already address the externalities that
provide a reason for government intervention. They provide incentives
for private businesses to adopt clean energy or ``green'' technologies
and practices when they are cost-effective ways of complying with
environmental regulations and policies, and leave them free to do
otherwise when green is not cost-effective. Therefore, federal funding
and standards to promote adoption of green technology are unnecessary
to achieve the environmental goals that have been accepted in public
policy. For the economy as a whole, these large expenditures and
requirements only serve to increase the cost of achieving the goals of
environmental policy by predetermining which technologies will be
favored. They do, of course, increase investment in favored
technologies, but they do so at the expense of investment in more cost-
effective alternatives and the consumer who always pays the bill.

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Dr. Montgomery.
Just for the information of members of the committee, we
have a vote on, and for the witnesses, we have a vote on now.
We will be able to hear Mr. Kovacs' testimony. After Mr.
Kovacs' testimony we will recess and reconvene 10 minutes after
the last of four votes begins.
So, if you would, please, come right back after you vote,
and we will get back as quickly as we can. We apologize for the
interruption, but, unfortunately, we have got the votes.
So, now I want to recognize our final witness, Mr. William
Kovacs, U.S. Chamber. Mr. Kovacs, you have got five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. WILLIAM KOVACS, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
ENVIRONMENT, TECHNOLOGY, & REGULATORY AFFAIRS, U.S. CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE

Mr. Kovacs. Thank you, Chairman Broun, Ranking Member
Edwards, and the members of the committee. You have asked me to
address two issues; one, the impediments to the development of
private sector energy projects, including the creation of green
energy jobs and to identify under-utilized federal programs
that could spur job growth without new statutory authority.
There are actions Congress could take, and they could take
them now with any--without any appropriated funds that would
create tens of thousands of clean energy and energy-efficiency
jobs, generate billions of dollars in additional GDP, expand
the development of clean energy technology, and substantially
reduce the energy use of the world's largest energy user, the
Federal Government.
You can do this by doing two simple things without any
federal funding. One is you need to streamline the permitting
process for private sector energy projects, and two, we need to
maximize the implementation of the Energy Savings Performance
Contracts that Congress passed in 2007.
Let me expand on both of these. If you look at page four
on--in my testimony, it is a map of what we call our Project No
Project, and that is an identification of projects in March of
2010, that were stopped by permitting challenges across the
United States, and what is so fascinating about this is that
the only common thread is that they were stopped by sequential
challenges. They would start with one law, move to another law,
move to another law, and because the statute of limitations is
generally six years, you can be the last person in your law
school class and hold it up for ten years. It doesn't--it is
not a trick.
But what is so important is that in this process, when we
did the economic study, if these projects had all moved forward
during the seven-year period of time which would have been the
construction period, they would have generated about $1.1
trillion in new GDP, and it would have created about 1.9
million jobs a year. And then for the 20 or 30 years that they
were in existence they would have produced more jobs.
We recognize within the study that you couldn't build them
all at once. There wasn't the people, there weren't the
materials. So we did a sensitivity analysis, and even if you
took whatever was happening and let's say we did the largest
project in any state, you still had a $.5 trillion in GDP and
hundreds of thousands of jobs, and we did that for nuclear or
all renewables, pick your choice. But some of the projects, if
a large group would have gone forward, you still would have
created the jobs.
The solution there is permanent streamlining. Congress has
handled this issue many times. You handled it in the Highway
Bill in 2005. You literally created the time to get through the
process for NEPA in half from about 72 months to 38 months. You
did it in the Stimulus Project with requiring the use of NEPA
in as expeditiously a manner as possible. That allowed 180,000
out of 250,000 projects to get into the marketplace quickly.
The second point that I want to talk about is energy-
savings performance contracts. In a climate of fiscal restraint
you literally have an $80 billion pool of contracts that you
can move immediately. An Energy Savings Performance Contract is
a statutorily-established, private sector partnership in which
the private sector energy service company installs in federal
buildings all the energy efficient equipment at its own expense
and is paid from the energy savings over a 20 to 25-year period
of time.
You are probably all familiar with it. This building is
subject to one of the Energy Savings Performance Contracts as
well as the other House buildings. The energy service company
guarantees the proposed energy savings and takes full
responsibility for any of the shortfalls. So there is
absolutely no risk to the Federal Government. It is an $80
billion authorization that can be triggered literally by the
Federal Government wanting to do this.
One of the things that we have--that has been very clear is
that there have been two problems with this issue. One is
because it is outside of what we would call just using
appropriations, the federal contractors in the Department of
Energy that manage these programs really are not familiar with
it, and they could use more training, and that is based on
basically GAO reports.
And the second is I think the Stimulus from what we can
tell from both the GAO reports and the obligated funds under
the Stimulus, because appropriated funds were available, it was
easier for the Department of Energy to move and use the
appropriated funds first rather than the Energy Savings
Performance Contract. So what happens is you ended up in the
last year with only six projects totally $104 million when you
have an $80 billion authorization.
Oak Ridge National Labs indicated that this would create 40
billion jobs, $21 billion in saved energy, and take ten million
cars off the road.
In my last 10 seconds I recommend that solutions and
executive order get the President behind us. This is an
excellent law, and if he makes it--if he requires this to be
used first before appropriated funds, that would move it along.
We need training and then finally Congressional oversight.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kovacs follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. William Kovacs, Senior Vice President,
Environment, Technology, & Regulatory Affairs, U.S. Chamber of Commerce

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Kovacs. I appreciate all the
witnesses staying pretty much within your five minutes and Dr.
Montgomery, for you being even under time. If I remember last
time you were here, you were under time also, and I appreciate
that very much.
Unfortunately, we have got about six minutes or 6-1/2
minutes on this vote. You all can stand, the witnesses can
stand at ease. The committee will recess until 10 minutes after
the last vote begins.
[Whereupon, at 2:42 p.m. the subcommittee recessed, to
reconvene at 3:28 p.m., the same day.]

Chairman Broun. I call to order the continuation of this
hearing, and I thank our witnesses for your forbearance in our
going to vote, and we tried to rush back here to minimize you
all's time. So I thank you all for your testimony, and I want
to remind members that the committee rules limit questions to
five minutes, and the chair at this point will open the round
of questions. I recognize myself for five minutes.
Federal efforts to create green jobs costs money. Our
Nation is currently very heavily in debt and running a huge
deficit that is unsustainable.
Where are we getting the money to fund these projects, and
what impact does that have on the overall economy?
I would like anyone who--Dr. Green is nodding his head, so
I will give you first go at that.
Mr. Green. Other than printing up money the government
doesn't have any money, and therefore, when it gives money to
subsidize an industry or to create jobs in a certain sector or
to subsidize battery production and so forth, it takes that
money from another part of the productive economy.
Unless you subscribe to the mattress theory of capital,
which is that people actually stick their capital under a
mattress and don't have it working somewhere in the economy,
either in their bank or in their savings account or in
investments, it is simply the truth that the government scoops
money out of the economy here, and they hand it over here. They
take their cut along the way, and the jobs they create are more
expensive than would be created in the market, and you have
less jobs.
Chairman Broun. Dr. Kreutzer.
Mr. Kreutzer. I would say even if people did put their
money in their mattress, you have to follow the real resources,
all right, and if you are somehow going to build a new high-
tech economy entirely with people from the unemployment line,
you know, then that is where the cost would be low. But that
isn't what happens. I mean, we use resources that have an
opportunity cost.
Chairman Broun. I think Mr. Kovacs, I saw that you were
nodding. Did you want to----
Mr. Kovacs. I am happy to take a crack at it.
Chairman Broun. Dr. Bivens.
Mr. Bivens. I mean, the short answer is they are borrowing
it, and now is a perfect time to borrow it because U.S.
households and businesses are saving at historic rates because
they are terrified because of the recession, they have lost a
lot of wealth, and they are taking that savings that otherwise
would not go to productive use, and they are making sure that
there is enough demand in the economy to fill the hole caused
by the bursting of the housing bubble.
Chairman Broun. Mr. Kovacs. Or Dr. Montgomery. We will just
go right down the line. Dr. Montgomery.
Mr. Montgomery. Thank you. I think that the notion of real
resources really is the important one, that that is what most
of the green jobs studies miss, that you have to ask where the
money is, where the funding is coming from, and that means what
the real resources are, what is the capital and labor that is
building green technology, what would it be doing otherwise.
And if the government has to provide subsidies to get that
capital labor into green technologies, that means it costs more
than what the alternative would have been.
So, yes, that is the sense in which there is a cost, but I
think in terms of fiscal stimulus, there really is an error in
thinking that we can justify spending on green jobs as a short-
term stimulus, because it is probably the worst way to spend
short-term money. What we need to do for--every fiscal
economist agrees, I think, that in the recession what you want
to do is you want to get money into people's hands as fast as
possible, you want to ramp that spending up rapidly, and then
you want to ramp it down just as rapidly when you are coming
out of the recession.
What you want to do for R&D and technology development is
provide a long-term, stable set of incentives as I was
describing before. That is exactly the opposite of the program.
That is the last program you would want to try to ramp up and
ramp down to do something about the recession, even if you
believe that fiscal policy is going to work.
Chairman Broun. Mr. Kovacs.
Mr. Kovacs. Well, I certainly don't want to sound like a
broken record, but I do want to push the Energy Savings
Performance Contracts. In some way, shape, or form they have
been around since 1985. They are a bipartisan effort. All the
money is put forth through the private sector. You are--the
government is guaranteed that they will not pay any more than
their energy costs. They theoretically will save about $21
billion depending on how the contract, depending on how long
the equipment lasts beyond the contract period. They take, you
know, what is the equivalent of ten million cars off the road,
but more than anything the government is guaranteed that it
will not pay more, and it creates jobs.
Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Kovacs. I have three-
quarters of a minute left, so I will ask Dr. Kreutzer, I think
you brought up Evergreen Solar. They received $20 million in
funds to build a plant in Devens, Massachusetts. Shortly after
receiving those funds Evergreen Solar shuttered the plant,
fired 800 workers, is now moving its operations to China.
What presents--wasn't it you, Dr. Kreutzer that--oh, Dr.
Green. Okay. Dr. Green then, what prevents other companies from
doing the same?
Mr. Green. Absolutely nothing, and in fact, all the
incentives point in the opposite direction. China has
temporarily at least cornered the market on the rare earth
elements which are used to make advanced technologies,
including cell phones, wind turbines, solar panels, and the
like, and they are instituting cuts in exports of those
materials.
And so if you want to produce and have access to these
materials and lower labor rates and lower environmental
standards for production, and it is--these are quite damaging
technologies to produce, you want to go build them in China.
So the incentive is to actually take the Stimulus--take
government money here, do your R&D here, and then take what you
have learned to the low-cost production in China.
Chairman Broun. Thank you, Dr. Green. My time is up, and I
recognize Ms. Edwards for five minutes.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses. I just have one quick question, and you can just
answer yes or no, and then we will get to the meat of it.
I am curious as to whether you or your organization, the
organizations that you represent supported the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act, the Stimulus Package?
Mr. Green. AEI as an institution does not take official
positions. Some of our scholars did, and some of the scholars
didn't, I believe.
Ms. Edwards. Did you?
Mr. Green. No, I did not.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you.
Mr. Kreutzer. Yeah. That is not my area of energy, and I am
not speaking for Heritage, but I don't believe they supported
it.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you. Dr. Bivens.
Mr. Bivens. Our institute did support it.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you. Dr. Montgomery.
Mr. Montgomery. No. Consulting firms clearly don't support
legislation one way or the other.
Ms. Edwards. Did you?
Mr. Montgomery. I feel that my job is to try to explain
when I am asked what the likely consequences of decisions are
and----
Ms. Edwards. So you don't have a position on the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act?
Mr. Montgomery. I would be happy to, as I am today,
discussing what I think its effects were. I don't know whether
you mean that is a position or not, but these are certainly my
professional opinions about what the effects of the act----
Ms. Edwards. But you didn't have a position at the time
whether you supported or opposed the Recovery Act?
Mr. Montgomery. What do you mean by a position?
Ms. Edwards. Did you support or oppose the Recovery Act?
Did you----
Mr. Montgomery. In what context?
Ms. Edwards. --support----
Mr. Montgomery. Party conversation or----
Ms. Edwards. Let me finish my question, please. Did you
support the President's signing into law and the passage out of
this Congress of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act?
Mr. Montgomery. Well, I am not a member of Congress, so I
didn't get to vote on it one way or the other.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you. Mr. Kovacs.
Mr. Kovacs. The Chamber supported it.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you. I am just curious when it was
passed, it was, you know, I think it was because of a collapse
in consumer demand and a financial system that really was on
the brink of disaster and job losses, and so I am curious as to
each of you, if there is a situation that doesn't justify the
government stepping in to create jobs and restore confidence in
the economy such as the time that we experienced from 2008, and
beyond, what would it be?
Dr. Green.
Mr. Green. Since I am not an economist, macro, micro, or
otherwise, this is a personal opinion, and there are--there
were different ways--was it legitimate for the government to
step in? Probably so. I am actually not anti-government. I
think government is widely important. It is like fire. It is a
necessary thing. It is great in the fireplace, it is wonderful
on the stove, it is not so good on the carpets and on the
drapes.
But there are different ways that I think it could have
been implemented that I would have preferred, which is why I
didn't support it.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you. Dr. Bivens, is there an appropriate
time when the government should intervene in cases of high
unemployment and collapse of confidence in the market?
Mr. Bivens. Absolutely. I mean, in specific over the past
couple of years why it was so appropriate for the American
Recovery Act to be passed is because our primary tool for
fighting recession is Federal Reserve Policy, had already
pretty much maxed out its conventional ammunition. There was
very much little extra the fed could do, something else had to
come in and try to support the economy. That is what made it so
appropriate in this context.
Ms. Edwards. And so you come to a conclusion in your
testimony that jobs were created, the economy was stabilized.
How do you know that? From an economic perspective and from an
evaluation perspective. How do you know that?
Mr. Bivens. I reference the sort of consensus among
forecasters, and that is not evidence in and of itself, but
what it reflects is that there is a lot of strong evidence
underlying it.
One is just the timing of the act. It works very well when
the downward spiral was arrested. Two, you do economic
simulations where you try to construct, and this is what the
Council for Economic Advisors did when they did their quarterly
reports on the Recovery Act, and you can get a baseline path of
how the economy would have done given the trajectory of
economic variables as the crisis hit and then see how it
actually did do relative to that counter-factual baseline. And
then, three, you know, you use the multipliers that have gotten
such a bad name in this debate, you know, given the amount of
spending on food stamps or public sector investment. People act
like these multipliers come from thin air. They don't come from
thin air. They come from lots and lots of empirical research of
the affect of government spending in environments like we saw
in 2008, that is when the interest rate is at or zero-lower
bound, when you have got the threat of deflation in those
environments, past government spending has provided very large
multipliers. That is where those come from. So that is where I
got those.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, and then lastly, Mr. Kovacs, can
you imagine an environment today in which we wouldn't have done
the--passed the Recovery Act and what that would mean to the
businesses that you represent?
Mr. Kovacs. Well, actually, I think we, as the Chamber put
it, an enormous amount of constructive thought into trying to
work with Congress. One of the provisions that we had been
lobbying for was what Senators Barrasso and Boxer put in, which
was the way that you have to treat NEPA. In other words, it has
to be handled in the most expeditious way possible, and we had
no idea how many projects were really going to be impacted, but
we knew there weren't that many shovel-ready projects.
In the end according to the Administration that provision
was used over 180,000 times, so we think that we added to
really making the act work.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Broun. Okay. The--I guess, Mr. Miller, you are
recognized for five minutes. I was just looking around to see
who was here, so you are recognized for five minutes.
Congressman Miller, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Miller. All right. Thank you. Dr. Green, you just a
moment ago said that you are not an economist macro and micro.
Actually my information is that your Ph.D. is in environmental
science and engineering. You have a B.S. in biology and a
Master's in molecular genetics.
Did you take macro and micro in college?
Mr. Green. Yes, sir. Yes, Congressman. As part of my
doctorate at UCLA, the program I was in was an inter-
disciplinary and policy-oriented doctoral program in which we
had a core course on decision-making theory that included
economics.
Furthermore, I have worked at and with economists now for
16 years, including for three years editing a journal on the
think tank that was primarily economic studies. So I am not an
economist, but that does not mean I am not versed in economics.
Mr. Miller. Okay, but you don't have an academic credential
that would--you would not be qualified to peer review for a
peer-reviewed economics journal, would you?
Mr. Green. I believe I have, but I will leave that to your
judgment.
Mr. Miller. Okay, but all of your testimony today is on
economics. Correct?
Mr. Green. Essentially. Yes.
Mr. Miller. Okay. In the three studies that you refer to
are all economic studies. Isn't that correct?
Mr. Green. Yes.
Mr. Miller. Okay. Do you know if those studies were peer
reviewed?
Mr. Green. I am not aware of whether they were peer
reviewed or not, but then, again, I don't hold a peer review as
a particular guarantor of accuracy, and that has been clearly
documented in the university.
Mr. Miller. Okay. Do you know if those studies have been
criticized by other economists as methodologically unsound?
Mr. Green. Well, yes, naturally. I mean, all studies in
this area are criticized, including----
Mr. Miller. Isn't that one of the reason for peer reviews
is to have a discussion back and forth between those who are
familiar with methodology about whether the studies are
methodologically sound?
Mr. Green. Sure, and my guess is, yes, they actually did
consult with their peers to have their research findings
checked.
Mr. Miller. Okay.
Mr. Green. However, even peer-reviewed studies are a source
of debate. Look at the IPCC, look at all the studies----
Mr. Miller. Do you know the extent to which--do you know if
they got any funding from the fossil fuel industries?
Mr. Green. I have no idea what their sources of funding
are.
Mr. Miller. You don't know that they did?
Mr. Green. I don't know what their sources of funding are
at all.
Mr. Miller. Okay. You are a fellow at the American
Enterprise Institute. You say that you are here expressing your
own opinion. I assume you are not on unpaid leave today, and in
fact, if we look at the website for AEI in a few days they will
probably tout your testimony today as a credential for you.
Tell us what support AEI gets from the fossil fuel
industry.
Mr. Green. Well, first to correct the record, I am a
resident scholar at AEI.
Mr. Miller. Okay.
Mr. Green. It is an arbitrary distinction or distinction
that only matters inside, but for the record that is the case.
I have no idea to tell you the truth what the fossil fuel
industry donates to AEI. The scholars are walled off from the
fundraising process entirely, and I couldn't begin to tell you.
Mr. Miller. Okay.
Mr. Green. Or any other donor to AEI.
Mr. Miller. All right. Dr. Bivens, are you familiar with
the three studies that Dr. Green wrote about?
Mr. Bivens. I am familiar with two of the three, the
Spanish and Italian, but I have not read the Scottish one.
Mr. Miller. Okay. What--you presumably are qualified to
peer review them as an economist. What is your peer review?
Mr. Bivens. I think they are pretty bad. I mean,
essentially they compare the labor intensity of jobs supported
by green investments versus some economy-wide average, and
because the labor intensity is lower, they decide that money
could be more profitably spent somewhere else in the economy.
I mean, that is ridiculous. If you just look at jobs in the
utility sector in the United States today, they are not labor
intensive at all. It is not a real shock, you know. These are
very capital-intensive industries, so the idea that you could
somehow just stop spending on utilities in the U.S. economy
today and devote the money to other activities and create more
jobs that the utility sector is killing jobs, that is an insane
way to think of the issue.
So basically they have come up with the blockbuster finding
that utilities are not very labor intensive, which was not a
surprise to anyone.
Mr. Miller. Okay. A lot of the testimony today has been
that government support distorts the market, and I see some
heads nodding yes, that is correct. That is what your testimony
is, that presumably if government is supporting something in
one way, presumably alternative energy is in competition with
coal, with oil and gas, with nuclear, and by supporting
alternative energies, it distorts what the market would
otherwise do.
Since 1948, there has been $91 billion in funding for
nuclear energy. Excuse me. There has been a total of--that is
correct. Ninety-one billion for nuclear energy, 46 billion for
fossil energy, and 11 percent or 21 billion for alternative
energy. That is wind and solar and everything else together.
Has that distorted the marketplace at all? Mr. Green. Dr.
Green.
Mr. Green. I would like to say, first of all, one has to
keep these things in perspective. When you look at subsidies
per megawatt hour, you do not see a dominance in the oil and
petrochemical sector.
I testified before I believe all subsidies distort markets
and all subsidies in the energy field, in the markets should be
removed to everyone, fossil fuels, nuclear power, wind, solar,
alternative, battery technology. It doesn't really matter.
Mr. Miller. Mr. Kovacs, do you have an opinion on this?
Mr. Kovacs. I mean, look. We have, you know, we have
generally supported the advancement of technology at various
stages. We for years have supported the advancement and the
funding of all the technologies in the Energy Policy Act of
2005, 2007. We believe that one of the ways to begin addressing
some of the issues that we have in this country is through
technology, and obviously funding is a part of it.
You know, to that extent we have supported it, and I think
in the end one of the things we are here today to talk about is
to say, okay, it seems as though the climate has changed, we
have borrowed a lot of money as a Nation, and we are here to
try to give ideas as to how we might cooperate and do both
energy efficiency, promote technology, and have it done through
the private sector.
So, but, yes, we have always supported the technology
efforts.
Mr. Miller. My time has expired, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Broun. Yes, it has, but if you would like to ask
an economist, Dr. Montgomery, those economic questions you
asked of the other witnesses, I will be glad to give you a few
more minutes for Dr. Montgomery to answer.
Mr. Miller. Which ones particularly do you want to----
Chairman Broun. Well, you asked an economist whether they
were--Dr. Montgomery is an economist if you want to ask him the
question about investment.
Mr. Miller. Well, certainly.
Chairman Broun. I would be glad to give you extra----
Mr. Miller. Dr. Montgomery, well, do you agree that
government support, subsidies, whatever, distorts the
marketplace, the decisions that we made in the marketplace or
otherwise?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, I do, and in particular I think that
the--yes, and that there is a difference between distorting the
marketplace and intervening in order to deal with true
externalities like environmental protection. And I was trying
to make that distinction in my testimony and rapidly in my five
minutes, that it is a perfectly legitimate role and something
which we have done quite successfully in many areas to
establish cost-effective regulations that deal directly with
emissions.
Like the Title IV Sulfur Program under the Clean Air Act.
That is the right way to direct technology into cleaner energy
because it deals with the emissions. Where the distortions come
in is when the government picks the technologies by funding the
technologies directly rather than concentrating on what the
consequences of the technologies are and letting nuclear
renewable energy, natural gas, and others fight it out on a
level playing field to see which one has the best way of
meeting the environmental goals.
Mr. Miller. Okay. How about the ultra deep water and
unconventional natural gas and other Petroleum Research Fund?
Does that fall within that--that doesn't seem to have anything
to do with the environment. It seems to be simply with doing
the research to--how to drill down to two miles.
Mr. Montgomery. I think the other part of my testimony was
that there is a general market failure in R&D which leads to a
lack of adequate investment across the board in the economy,
including in the energy sector in the basic and applied
research that provides new ideas on which innovations are
built.
Now, I don't know whether that particular fund is doing
that kind of basic and applied research or is doing something
that the oil industry could have done perfectly well all by
itself without having that money put into it.
But I would call that spending on technology development
that may or may not be justified, depending on whether it is at
the basic research end of the scale where government has an
appropriate role.
Chairman Broun. The gentleman's time has expired. Just in
fairness.
The gentlelady, Ms. Lofgren, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thanks very much. You know, I come from
Silicon Valley where the tech sector is very excited about
clean energy. I mean, it is not just the government programs
that has given a tiny leg up to the industry but also the
venture capital world. That is the biggest area of new growth,
and people believe in business and also in the academic world
that this has a tremendous future, not only in energy
production but clearly in terms of job creation, and it is the
next big thing that we don't want to miss out on.
And as I review the testimony today, I do have a concern.
There seems to be a questioning of government investment in
clean energy and green jobs. Now, Mr. Miller mentioned the
disparity in terms of research dollars which the Congressional
Research Service has advised us of with most of the money going
into nuclear and the most of the rest going into fossil and
really just a small percentage going into clean energy, but I
think that is part of the story.
We have, and I have heard no willingness on the other side
of the aisle to take a look at the tax breaks that we are
giving in the fossil fuel arena, especially to oil companies.
Dr. Bivens, it seems to me if you add in the disparity in
research funding with the tax breaks given to oil companies
that nobody apparently is talking about repealing, you know,
what does this do to the kind of a level playing field for the
clean energy industry? Doesn't it make sense when we are
subsidizing the oil industry and when we are disproportionately
funding nuclear and fossil fuels to at least provide some
assistance to this fledgling part of the energy economy, the
high-tech sector?
Mr. Bivens. Yeah. I mean, I would say I am not an expert on
exactly how much in the way of benefits the fossil fuel
industry gets, but I think your point is a good one, and I
would add, you know, that besides the direct benefits,
subsidies, tax breaks going to the fossil fuel sector, I think
the single biggest subsidy is our failure to price emissions
that are harmful to other economic stakeholders. That is a huge
subsidy, and so I think until we correct that one, we are just
not giving the private sector near enough incentive to do the
green investment on its own, so I think public sector
incentives to give that, give those incentives are a very good
way to go.
Ms. Lofgren. I was interested in Dr. Montgomery's comment
in the exchange with Mr. Miller about the value of regulation
to set standards that then people or industries will work to. I
am wondering the Governor of California just upped the
renewable energy portfolio requirement to a third today, and
what I hear from industry is that if they know what it is they
are supposed to do, they can do it. But what they need is some
standards and what are the rules, and would you support, would
you think that that would help? What California is doing?
You know, our energy consumption has remained flat while
the population has grown about 25, 30 percent.
Mr. Montgomery. I have done a lot of work on California's
AB-32 implementation, so I will resist the temptation to talk
about all of it.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you.
Mr. Montgomery. I think the clean energy standard is a good
example of a program which actually increases the cost of
achieving the actual environmental objectives, and this is
something we discussed at great length with the Air Resources
Board and with the Economic and Allocation Advisory Committee.
Larry Gould who chairs it from Stanford. That a cap-and-trade
program in California would have been sufficient to achieve the
goals of AB-32.
Adding the Clean Energy Standard to it serves only to limit
the choices that utilities have for what kind of energy they
are going to use to meet that standard, and it forces utilities
to bear more of the burden.
Ms. Lofgren. It is interesting, if I can, I have limited
time, I don't want to be abrupt or rude, but the utilities
certainly don't feel that way. In fact, PG&E which is the major
utility and is the utility in my part of the State, pulled out
of the Chamber of Commerce when they didn't support the cap-
and-trade bill that the Congress had.
Dr. Bivens, do you share that point of view? I mean, not
that California is so perfect, we have our challenges, but from
an energy point of view we are making tremendous progress.
Mr. Bivens. That general point of view that California has
been a real leader in keeping energy consumption down relative
to the rest of the country, absolutely, and I will say, you
know, I bet I could construct an absolutely platonic, perfect
energy policy that follows textbook economics and gets us to
exactly where we need to go. That is not the world we live in.
I mean, right now we have just got the market failing every day
to put a price on emissions that harm other economic
stakeholders, and so we should find a second best way to do the
job until we get the platonic ideal.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I think that is correct, and certainly
the State of California has set the standard in many ways by
setting fuel efficiency standards when the Nation would not,
and because it is such a large market, it actually did move
fuel efficiency in the Nation, and we are doing the same thing
with air quality, energy consumption, renewable uses, and the
like.
I want to just switch briefly because I am almost out of
time to the role of basic science research, which there is no
way industry has the funds to do that kind of pre-competitive
pre-commercial research, and I have a very deep concern that if
we don't do adequate investments in basic research, university-
based, or in the national labs, that we are going to have a big
problem in the future and specifically some of the reductions
that are being proposed, for example, the Stanford Linear
Accelerator, which is doing X-ray photography in a way where
they will actually be able to see at a molecular level
photosynthesis, which has tremendous potential in terms of
energy.
What is your take on the budgets, budget discussions on
basic research, Dr. Bivens? What would those cuts do for our
future competitively from a jobs point of view and from an
energy point of view?
Mr. Bivens. Yeah. I pretty much totally agree with you. I
think cutting investments in basic research and a rush to
budget austerity is kind of the definition of penny wise, pound
foolish. I just don't think we should do it.
Ms. Lofgren. Dr. Montgomery, do you have a point of view on
that?
Mr. Montgomery. Yes, I absolutely agree. In fact, that was
what I put into my opening statement to try to emphasize it
more than my written testimony did. Absolutely that the
highest--that as you look at cutting the budget, it is very
important that you protect the level of funding that we are now
putting into basic energy research, not let it get cut.
The problem is that it has generally been starved by
Congress in order to continue funding the subsidies and
deployment of existing technologies, and that is because of the
jobs that that creates. I think we have to----
Ms. Lofgren. Well, there are jobs in basic science
research, too.
Mr. Montgomery. There are, and that is just fine, but don't
lose sight--but don't concentrate so much on jobs that you put
money into things instead of basic.
Ms. Lofgren. I think we are the richest country in the
world. We can do both, and I yield back.
Chairman Broun. The gentlelady yields back.
Now, the chairman recognizes Mr. Hultgren for five minutes.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of
questions, and I am sorry, there is a couple different
committees meeting the same time, and I wish I could have been
here for the whole time, but we will spend more time going over
your testimony and things, but I did want just some
clarification if I could.
And I guess I will, Dr. Montgomery, if I can address this
to you at first, the Administration has made a high profile
effort to invest a significant amount of taxpayer money on
green jobs. How should Congress evaluate various job creation
proposals? Any suggestions that you would have for us?
Mr. Montgomery. Yeah. I would say ignore everything anybody
says about jobs. You should be evaluating programs on their
merits in terms of what do they cost, how do they address a
specific externality or public policy problem, are they going
to be increasing or reducing the cost of energy. The jobs
calculation I think is--the jobs argument is pure smokescreen.
Everybody can argue that they are going to be creating jobs if
you give them money or losing jobs if you don't give them
money. You have to actually look at the merits of what the
money is doing.
Mr. Hultgren. Mr. Kovacs, would you agree with that, and I
guess just kind of a follow-up question. What is the
appropriate cost that we should expect to pay? You know, is it
$100,000 per job or $1 million per job or $10 million per job?
Where do we start making a decision that this is too much, it
is not being effective?
Mr. Kovacs. Well, our research doesn't confirm or deny any
of that, but what it does state factually was that at least in
March of 2010, there were 351 developers around the United
States who were willing to put in $570 billion in direct
investment that would have created roughly about $1.1 trillion
as you have the multiplier effects with about 1.9 million jobs.
And what we are trying to say is the thing that held up
that investment was the fact that departments were challenged
and challenged and challenged, and if you--the goal isn't
necessarily an environmental goal because every kind of
facility was challenged, and 40 percent of the facilities that
were challenged were all renewables. And there are 24 nuclear
and I forget how many transmission, which would actually take
the renewable power from the plains into Minnesota or Chicago.
So you have a pot of money, and you have developers who are
willing to risk their money to build these facilities. So the
easier way to do it is to let the private sector do it, and the
market will begin to sort itself out. Some will get permits,
some won't, but even if you took just one facility per state,
you still get to about $400 billion in direct investment. That
is needed at this time.
Mr. Hultgren. Thanks, Mr. Kovacs, and I agree. It
frustrates me when I see sometimes we are picking winners and
losers or pushing an agenda that the market just doesn't want,
and you know, there are some issues there I think that--so I
appreciate your input there.
Dr. Green, if I could ask you, would you--are there other
federal efforts that could be more efficient--that could just
work more efficiently to help unemployed American and also
stimulate the growth of the green economy? Are there things
that you see that we could be focusing on that you would
recommend?
Mr. Green. I lack the hubris to make suggestions like that.
That would be better asked of someone who was more focused on
sort of how economic stimulus works. I can recommend any of our
economists at AEI for that.
Mr. Hultgren. Great. I will move right next door if I could
with that question, Dr. Kreutzer. If you have any suggestions,
are there things, you know, federal efforts that could be more
efficiently used to help people who are unemployed other than
some of these green jobs initiatives?
Mr. Kreutzer. Yeah. Well, let's look at some of the things.
First of all, we could have a separate discussion about the
general benefit of federal funding of research, but the
Stimulus Package doesn't fit that. We are trying to promote the
economy. In the Stimulus Package they had a carve out of $140
million for climate data modeling. I checked with
climatologists. They didn't know any unemployed climate data
modelers.
We had a $5 billion program for weatherization. The state
auditor in New Jersey, Stephen Eells, looked at the money that
was being spent in New Jersey. Five percent of the funding was
spent documented on nothing, close to ten percent they couldn't
even tell where it had been spent, eight percent was overspent.
They spent, you know, $22 on a light bulb that cost $1.50.
In short, out of 5 billion if you use that ratio, 1 billion
is wasted. So you could do a lot better stimulus with the
economy by not wasting billions of dollars by not ramping up
money for people that are already employed.
When it comes to the impact, there was a debate earlier on
whether we had the studies that Dr. Green cited were peer
reviewed, as though they didn't matter if they weren't, but
here is a statement from the Congressional Budget Office, okay,
last year on the impact of policies to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions on employment. This is a quote. ``In particular, job
losses in the industries that shrink would lower unemployment,
excuse me, would lower employment more than job gains in other
industries would increase employment, thereby raising the
overall unemployment rate.''
So it is not fossil fuel funded researchers that are coming
up with this. This is very general, consistent from economists.
We had a panel at the Heritage Foundation in September of 2009.
We had economists from the EIA, we had economists from the EPA,
we had economists from the Congressional Budget Office, we had
economists from the Brookings Institution. All of them
analyzing the employment and the simulative impact of Waxman-
Markey. None of them found that it stimulated the economy.
The debate was entirely over how much did it cost. Nobody
found economic growth from that. The question is is it worth
that? That is a reasonable debate to have, but you can't
pretend that it is free.
Mr. Hultgren. I am out of time. Thank you very much. I
yield back.
Chairman Broun. The gentleman's time has expired.
I want to thank the witnesses for you all's valuable
testimony here today. It has been very enlightening, and I
thank the members for your questions.
Members of the subcommittee have additional questions for
the witnesses, and I will ask all of you all to respond to
those questions in writing. The record will remain open for two
weeks for additional comments from members, and if you would,
please get those answers in writing back to us within that two-
week period.
The witnesses are excused and----
Ms. Edwards. Mr. Chairman, I just have a question. I would
ask unanimous consent that we be allowed to include materials
for the record that were shared with the majority staff prior
to the hearing.
Chairman Broun. Okay. I think that has been agreed to. So
ordered.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you.
[The materials follow:]

Chairman Broun. Anything else? Okay. Witnesses excused. The
hearing is now adjourned, and thank you all very much.
[Whereupon, at 4:05 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Kenneth Green, Resident Scholar at the American
Enterprise Institute

Responses by Dr. David Kreutzer, Research Fellow in Energy, Economics,
and Climate Change, The Heritage Foundation

Responses by Dr. David W. Montgomery, Vice President, NERA Economic
Consulting

Responses by Mr. William Kovacs, Senior Vice President, Environment,
Technology, & Regulatory Affairs, U.S. Chamber of Commerce



