- NSF MAJOR RESEARCH EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES MANAGEMENT: ENSURING FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

NSF MAJOR RESEARCH EQUIPMENT
AND FACILITIES MANAGEMENT:
ENSURING FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, MARCH 8, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-69

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

73-127PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             PAUL D. TONKO, New York
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               JERRY McNERNEY, California
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
Tennessee                        HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Research and Science Education

HON. MO BROOKS, Alabama, Chair
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       PAUL D. TONKO, New York
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Thursday, March 8, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Mo Brooks, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Research and Science Education, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................    17
Written Statement............................................    18

Statement by Representative Daniel Lipinski, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Research and Science Education,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    18
Written Statement............................................    20

Witnesses:

Dr. Cora Marrett, Deputy Director, National Science Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    22
Written Statement............................................    24

Dr. Jose-Marie Griffiths, Chairman, Subcommittee on Facilities,
National Science Board; Vice President of Academic Affairs,
Bryant University
Oral Statement...............................................    34
Written Statement............................................    36

Mr. James H. Yeck, IceCube Project Director, University of
Wisconsin-Madison
Oral Statement...............................................    43
Written Statement............................................    45

Dr. Tony Beasley, COO/Project Manager, Neon, Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    58
Written Statement............................................    60

Dr. Tim Cowles, Vice President and Director, Ocean Observing,
Consortium for Ocean Leadership
Oral Statement...............................................    67
Written Statement............................................    69

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Cora Marrett, Deputy Director, National Science Foundation...    88

Dr. Jose-Marie Griffiths, Chairman, Subcommittee on Facilities,
National Science Board; Vice President of Academic Affairs,
Bryant University..............................................    98

Mr. James H. Yeck, IceCube Project Director, University of
Wisconsin-Madison..............................................   102

Dr. Tony Beasley, COO/Project Manager, Neon, Inc.................   103

Dr. Tim Cowles, Vice President and Director, Ocean Observing,
Consortium for Ocean Leadership................................   104

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Dr. Cora Marrett, Deputy Director, National Science Foundation...   106

NSF MAJOR RESEARCH EQUIPMENT AND
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT:
ENSURING FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY
AND ACCOUNTABILITY

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 8, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Science Education,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mo Brooks
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Brooks. The Subcommittee on Research and Science
Education will come to order.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``NSF Major Research
Equipment and Facilities Management: Ensuring Fiscal
Responsibility and Accountability.'' The purpose of today's
hearing is to examine the management and operations of major
research equipment and facilities' construction--MREFC is the
acronym--projects at the National Science Foundation. I now
recognize myself for five minutes for an opening statement.
I am pleased to welcome all of our witnesses to discuss the
oversight of NSF's major research equipment and facilities
management from basic concept design through post-construction
operations and maintenance. I look to my colleague, Mr.
Lipinski, and my fellow Subcommittee members on both sides of
the aisle to work with me to continue to ensure the
Subcommittee performs its legislative, oversight, and
investigative duties with due diligence on matters within its
jurisdiction throughout the 112th Congress and appreciate their
valued experience and insights.
Investments in various multi-user research facilities such
as vessels, astronomical observatories, particle accelerators,
the United States Antarctic stations, seismic observatories,
and many others comprise approximately 15 percent of NSF's
portfolio. Additional components of the infrastructure
portfolio include large datasets based on NSF-supported
surveys, the provision of shared-use equipment for academic
researchers, and interdisciplinary centers.
Under the Major Research Equipment and Facilities
Construction (MREFC) account, large multi-year projects are
funded that would be too expensive for a specific Directorate
to take up on its own. MREFC projects focus solely on the
construction of major equipment and facilities. The science
driving the projects and the operations and maintenance once
construction is completed are funded through separate NSF
budget accounts.
Over the past ten years, NSF has worked to establish and
refine the practices for launching new MREFC projects,
overseeing construction, and the transition to managing the
operations and maintenance of the equipment and facilities.
These practices have lead to greater involvement by the
National Science Board and a clear understanding of how MREFC
projects are prioritized in difficult economic times. While
these major equipment and facilities support NSF's larger goal
of ensuring the United States maintains its competitive edge in
science by promoting global leadership in advancing research,
education, and innovation, it is imperative that appropriate
oversight be executed to guarantee the greatest return on
taxpayer investments.
I have said this before and will echo the sentiment again
today--America faces unsustainable budget deficits that
constitute our greatest economic and national security threat.
This leaves absolutely no room for government waste, even
within America's most prized programs and facilities. I look
forward to learning more about what I, and my colleagues on the
Research and Science Education Committee, can do to pave a more
responsible path for America's future by way of supporting
these important endeavors.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Lipinski from the great State
of Illinois for an opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brooks follows:]

Prepared Statement of Chairman Mo Brooks
Good morning and welcome. I am pleased to welcome all of our
witnesses to discuss the oversight of NSF's major research equipment
and facilities management from basic concept design through post-
construction operations and maintenance.
I look to my colleague, Mr. Lipinski, and my fellow Subcommittee
Members on both sides of the aisle to work with me to continue to
ensure the Subcommittee performs its legislative, oversight, and
investigative duties with due diligence on matters within its
jurisdiction throughout the 112th Congress and appreciate their valued
experience and insights.
Investments in various multi-user research facilities such as
vessels, astronomical observatories, particle accelerators, the U.S.
Antarctic stations, seismic observatories, and many others comprise
approximately 15 percent of NSF's portfolio. Additional components of
the infrastructure portfolio include large datasets based on NSF-
supported surveys, the provision of shared-use equipment for academic
researchers, and interdisciplinary centers.
Under the Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction
(MREFC) account, large multi-year projects are funded that would be too
expensive for a specific Directorate to take up on its own. MREFC
projects focus solely on the construction of major equipment and
facilities. The science driving the projects and the operations and
maintenance once construction is completed are funded from separate NSF
budget accounts.
Over the last ten years NSF has worked to establish and refine the
practices for launching new MREFC projects, overseeing construction,
and the transition to managing the operations and maintenance of the
equipment and facilities. These practices have lead to greater
involvement by the National Science Board and a clear understanding of
how MREFC projects are prioritized in difficult economic times.
While these major equipment and facilities support NSF's larger
goal of ensuring the United States maintains its competitive edge in
science by promoting global leadership in advancing research, education
and innovation, it is imperative that appropriate oversight be executed
to guarantee the greatest return on taxpayer investments.
I have said this before and will echo the sentiment again today--
America faces unsustainable budget deficits that constitute our
greatest economic and national security threat. This leaves absolutely
no room for government waste--even within America's most prized
programs and facilities. I look forward to learning more about what I,
and my colleagues on the Research and Science Education Subcommittee,
can do to pave a more responsible path for America's future by way of
supporting these important endeavors.

Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Chairman Brooks. Thank you for
holding this hearing today.
Ten years is probably too long a period between hearings on
the important topic of how NSF manages and oversees its large
facilities over their full life cycle, especially given the
many changes of the MREFC process in that time. So I am pleased
that we are having this hearing this morning and grateful to
witnesses who are taking the time to help us understand where
we stand with MREFC and what oversight issues remain.
When I was Subcommittee Chair in the last Congress, we held
a hearing on the role of NSF in supporting university research
infrastructure. That was a somewhat different topic but still
part of the larger question of how we balance support for
research infrastructure with support for research grants.
Remaining a global leader in scientific R&D requires more than
intellectual freedom in grant funding. Cutting edge research
requires state-of-the-art research facilities and we can no
longer take it for granted that the best scientists want to
live and work in the United States.
In a 2003 report on science and engineering infrastructure,
the National Science Board recommended that the share of the
NSF budget dedicated to research infrastructure should fall in
the range of 22 to 27 percent but closer to the high end of
that range. While I am pleased that the fiscal year 2013 budget
request restores funding to MREFC projects after several years
of cuts as a percentage of the budget, funding for it still
remains at the bottom end of that range. This can at least in
part be explained by the blip in ARRA funding in 2009 that
reduced pressure on out-year budgets for MREFC and the fact
that there is no new proposals for fiscal year 2013. However,
this remains an area of concern for me and one I will continue
to closely--follow closely in my leadership role on this
Subcommittee.
Returning to the specific topic of this hearing, major
research facilities management, there are a couple of issues I
am hoping to learn more about. First, I would like to
understand how MREFC policies have evolved in the last few
years, including the role of the National Science Board and
what instigated these changes. In particular, I would like to
know what we have learned from the Deep Underground Science and
Engineering Laboratory, or DUSEL. While I believe that the
December 2010 decision by the Board with respect to DUSEL was
probably right--was the right one for the foundation, letting
the project advance as far as it did before terminating it was
certainly harmful and wasteful. So I would like to know what
policies have been put in place since then to avoid a repeat of
the situation.
Second, I would like to address the ongoing dispute between
the Inspector General and NSF management with respect to
contingency funds. I will begin by saying that I am comfortable
with the definition NSF is using for contingency funds and it
appears to be consistent with the private sector standard for
project management and with practices at other agencies. As
someone trained in systems engineering, I also think that
calculating a contingency total based on the ensemble mean of
all foreseeable risks across all aspects of a project and
incorporating that into the total project cost is the right
approach. But the IG has raised important questions regarding
whether there are sufficient controls over draw-downs from the
contingency fund and whether the funds should be held at the
Agency or with the project.
I think there are good arguments on both sides of this
issue, and I worry also that the projects currently underway
are caught in this dispute between the IG and NSF management. I
would like to hear how the IG and NSF are working to resolve
their differences.
Finally, as stewards of taxpayer money, it is incumbent
upon us to ask whether it is appropriate that any funds left
over due to outstanding management or just plain luck should be
returned to the NSF where re-scoping of that particular project
can be balanced against other agency priorities. I know that
NSF and Mr. Yeck are proud of how the IceCube Project came in
under budget and rightly so. Mr. Yeck, from everything I know,
from what you did, you did an exemplary job with the project
under extraordinary conditions. I would like to learn more
about what IceCube was able to accomplish with those leftover
funds, but also ask the broader question of whether this is the
most appropriate use of NSF dollars given that the most
important science was already prioritized in the original scope
and design of IceCube.
Now, I don't have answers to these questions, and I hope
our witnesses will share their insights. But I do think it is
critical that we align incentives with prudent project
management and outcomes that are most appropriate in terms of
both the science and the budget. Overall, I am very pleased
with how far the Agency has come in the last few years in
strengthening management and oversight of its large facilities
and I look forward to using this hearing to explore where
issues may remain and what the best way is to move forward.
And I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lipinski follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski
Thank you Chairman Brooks. Ten years is probably too long a period
between hearings on the important topic of how NSF manages and oversees
its large facilities over their full lifecycle, especially given the
many changes in the MREFC process in that time. So I am pleased we are
having this hearing this morning and grateful to the witnesses who are
taking the time to help us understand where we stand with MREFC and
what oversight issues remain.
When I was subcommittee chair in the last Congress, we held a
hearing on the role of NSF in supporting university research
infrastructure. That was a somewhat different topic, but still part of
the larger question of how we balance support for research
infrastructure with support for research grants. Remaining a global
leader in scientific R&D requires more than intellectual freedom and
grant funding. Cutting edge research requires state-of-the-art research
facilities, and we can no longer take it for granted that the best
scientists want to live and work in the United States.
In a 2003 report on science and engineering infrastructure, the
National Science Board recommended that the share of the NSF budget
dedicated to research infrastructure should fall in the range of 22-27
percent, but closer to the high-end of that range. While I am pleased
that the FY 2013 budget request restores funding to MREFC projects
after several years of cuts, as a percentage of the budget, funding for
facilities remains at the bottom end of that range. This can at least
in part be explained by the blip in ARRA funding in 2009 that reduced
pressure on outyear budgets for MREFC, and the fact that there is no
new-start proposed for FY 2013. However, this remains an area of
concern for me and one I will continue to follow closely in my
leadership role on this subcommittee.
Returning to the specific topic of this hearing, major research
facilities management, there are a couple of issues I'm hoping to learn
more about.
First, I'd like to understand how MREFC policies have evolved in
the last few years, including the role of the National Science Board,
and what instigated these changes. In particular, I would like to know
what we learned from the Deep Underground Science and Engineering
Laboratory, or DUSEL. While I believe that the December 2010 decision
by the Board with respect to DUSEL was probably the right one for the
Foundation, letting the project advance as far is it did before
terminating it was harmful and wasteful. So I'd like to know what
policies have been put in place since then avoid a repeat of this
situation.
Second, I'd like to address the ongoing dispute between the
Inspector General and NSF management with respect to contingency funds.
I'll begin by saying that I'm comfortable with the definition NSF is
using for contingency funds, as it appears to be consistent with the
private sector standard for project management and with practices at
other agencies. As someone trained in systems engineering, I also think
that calculating a contingency total based on the ensemble mean of all
forseeable risks across all aspects of a project and incorporating that
into the total project cost is the right approach.
But the IG has raised important questions regarding whether there
are sufficient controls over drawdowns from the contingency fund and
whether the fund should be held at the agency or with the project. I
think there are good arguments on both sides of this issue, and I worry
also that the projects currently underway are caught in this dispute
between the IG and NSF management. I would like to hear how the IG and
the NSF are working to resolve their differences.
Finally, as stewards of the taxpayer money, it is incumbent upon us
to ask whether it is appropriate that any funds left over due to
outstanding management or just plain luck should be returned to NSF,
where re-scoping of that particular project can be balanced against
other agency priorities.
I know that NSF and Mr. Yeck are proud of how the IceCube project
came in under budget, and rightly so. Mr. Yeck, from everything I know
you did an exemplary job with that project under extraordinary
conditions. I'd like to learn more about what IceCube was able to
accomplish with those ``leftover'' funds, but also ask the broader
question of whether this is the most appropriate use of NSF dollars
given that the most important science was already prioritized in the
original scope and design of IceCube.
While I don't have answers to these questions--and I hope our
witnesses will share their insights --I do think it's critical that we
align incentives with prudent project management and outcomes that are
the most appropriate in terms of both the science and the budget.
Overall, I am very pleased with how far the agency has come in the
last few years in strengthening management and oversight of its large
facilities, but I look forward to using this hearing to explore where
issues may remain.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
If there are members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time, I would like to introduce our witnesses for
today's hearing. Dr. Cora Marrett is Deputy Director of the
National Science Foundation. Since January 2009, Dr. Marrett
has served as NSF's acting Director, acting Deputy Director and
Senior Advisor until her confirmation as Deputy Director in May
2011.
Dr. Jose-Marie Griffiths is the Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Facilities of the National Science Board, NSB.
Dr. Griffiths was appointed to the NSB in 2006. She is
currently Vice President for Academic Affairs and University
Professor at Bryant University in Smithfield, Rhode Island.
Mr. James Yeck is Director of the IceCube Neutrino
Observatory located at the South Pole. That is a pretty good
name, IceCube, for the South Pole. That is clever. Who came up
with that? We will get into that in the questions. Mr. Yeck
joined the University of Wisconsin-Madison as the IceCube
Project Director in 2003. Previously, Mr. Yeck served as Deputy
Project Director and Assistant Project Director for the
National Synchrotron Light Source II project and as the Federal
Project Director for the U.S. Large Hadron Collider
Construction Project. Now, that is a mouthful. IceCube is
easier to say.
Dr. Tony Beasley is the Chief Operating Officer and Project
Manager of the National Ecological Observatory Network. Dr.
Beasley has worked as an astronomer post-doc, staff member, and
Senior Manager at the U.S. National Radio Astronomy and Project
Manager for CARMA and ALMA millimeter telescopes.
And then finally, we have Dr. Tim Cowles. He is the Project
Director and Principal Investigator of the Ocean Observatories
Initiative, OOI, and serves as Vice President, Director, Ocean
Observing activities at the Consortium for Ocean Leadership.
Previously, Dr. Cowles served as Associate Dean and Interim
Dean of the College of Oceanic and Atmospheric Sciences at
Oregon State and served on the Leadership Council of the
University National Oceanographic Laboratory System.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each, after which the members of the Committee
will have five minutes each to ask questions.
As an aside, we are scheduled to vote today at
approximately 11:15. That is the advanced notice we have.
Hopefully, we will be able to finish this hearing by then, but
if not, as circumstances warrant, we will suspend and come back
after the votes.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Cora Marrett. Dr.
Marrett, you are recognized for your five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. CORA MARRETT, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
SCIENCE FOUNDATION

Dr. Marrett. Thank you very much.
Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski, and distinguished
members of the staff, thank you for inviting me to participate
in this hearing for I am pleased to have the opportunity to
discuss the National Science Foundation's large facilities
process with you.
As you well know, NSF is the primary federal agency
supporting research at the frontiers of knowledge across all
fields of science and engineering and all levels of science and
engineering education. Its mission, vision, and goals are
designed to maintain and strengthen the vitality of the U.S.
science and engineering enterprise. As I start my remarks, I
want to thank Congress on behalf of the Foundation for the
sustained engagement and support you have shown NSF even in
difficult economic times.
Throughout its 60-year history, NSF has contributed to
maintaining U.S. leadership in science and engineering research
by enabling the creation of advanced instrumentation and world-
class, multi-user facilities for the science and engineering
research community. Each NSF facility is chosen carefully to
push technology and innovation to a new frontier of scientific
discovery. In addition to enabling immense scientific return,
these facilities serve as platforms to prepare the next
generation of scientists and engineers and contribute to the
need for high technology and services necessary for economic
growth and innovation.
You will hear today about a few of our newest major
facilities, about, as you have already mentioned, IceCube, the
world's first neutrino observatory which has just opened a new
window on the engines that power galaxies and other
astrophysical processes throughout the universe. You will hear
about the Ocean Observatories Initiatives, or OOI, and the
National Ecological Observatory Network, NEON. These are our
newest facilities under construction.
OOI and NEON are representative of a new transformational
class of facilities for the 21st century. These are cyber-
enabled distributed observing systems that acquire and stream
scientific data on vast geographic scales. These are just a few
examples of our facility portfolio, a portfolio which spans the
gamut of research disciplines from physics and astronomy,
engineering and material science, to earth and ocean sciences,
and polar and biological sciences.
Major facility projects require special funding mechanisms
that allow for multi-year construction. The Major Research
Equipment and Facilities Construction account, or MREFC, was
established by Congress in 1995 to support the acquisition,
construction, and commissioning of large-scale facilities
projects. Eligibility for MREFC funding is made on a case-by-
case basis and is not solely dependent on cost but on
scientific promise. Indeed, NSF requires that each MREFC
candidate project represent an outstanding opportunity to
enable breakthrough research and innovation, as well as
education and broader impacts.
Mr. Chairman, NSF takes its facility stewardship
responsibilities very seriously. Implementation of the largest
NSF multi-user facilities requires investments of hundreds of
millions of dollars to ensure success at this major scale of
investment. NSF has strong processes in place for overseeing
the planning, construction, and operation of its facilities and
for managing our overall facility portfolio.
As you will hear shortly from Dr. Griffiths, the National
Science Board also provides extensive guidance, review, and
concurrence on NSF decision-making for facilities. NSF also
works very closely with our Inspector General, the Office of
Management and Budget, and in partnership with Congress to
ensure that we are working to the very highest standards.
My written testimony outlines our processes from start to
finish, including recent enhancements we have made to our
procedures for facility planning and oversight.
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for the opportunity to appear
before the Subcommittee to speak to you on this important
topic. At an appropriate time I will be pleased to answer any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Marrett follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Marrett.
Next, the Chair recognizes Dr. Griffiths for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOSE-MARIE GRIFFITHS,

CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON FACILITIES,

NATIONAL SCIENCE BOARD, VICE PRESIDENT OF

ACADEMIC AFFAIRS, BRYANT UNIVERSITY

Dr. Griffiths. Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski,
and distinguished members of the staff, I appreciate this
opportunity to testify before you today regarding the role of
the National Science Board in guidance and oversight of
facility investments at the National Science Foundation.
Projects being considered for funding under the Major
Research Equipments and Facility Construction account are high-
profile, high-cost activities for unique, cutting-edge
facilities. They require considerable research and development
in the design stage. And since these types of projects require
significant taxpayer funds, the Board and the Foundation invest
substantial efforts to review scientific needs, construction
costs, and operations and maintenance costs for projects in or
being considered for inclusion under the MREFC account.
In my time on the Board, the Agency has made great strides
in overseeing both the design and the construction of these
critical facilities. The Board's role in oversight of the MREFC
account includes approval of NSF-proposed projects for funding
in future budgets, the funding priority list for previously-
approved-but-not-yet-funded MREFC projects, and approval for
the release of Congressionally appropriated MREFC funds to NSF
awardees.
Current policy is for the Board to concur on the readiness
of projects to proceed to the final design stage in the MREFC
account. The most recent enhancement to this policy approved by
the Board in February 2010 is the timeline for the Board's
MREFC process, which the Board now receives in association with
its annual facilities portfolio review.
The Board established the Subcommittee on Facilities in
2009 to oversee the Foundation's portfolio of facilities
projects. The Subcommittee provides guidance to the Board on
strategic planning for the NSF-funded research equipment and
facilities portfolio. This guidance includes an annual review
of existing MREFC and R&RA (research and related activities),
large and mid-sized research facilities and infrastructure, and
their impact on long-term budgets within the Foundation. The
Subcommittee on Facilities reviews all phases of its facility
design, development, construction, operations, and retirement.
As part of its review, the Board conducts a joint Committee
on Programs and Plans and Committee on Strategy and Budget
meeting in February to hear details of the NSF facilities plans
for projects anticipated in the upcoming year. The plan
contains information about the planning and budgeting process
for facilities under construction, including a brief status
report on those projects already funded under the MREFC
account.
After the facility plan discussion, the Board conducts an
annual portfolio review of projects at its May meeting. The
objectives of this review are to examine the interrelationships
between the proposed facility development and other activities
across the Foundation to help guide the appropriate balance of
investment in infrastructure and research. The review also
examines the budgetary consequences, operations costs, and
future liabilities of further development and guides NSF in
managing risk and also in being able to respond to
opportunities. It also can guide policies and recommend
specific action for the coordination and optimization of
partnerships between NSF and other agencies, private
foundations, and foreign entities in support of major
facilities.
NSF's major multi-user facilities and its MREFC program are
integral to the NSF investment portfolio. Selecting the best
projects, providing adequate program management, and oversight
for the operation of such facilities are all substantial
challenges. These challenges must be met while ensuring that we
continue to provide adequate balanced support for the
individual research or proposals for potentially transformative
research.
On behalf of the National Science Board and the science and
engineering research and education communities, I would like to
thank the members of the Subcommittee for your long-term
recognition of and commitment to support for the National
Science Foundation and we look forward to continuing our
productive working relationship with you and service to the
Nation.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Griffiths follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Griffiths.
The Chair next recognizes Mr. Yeck for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES H. YECK,

ICECUBE PROJECT DIRECTOR,

UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN-MADISON

Mr. Yeck. Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski, and
distinguished members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify. My name is Mr. Jim Yeck, and I am the
Project Director of IceCube, an NSF MREFC Project that created
the IceCube Neutrino Observatory. My testimony provides an
overview of the IceCube project from its beginning and responds
to questions from the Subcommittee.
IceCube is a particle detector embedded in a cubic
kilometer of deep, very transparent South Pole ice that was
designed to detect high-energy neutrinos from nearby and across
the universe. The science capability of the observatory greatly
exceeds that of previous detectors and those currently under
construction, and thus, its capacity for transformational
discovery is very significant.
The IceCube MREFC project was proposed in 1999 and final
approvals for constructions were given in 2004. Installation of
detector instrumentation started in 2005 and concluded in
December of 2010. Final project closeout will be completed this
year. The total MREFC cost was $279.5 million with NSF
providing 242.1 million and funding partners in Belgium,
Germany, and Sweden providing support valued at 37.4 million.
The bottom line is that the project was completed at cost
and on schedule and that the detector exceeds its original
performance and sensitivity goals. A series of peer reviews
organized by NSF and the National Academy of Sciences concluded
that IceCube was a worthwhile MREFC investment. Construction
plans matured and eventually the MREFC project was ready for
construction. This six-year process concluded with approval to
begin full-scale construction by the National Science Board in
April 2004.
The primary strengths of the approval process were the
quality of the external peer review, the close and effective
coordination between the NSF's Office of Polar Programs and the
Division of Physics, strong institutional commitment and
engagement by the University of Wisconsin-Madison, and the
international interest and support of the project. The primary
weaknesses of the approval process were the general environment
of uncertainty, the potential for discontinuities in financial
support, and the fact that both the NSF and UW-Madison were
still maturing in terms of their large project experience and
capabilities.
An approval process that is stretched out or unclear in its
outcome creates an environment of uncertainty that is difficult
to manage at the facility level. Construction and operations
are managed under the terms of a cooperative agreement between
the NSF and UW-Madison. The partnership between NSF and UW-
Madison provides the management accountability necessary to
ensure that resources are used efficiently and that goals are
consistently achieved. Key management arrangements used to
manage IceCube include these clear lines of accountability and
authority from NSF to UW-Madison to IceCube; detailed scope,
schedule, and budget definition; explicit cost and schedule
contingency derived from risk assessment; regular reviews by
external committees; tracking and progress reporting against
established milestones, budget, and performance metrics; and
routine oversight by NSF, UW-Madison, and the foreign funding
agencies.
The essential tool of project management is to define an
explicit contingency budget within a total project cost
baseline. The IceCube project performance baseline included a
22 percent contingency budget. In order to create this
contingency budget within funding constraints, the base cost
estimates were squeezed and the project scope was reduced
creating an incentive for all parties to control cost in order
to restore the original scope.
The management flexibility enabled by contingency
expenditures improved scheduled performance and resulted in
cost savings and ultimately the restoration of the original
project scope. Peer reviews organized by NSF were absolutely
essential to IceCube's success. These reviews were typically on
an annual basis and ensured transparency, early identification
of critical issues, and project plans that included input from
outside experts. Performance metrics were developed to ensure
efficient use of American taxpayer dollars. Early operation
results are excellent with 98.5 percent of the censors taking
data and detector uptime at over 99 percent.
The biggest challenges with the MREFC projects are often
the transition phases--R&D and project definition into a
construction start, the ramp-up into full construction, the
efficient ramp-down of the construction effort, and the
transition into operations. Discontinuities in funding and
support can be detrimental as the facility managers strive to
maintain a team of talented and motivated people, which is
essential to the program's success.
The stewardship of a large facility requires engagement,
problem-solving, and support over decades. Facility stewardship
requires an active role by the funding agency and involves
joint ownership and partnership with the facility managers. The
MREFC program has matured significantly over the last decade
since IceCube was originally proposed. There is excellent
sharing of experiences, lessons learned, and the ingredients to
success.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy
to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Yeck follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Yeck.
The Chair next recognizes Dr. Beasley for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF TONY BEASLEY,

CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER/PROJECT MANAGER, NEON, INC.

Dr. Beasley. Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski, and
distinguished members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify.
My name is Dr. Tony Beasley and I am the Project Manager
for the National Ecological Observatory Network and Chief
Operating Officer of NEON, Inc. I appreciate the opportunity to
provide you an overview of the NEON project today. My testimony
will also address questions about the NSF MREFC program
directed to me by the Committee.
I would like to begin with a scientific motivation for
NEON. Living systems on this plant are experiencing some of the
greatest rates of change in history. The basic scientific
knowledge needed to understand these changes on human scales--
that is regional to continental scales--calls for standardized
physical and biological measurements on meter to multiple-
kilometer scales. Creating a national observatory to gather
that information is the goal of NEON.
In 1998, the National Science Board's Taskforce on the
Environment identified NEON as a potential major facility, and
after public hearings and discussions with the research
community, the NSB qualified NEON as a potential MREFC project
in August of 1999. Four years later, a National Academy of
Sciences study also recommended the establishment of a national
ecological observatory. Following these recommendations, the
NEON project team began design and development efforts and
passed through the MREFC process and reviews during 2006 to
2009. In May of 2010, the National Science Board approved NEON
construction and the NSF fully funded NEON construction in
August of 2011 after authorization by Congress. From concept to
start of construction was approximately 12 years, and we are
recently underway.
The MREFC process reviews all aspects of facility projects,
including design, risk, cost estimates, and organizational
capabilities. It examines whether the project will meet the
scientific objectives of the facility in a safe, cost-effective
and low-risk manner, and includes off-ramps where projects can
be halted. Between late 2006 and early 2010, more than 16 major
reviews of NEON construction and operation plans took place
involving more than 100 scientists, engineers, project managers
and administrators from the research and other communities.
NEON's goals and implementation complement efforts in other
organizations and we have worked extensively with state and
federal partners to ensure our plans are understood and to
identify new opportunities to use NEON data for resource
management and other relevant purposes. At the project level,
we have a continuous dialogue underway with the NSF reporting
progress, issues, opportunities to guide facility construction
and to allow project performance monitoring. Annual reviews of
the project by external experts ensure that resources are being
effectively used and progress is on track.
Over the past decade, the MREFC process has become a well
defined framework within which a facility can be conceived,
designed, planned, reviewed, and constructed. The process is
constituent with those used by the Department of Energy, NASA,
and other large organizations to construct major facilities and
experiments. In my opinion, it is a reasonable framework, but I
note that individual outcomes in the process will vary as
projects are subject to different risks and sensitivities to
external circumstances.
There are areas for development. The MREFC process
currently focuses on domestic facilities like those represented
here today, but the scale of scientific research has grown
rapidly over the past two decades, and large international
facilities may be needed to address the important scientific
issues of tomorrow. The NSF Large Facilities Office has
recently spearheaded efforts to improve community understanding
of the challenges of international partnership and over time I
would expect that the MREFC processes will be expanded to
include interfaces to the international analogs.
In summary, the field of ecology includes many complex
scientific problems that increasingly can be addressed by new
technologies, networking, and research collaboration styles,
and NEON's goal is to facilitate this new path. The MREFC
process provides an objective and effective management
framework for facility construction and its rigor has
undoubtedly improved NEON's project definition and performance.
We look forward to continuing work with the Large
Facilities Office, the National Science Foundation, and
Congress to make a national ecological observatory a reality.
Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, thank you
once again for the opportunity to testify and I would be happy
to discuss any issues the Committee may wish to explore.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Beasley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Beasley.
The Chair next recognizes Dr. Cowles for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF TIM COWLES,

VICE PRESIDENT AND DIRECTOR,

OCEAN OBSERVING, CONSORTIUM FOR OCEAN LEADERSHIP

Dr. Cowles. Thank you, Chairman Brooks, and Ranking Member
Lipinski, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee and
staff. Thank you for this opportunity to expand upon the
comments already made and describe the Ocean Observatory's
initiative and how it fits within the family of MREFC projects
and has adjusted to and adapted to the processes now in place.
I think a good starting point for our--my testimony is to
refer to the two quotations that are behind you on the wall,
which both refer to vision. Observatories provide the
opportunity for us to open new windows onto the natural world.
It is only through the opportunity for scientists to open new
windows on scales previously unavailable to them that we can
see further into the future and use the observatories as
leverage to ask compelling new questions for science. So it is
within that context that all of us at the table here are trying
to push forward with observing science.
The Ocean Observatories Initiative represents a midpoint of
the three programs at the table today--NEON just getting
started, IceCube well into the operational mode, the Ocean
Observatories Initiative is about halfway through the 5-1/2
year construction period. The Ocean Observatories Initiative
consists and will consist of a very sophisticated cyber-network
of ocean instrumentation--some of it fixed in place, some of it
mobile and robotic--that spans multiple locations in the
world's oceans, coastal sites, and seafloor capability. The
transformative nature of the OOI has direct and short-term
societal benefits to address aspects of coastal ecosystem
health, ocean circulation, climate variability, and a range of
topics around seafloor activity and geodynamics. Those short-
term benefits lead later to long-term forecasting improvements
over a range of ocean processes.
The MREFC experience for the Ocean Observatories Initiative
is similar to the points that Mr. Yeck and Dr. Beasley have
already made. A sequence of intensive peer-reviewed processes
from initiation through final approval by the NSF through the
National Science Board forges a level of rigor in the project
team that is essential for both the construction and transition
into the operational phase. For the OOI, the initial initiation
or inception of the idea of a major ocean observatory system
had its birth in the late 1980s. Many community workshops and
panels met. There were reports at the national level that
supported the concept of an extensive ocean observing system.
In 2000, the NSB recommended that the idea of an ocean
observatory system was worth further planning. In 2004, the
National Science Foundation funded the opening of a project
office for planning. Beginning in 2006, conceptual network
design progressed through preliminary design reviews, and then
final design reviews in late 2008 and early 2009 resulting in
project approval in 2009 and construction initiation under
stimulus or ARRA funding in September of 2009.
The project has benefitted extensively from the process
imposed by the NSF. We work very closely with the NSF on
reporting and oversight. We implement; the NSF provides the
oversight. The interaction of the project and the NSF and the
external community is critical in the success of the
observatory. And I would like to stress the point that the OOI
as a product of the MREFC process builds upon a partnership
between public, private, industrial, and the NSF. That
integration of complementary capabilities is a very effective
use of public funds.
So I welcome the opportunity once again to discuss the OOI
with you and I certainly will be available to answer any
questions you have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Cowles follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Cowles.
I want to thank the panel for their testimony. Reminding
members that committee rules limit questioning to five minutes,
the Chair will at this point open the round of questions. The
Chair recognizes himself for five minutes.
My first question is for Dr. Griffiths. The issue of
contingency continues to be an area of concern not only for the
National Science Foundation Inspector General but for Congress
as well. You testified that the Board receives updates on the
discussions between the Inspector General and NSF senior
management. In that vein, I have three questions.
First, does the Board have an opinion? Second, can you
expand on the Board's role, if any, in the ongoing discussions
and actions around this issue? And third, does the Board plan
to take any action on this issue? So first is opinion; second,
the Board's role; and third is action.
Dr. Griffiths. Thank you, Chairman Brooks. The first one,
on the Board having an opinion, the Board has spent a lot of
time, particularly the Subcommittee on Facilities and the
Committee on Programs and Plans, looking at how contingency is
defined by the Board. And I will say it took a little while for
us to understand that because of more common uses of--or
multiple uses of the term ``contingency'' in our other
environments. But I think the Board has a tendency to agree
that the definition that is being used is fine. Now, the
question is what are the implications of that definition going
forward? The Board's role in the discussion, we have been--the
Committee on Audit and Oversight has been receiving updates on
the negotiations between NSF management and the Inspector
General's office at every one of our meetings. So every meeting
we have had a report. And we are pleased with the progress made
to date. So at this point we haven't weighed into those
interactions but we are receiving reports.
Chairman Brooks. Second question would be for Dr. Marrett
and Dr. Griffiths. Choose amongst yourselves who wants to take
first crack at it. For three straight Inspector General semi-
annual reports, Inspector General Auditors have found
unallowable contingency costs for three separate MREFC
projects, $76 million for NEON, $88 million for OOI, and $62
million for ATST. What is the NSF doing to rectify this
continuing problem and what steps are being taken to prevent
similar problems with other projects?
Dr. Marrett. Thank you. I will start. Actually, there is a
question about whether there are problems. I will say that
those audits were of the proposals from particular projects,
not from the actual expenditures once construction has begun.
Thus, we are asking--and I believe the Inspector General's
office is prepared now--to do audits not of the proposals but
of the actual expenditures. The consequences are likely to be
quite different.
I would also elaborate a bit more on what Dr. Griffiths
just said about the very notion of contingency. We know that
for any project there are known risks and that is what the
contingency is to cover, the known risks that are there. Thus,
this is associated with our policy of no cost overrun. So no
project is to go above what those costs are. The contingency is
there to keep it within the bounds, then, of the kinds of costs
that would be associated. Thus, what we are doing in
collaboration with the Office of the Inspector General is
clearing up the understanding that the processes that we use
for contingency are those that are consistent with other
agencies, and industry. Because of the very strong relationship
we have with the wonderful Office of the Inspector General, we
are convinced that we will be able to resolve--what seemingly
are differences, that we are not quite sure are as deep as
might be implied in the semi-annual reports.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Marrett. I am going to move
to Dr. Beasley and Dr. Cowles for a moment.
Would each of you briefly explain your side of the
contingency issue for the $76 million concerning NEON and the
$88 million concerning OOI?
Dr. Beasley. Mr. Chairman, as Dr. Marrett just indicated,
the $76 million in contingency that was identified in the IG
report is all of the contingency of the program at the proposal
level. And so what you are seeing, as Dr. Marrett described, is
not necessarily a difference between execution of the program
and what we said; it is really the fact that our original
proposal produced a risk-adjusted estimate, which included a
contingency. And so they have found all of the contingency to
be unallowable. And so that is the original of the $76 million
number in the IG report.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Beasley. Dr. Cowles?
Dr. Cowles. Yes. Really, the answer is essentially the
same. So when we began examining the construction costs for the
OOI, we evaluated, using industry practice, the risk-based
elements using clear formulae for assessing risk for every item
in the construction and totaled that up and we end up in our
proposal with $88 million. That, as Dr. Beasley said, is not
the expenditure. It is not a number that is automatically
expended. It is there to be drawn upon by the project through
NSF approval process and our own internal controls only when
the risk has to be addressed and mitigated through application
of contingency funds. From a project standpoint, the $88
million for the OOI is an essential part of how we must address
risk through construction. Independent of how the IG looks at
it from a practical, pragmatic standpoint, if we didn't have a
contingency amount in our project budget, the initial budget
would have had to have risk included in the construction costs.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Cowles. I finished my
questions before the five minute mark, but with the answers, we
blew right on by it.
At this point, I will recognize Mr. Lipinski.
Mr. Lipinski. And Mr. Chairman, it's your Subcommittee so
you can go as long as you want I think.
I just want to thank all of our witnesses for their
testimony and thank Mr. Yeck, Dr. Beasley, and Dr. Cowles for
their--the work that they have done. I think what we are--we
know we are looking at--the work that you are doing is looking
at very important scientific questions and what we are trying
to do here is to make sure that we are getting the most out of
the funding and we are doing things in the best way possible.
I want to start out by talking about DUSEL. The NSF's
experience with DUSEL facility clearly indicates that planning
and funding problems can affect not only the construction phase
of MREFC projects but the preliminary design phase as well. And
I think the NSF made the right choice regarding DUSEL but it is
important that the lessons learned from this episode are used
to improve the project evolution process.
So I wanted to ask Dr. Marrett and Dr. Griffiths, can you
discuss the steps that have been taken to improve the process
for the early stages of MREFC projects so that this doesn't
happen again?
Dr. Marrett. Yes, there are three things I would say about
what we have learned from the DUSEL experience. One is that we
have tightened up what we mean by horizon projects; sums but
more importantly perhaps, there is greater engagement early on
of the National Science Board; third, we give systematic
attention now to operations and management, more than had been
the case when we first started looking at a number of the
projects in this account.
I would elaborate a bit more on the role of the Board. The
Board has always had a role with reference to setting
priorities. It wasn't as necessarily involved in the very early
stages when we were talking about conceptual design, moving
from the horizon stage to the conceptual design stage. We now
have the Board engaged at every stage in the process. One of
the things that the Board, in the case of the DUSEL project,
certainly brought to attention was the importance of thinking
about the matter of stewardship. As Dr. Griffiths will
elaborate I am certain, this came to a question of what is the
appropriate agency for stewarding a project of this size? We
remain extremely interested in the science, the engineering
that could emanate, but the question of the infrastructure
itself was the one that was central for the Board's
deliberation. I am sure that Dr. Griffiths will say more on
that.
Dr. Griffiths. Yes. Mr. Lipinski, we had three big concerns
that came up with respect to the DUSEL project. One was the
role of the partners and the stewardship model that wasn't
really clearly defined at the stage at which we were looking at
moving DUSEL forward. The second was the cost and scope of
DUSEL as--inconsistent with the roles and responsibilities of
NSF and the total project. And the third was we were concerned
about NSF investment in underground science needed to be placed
in the context of other international activities.
But as Dr. Marrett has said, we have redefined the Board's
role in the entire MREFC process, so we are in fact actively
engaged at every stage. In particular, we recognize that moving
a project from conceptual design through preliminary design is
a significant investment of taxpayer money. We have focused our
efforts particularly at the post-conceptual design stage. We
have established the Subcommittee on Facilities to conduct an
annual portfolio review at that point in time. Prior to that,
facilities projects were looked at as they came in, one at a
time, and one at a time you could say everything looks good.
What we decided we had to do was to consider any new
facilities project in the context of the existing portfolio of
projects, how it adds, how it maneuvers resources, and in the
context of the R&RA funding for the planning, the operations
and maintenance, and most importantly, the research that the
new facility would enable so that the portfolio review, which
is conducted annually is going to become a major tool for
decision-making for the Board and the Foundation. And that
occurs for all facilities projects at every stage from horizon
to decommissioning where we look at the entire portfolio of
facilities, not just for the MREFC level of funding but
actually all the way down through mid-scale funding as well so
that we have a much better feel for the total portfolio. And we
are currently looking at ways to develop key indicators of the
health of that portfolio. So it is not just to look at the
portfolio as a whole from the Foundation management process as
a whole; we also look at the portfolio from the perspective of
the directorates and the different divisions and the impact
that new facilities will have on their available funding.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. I think it is critical that we
make sure that we are watching, you are watching more closely
from the beginning. And we just--especially in these tight
budget times make sure that we know--especially for the--so the
people understand that these projects are important and we are
doing the best that we can to fund them at the--in the
appropriate way.
So thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Brooks. Dr. Marrett, is the National Science
Foundation requiring more contingency now so that they stay
under their ``no cost overrun'' policy?
Dr. Marrett. If you mean are we requiring more for every
project to have contingency, we are doing that. But if you mean
are we requiring more in the contingency, no. What has to be
there, has got to be specific to each project. What the
contingency amount will be will vary depending on what the
known risks are for any given project. Thus, if you are
interested, we can provide you later, if you would like, how
contingency does vary across projects because that is
consistent with again what the known risks are for a project.
Chairman Brooks. Now, Dr. Marrett, another question. In
your testimony you noted, ``the decision milestones also
constitute `off-ramps' for terminating the project if progress
is not deemed satisfactory or NSF's plans or priorities
change.'' How are these ``off-ramps'' identified and by whom?
Dr. Marrett. The off-ramps are identified first within the
given program, next by the Major Research Equipment and
Facilities Construction panel, and then that panel makes its
recommendations to the Director. Each stage in our process
offers the possibilities for off-ramps, so there is nothing
that says a project that makes it through that first stage--
from horizon to conceptual design--will actually end up in
construction because any number of things could lead to the
decision that it is not ready. Those, then, represent the off-
ramps. If a project does not make it through conceptual design
review, for example, it doesn't move to the next stage in the
process. All of that is handled by, first, the program;
secondly, by the panel that advises the Director; then finally
by the Director.
Chairman Brooks. How many projects have been terminated for
failure to meet the milestones?
Dr. Marrett. We will get back to you. I am not sure I have
the exact figures. There have been lots of projects that have
come into the process. That is why I said in one way we have
tightened up on the notion of horizon projects because a lot of
people interpreted horizon as a dream in an eye, and that is
not what we meant there. There has to be a level of commitment
by the sponsoring organization for something to move to the
next stage. There are lots of activities that never really
reach that stage of moving from horizon. There are others, and
as I said, we can get to you the information on the number and
conditions associated with the failure of a project; to move
from one stage to the next.
Chairman Brooks. Offhand, can you recall any projects that
have been cancelled for failure to meet milestones?
Dr. Marrett. Let us see. Yes, although I am trying to
remember right now what are some of the precise ones. In Rare
Symmetry Violating Process (RSVP) we have an example of a
project that had been terminated because it didn't proceed
according to our process.
Chairman Brooks. In your judgment, does that threat of
termination of the project encourage the meeting of milestones?
Dr. Marrett. We certainly hope so. What has to be
understood from the outset is that nothing again is guaranteed.
This is the communication we have with the communities. That is
one of the reasons why these are cooperative agreements when
things are finally worked out because they have to be
cooperative between the National Science Foundation and the
proposing project. Thus, we make the case all the time that
there is nothing that says you will automatically move to the
next stage. We set forth in the criteria what is essential for
the kind of transition from one stage to the next. So we
believe that that really does tighten up on what is going to
come forth and certainly will tighten up on where allocations
have to be made.
Chairman Brooks. And are there additional issues that may
cause a termination not accounted for in the decision
milestones?
Dr. Marrett. Potentially, there are. I can say a few of the
things that we do take into account are extremely relevant. In
the case of multi-user facilities, for example, there has got
to be clarity that there is a user community, a large user
community that wants to make use of those facilities. If things
change over time and there is a strong indication that there
isn't a community that is going to be appropriately making--
benefitting from that, that is something that is important.
Other kinds of developments--there can be challenges as
other international projects might come onto the scene that
make something less than the cutting edge that we had
anticipated when the process might have started. Sometimes
there are personnel changes that make it very difficult for us
to anticipate that this is something that is going to move in
the directions that would be there. We think we have identified
key developments, key issues, but this is a process always
under examination, always subject to our learning more about
what are the conditions that have to be considered.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Marrett.
The Chair next recognizes Mr. Lipinski for an additional
set of questions and then we will move to Mr. Hultgren from the
great State of Illinois.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to continue on a little bit with what the
Chairman was asking about. We were talking about off-ramps here
and as these projects move forward and you are examining them
and say a project should not move forward. Where does Congress
come into this? Where should Congress come in? What is the
relationship--what kind of communication goes on with Congress?
I mean that is a critical role, obviously, that--up here that
we face. And I just want to know up to this point where--what
has that relationship been with that communication been on
these projects?
Dr. Marrett. Well, I can tell you Congress makes an
ultimate decision about an on-ramp or off-ramp having to do
with funding because once the project has moved from
preliminary to final design, that is the stage at which we can
talk about it being included in a future budget. When we say
this could be included in a future budget, as you know, budgets
are negotiated, discussed extensively with Congress. So that is
one of the key stages that Congress is clearly involved.
The other stages, Congress has always had the possibilities
of pursuing, as this hearing is doing, the stage of particular
projects, and we are always open to providing information in
some cases about the portfolio--that is what has been asked--
or in other cases about particular projects. We stand open
[today], then, to Congress at any time being very much
involved. So it is for the final--what happens to a final
project. It is also the engagement about what happens before
something goes into the MREFC account because the funding for
that stage comes from the research and related accounts.
Congress then also oversees what happens in the funding of
those accounts. So I would say the funding role is a critical
one.
Mr. Lipinski. Well, this isn't a criticism particularly of
anyone or anything that has gone on before, but maybe this
Committee should have--be watching more and not leave it up
just to the appropriators to be playing the role in this. I
certainly think that is an important role for this Committee to
be taking.
I am not sure how much we can get into this in the amount
of time I have left, but we are talking about contingency
funding, and I think it is a little fuzzy about what this is.
It is certainly not a slush fund. My understanding is on
average a project--the expectation that a project will be
completed at total cost--that is the sum of a fixed,
predictable amount plus the contingency fund, which captures
the expected cost of the uncertain portion of the project. So
my understanding is there is a calculation of how much you
expect because you can't know exactly how much everything is
going to cost, but you create a contingency fund. Is the
expectation, then, that you are going to--the spending is going
to be the mean of that contingency fund? You are going to
spend--that half the contingency fund will be spent or where is
the expectation of--because, you know, I am looking at this as,
you know, do you calculate a normal curve and say this is what
our expectation is for how much it is going to cost because
there is certain specific uncertainty for each portion of the
project? So what is the real expectation in terms of the
contingency fund? It is not--my understanding is it not on top
of what is--you plan--that you are expected to spend but you
expect to spend some of that contingency fund?
Dr. Marrett. For that, I will give a general response but I
think the more detailed response would come appropriately from
those who have had to handle the matter of contingencies. So I
would say again we go back to that there are given risks. When
a budget is prepared, it should be that minimal budget, the
budget that is going to have to be there given that there are
always potential risks and we can't come in over what we have
included there. That is the way, then, the contingency is to be
built in.
I know one of the questions that has come up periodically
is, don't you expect, then, the contingency not to be spent and
to be returned to the Federal Government? If that is the case,
we can return. But more frequently it is there because the
risks actually do come about and we have to have a way for
covering those. As I said, I think it would be appropriate
probably for Mr. Yeck, who had to work with this with reference
to IceCube.
Mr. Lipinski. Before we go to Mr. Yeck, is the expectation,
though, that contingency--some of it will be spent or is the
expectation that it won't be spent?
Dr. Marrett. The expectation is it will be spent, that
there will be those risks. That is why we have said these are
not just some kind of speculation. It is the set of known
unknowns as sometimes they are called. You know that there are
going to be the risks and there are the estimates of what are
the costs associated with those. Thus, you do expect to have to
pay to cover those risks. So that is the way, as I said, I
believe I could elaborate on what that has meant for IceCube,
but that is the kind of expectation from the National Science
Foundation.
Mr. Lipinski. Mr. Yeck, it is up to the Chairman now. Mr.
Yeck, if you--to add more to--go ahead, Mr. Yeck, if you have
more to add to that from your experience.
Chairman Brooks. Go ahead.
Mr. Yeck. Yes, I can make some comments. The short answer
is that the expectation is that the contingency will be spent.
Project management----
Mr. Lipinski. Wait. Some of the contingency?
Mr. Yeck. All of it.
Mr. Lipinski. Or all of it?
Mr. Yeck. All of it. Project management--there is a science
to it and there is an art, and part of the art is to squeeze
base budgets so that the responsible managers are in a constant
discussion with the higher level management about how funds are
used, and contingency is one way of having a transparent
dialogue on that. Specifically, there are examples-- may I
respond to the question earlier, Mr. Lipinski, about IceCube.
You know, the boundary conditions when IceCube was baselined--
this period where you start construction, where you are
defining the performance baseline where you have--are very
general to MREFC projects. You have a five to ten year project;
you do not want to go back for more funding. There is a high
level of engagement and oversight by the NSF like any MREFC
project. Specific to IceCube, we had the recognition that it
would be exceedingly expensive to go back and try to add
instrumentation at a later date given the South Pole logistics
framework.
Leading up to project baseline, we did a bottom up cost
estimate. It came up over $10 million higher than the funding
plan, which was 242.1 million. And at this point, the
partnership between NSF, UW-Madison, and the scientific
collaboration engaged to look at how best to develop the final
project baseline, including a contingency. And we de-scoped
from 80 to 70 strings in terms of the plan, the project plan,
and established this 22 percent contingency budget that I
mentioned, which we expected to spend on the 70 strings.
When the project was approved by the Science Board, it was
approved to go up to 80 strings, the original baseline, and we
had an incentive built in to try to save costs--reduce costs,
and the best way to do that is schedule. So we worked very hard
to maximize the insulation of strings each year at the South
Pole and we reached record numbers and saved fuel, which is a
big expense for IceCube. And so in the end of our total
contingency budget, less than 25 percent went into the cost of
restoring these strings.
Further comment if I may that this practice is actually
modeled off another project which DOE and NSF supported--which
I was involved in which was the LHC--there was a cap
contribution to the European lab in particle physics. The
detectors de-scoped to create a 50 percent contingency given
the high risks in those projects, and in the end, about 50
percent of that contingency went to scope restoration. So it is
an approach that works very well from a project-management
standpoint to have that incentive. Typically, you would expect
to spend the contingency on the baseline scope.
Thank you.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Yeck.
Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
The Chair next recognizes Mr. Hultgren from the great State
of Illinois.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you.
Thank you all for being here. Sorry it is a busy day. We
have got a lot of different committees going on in markups. So
I know other people would love to be here. We are all kind of
running around so--but thank you so much for your work.
Dr. Marrett, I wondered--just a question. Major Research
Equipment and Facilities projects often span decades from
inception to operation. How does the Foundation plan 30 years
in advance or more if ramp-up is 10 to 15 years and a facility
may be in operation for an additional 30 years for the
continuous support of these projects?
Dr. Marrett. We are talking about the MREFC account, which
is a construction account. The other parts of this that you are
asking about will have to do with the research support that is
going to have to be there. As I have indicated a bit earlier,
we are now giving a lot of attention at the outset to what will
be the operational, the maintenance cost, and what is the
likelihood that there will be continued demand from the
research community. Anticipating what is going to happen from
the community is very much a part of this process but that is
funded not through this account, that is funded through the
research and related account or the education and human
resources account. So we don't really try to ask about funding
from MREFC for what will happen for support of the advancement
of the knowledge over the years.
Your overarching question suggesting that all of this has
to be taken into account and the long lead time does have to be
considered very much. There is a long lead time in the actual
development of construction projects, and then once there is
the construction, there is an anticipation of a certain
lifetime for the research that would be done. So I hope that
comes somewhat close to what you were interested in.
Mr. Hultgren. I appreciate that. And again I do thank you
all for being here. And I yield back.
Chairman Brooks. Mr. Yeck, one follow-up with you if I
might. ``IceCube is a particle detector imbedded in a cubic
kilometer of deep, very transparent South Pole ice that was
designed to detect high-energy neutrinos from nearby and across
the universe.'' And this is from your testimony. And then you
also add that it ``includes about 250 people from 39
institutions in 11 countries.'' If you could, please give the
members a primer of sorts on why the South Pole was chosen for
this particular endeavor and then also what is the expected
scientific reward for what we are doing.
Mr. Yeck. Thank you. The South Pole provides a unique
opportunity to have the large detector volume that is needed.
So detectors of this type previous practice would be to build a
large tank, excavate a cavern to create the volume that is
needed. In the case of IceCube, that volume exists in the
icecap at the South Pole. So the challenge, then, is to drill
into the ice and install the sensors that are needed. And the
South Pole is an ideal location because not only is that icecap
there but the infrastructure is in place through the U.S.
Antarctic Program. So the logistics chain exists and so the
instrumentation that was produced around the world could be
moved efficiently to the South Pole, and then the drilling
crews and the scientists could be supported at the South Pole
to carry out that construction. So that was very--it was very
cost-effective. If you imagine trying to do this at a location
that did not have that infrastructure, it would be exceedingly
expense.
IceCube is a detector that is opening up a new avenue to
discovery, neutrino astronomy. So it is as likely that the
science coming out of IceCube will be something unexpected, as
it is the expected science of neutrino detection, high-energy
neutrinos outside of our galaxy. So this is now underway, the
collaboration of institutions, which are about half in the
United States and half worldwide are actively analyzing data
and pursuing their science objectives.
Thank you.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Yeck. And I believe Mr.
Lipinski has one more round of questions.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have a question for Dr. Marrett. The Large Facilities
Office is responsible for a budget as large as the Office of
Cyberinfrastructure, which sits in the Office of the Director
and similar funds critical research infrastructure. Why is the
Large Facilities Office within the CFO's office and not the
Director's office like OCI where it would have direct access to
the Director and more leverage in its relationship with
research directorates?
Dr. Marrett. Actually, the location of an office or any
other entity of NSF does not indicate always the access that is
there. The Office of the Director has to be concerned with all
parts of the Foundation. Thus, the offices--the directorates
very much report to the Director. That is the same case, then,
for the Large Facilities Office. It does come through Budget &
Financial Administration, but that is not to indicate that
there isn't the kind of ongoing interaction between that office
and the Office of the Director, the way that it is for the
Office of Cyber Infrastructure.
One of the things that the Deputy Director for the Large
Facilities Office does is to prepare a monthly report on where
things stand, a report that comes to the Director and to me and
that we review very carefully. We then spend whatever time is
essential that might be requested from any number of angles to
ensure that we are very familiar with what happens in that
particular office. Thus, as I said, location is not always an
indication of oversight or engagement in the kinds of concerns
that the Foundation has to be concerned with.
Mr. Lipinski. Well, was there a reason that OCI was put in
the Director's office when it was created?
Dr. Marrett. Yes, there were a couple of reasons and some
of those are really being reexamined right now to be perfectly
honest. There are sometimes reasons for the location of
particular offices and operations that don't always hold up
over time. So we are reviewing all of the operations that
currently report to the Office of the Director because, as I
said, sometimes that is interpreted as giving greater access to
the Director than the directorates and other offices that are
not listed as a part of the Office of the Director. Since that
is really not the way it happens, we are just taking a look at
all of the structure to ensure that there is an understanding
of the engagement that has to be there, again, with all of the
key things the Foundation has to oversee.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Dr. Marrett.
I yield back.
Chairman Brooks. I would like to thank the witnesses for
their participation in today's hearing and also thank the
members for their questions. And most importantly, we were able
to finish before the votes start on the House Floor in about 10
to 15 minutes.
With that, the members of the Subcommittee may have
additional questions for the witnesses and we will ask you to
respond to those in writing should any be forthcoming. The
record will remain open for two weeks for additional comments
from members.
The witnesses are excused and this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:17 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Cora Marrett, Deputy Director, National Science
Foundation

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Jose'-Marie Griffiths,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Facilities, National Science Board;
Vice President of Academic Affairs, Bryant University

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. James H. Yeck, IceCube Project Director,
University of Wisconsin-Madison

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Tony Beasley, COO/Project Manager, Neon, Inc.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Tim Cowles, Vice President and Director,
Ocean Observing, Consortium for Ocean Leadership

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Additional responses for the record as submitted by
Dr. Cora Marrett, Deputy Director, National Science Foundation

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


