- TAPPING AMERICA'S UNCONVENTIONAL OIL RESOURCES FOR JOB CREATION AND AFFORDABLE DOMESTIC ENERGY: TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY PATHWAYS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TAPPING AMERICA'S UNCONVENTIONAL
OIL RESOURCES FOR JOB CREATION AND
AFFORDABLE DOMESTIC ENERGY:
TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY PATHWAYS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 17, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-75

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-055PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              PAUL D. TONKO, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Tennessee                        VACANCY
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, April 17, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Ralph M. Hall, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    17
Written Statement............................................    18

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking
Minority Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
U.S. House of Representatives..................................    19
Written Statement............................................    20

Witnesses:

Mr. Andrew Slaughter, Chair, Resource and Supply Task Group,
National Petroleum Council Report, ``Prudent Development''
Oral Statement...............................................    22
Written Statement............................................    25

Ms. Karen Harbert, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Institute for 21st Century Energy, U.S. Chamber of Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................    32
Written Statement............................................    34

Dr. Michelle Michot Foss, Chief Energy Economist, Center for
Energy Economics, Bureau of Economic Geology, University of
Texas-Austin
Oral Statement...............................................    42
Written Statement............................................    46

Mr. James Brown, President and Chief Operating Officer, Whiting
Petroleum Corporation
Oral Statement...............................................    60
Written Statement............................................    63

Mr. Daniel Weiss, Senior Fellow and Director of Climate Strategy,
Center for American Progress
Oral Statement...............................................    74
Written Statement............................................    76

Discussion.......................................................    94

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Andrew Slaughter, Chair, Resource and Supply Task Group,
National Petroleum Council Report, ``Prudent Development''.....   118

Ms. Karen Harbert, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Institute for 21st Century Energy, U.S. Chamber of Commerce....   120

Dr. Michelle Michot Foss, Chief Energy Economist, Center for
Energy Economics, Bureau of Economic Geology, University of
Texas-Austin...................................................   123

Mr. James Brown, President and Chief Operating Officer, Whiting
Petroleum Corporation..........................................   132

Mr. Daniel Weiss, Senior Fellow and Director of Climate Strategy,
Center for American Progress...................................   136

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Executive Summary of the National Petroleum Council report
submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall...............................   148

Article submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall, ``Scarce oil? U.S. Has
60 Times More Than Obama Claims''..............................   149

Article submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall, ``New regs could create
'nightmare scenario' for industry--Texas regulator''...........   152

TAPPING AMERICA'S UNCONVENTIONAL
OIL RESOURCES FOR JOB CREATION
AND AFFORDABLE DOMESTIC ENERGY:
TECHNOLOGY AND POLICY PATHWAYS

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 17, 2012

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:17 a.m., in Room
2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ralph Hall
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Hall. Good morning, and thank all of you. The
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology will come to order.
I want to welcome you to today's hearing entitled ``Tapping
America's Unconventional Oil Resources for Job Creation and
Affordable Domestic Energy: Technology and Policy Pathways.''
In front of you are packets containing the written testimony of
everybody.
Where is everybody? I guess they are still out watching the
shuttle. But this is a very busy day with a lot of committee
work going. I think they will be in and out of here. You didn't
come all this way just to talk to two people; I know that. But
it will go into the Congressional Record. Everybody is going to
have to read your testimony whether they want to or not. So we
welcome you here, and I might as well take the next five
minutes and give time for the shuttle to land. They are going
to Disneyland or wherever they are going.
I welcome you to this morning's hearing, and as I have
said, it is entitled ``Tapping America's Unconventional Oil
Resources and Job Creation and Affordable Domestic Energy:
Technology and Policy Pathways.''
Currently, gas prices average just under $4 per gallon
nationwide, and are expected to remain at that level through
the spring and the summer, maybe go higher. These prices are
hurting consumers and the economy, and have sparked yet another
national debate on energy policy, and to address high energy
prices, Republicans have long supported an ``all of the above''
approach, which includes expanding supply and production of our
vast domestic energy resources and development of market-based
solutions to reduce demand and increase energy efficiency.
In recent years, President Obama also adopted the
Republican ``all of the above'' slogan to describe his own
approach to energy policy. His Energy Secretary, Steven Chu,
has changed his tune as well, taking back his remark that we
need to ``somehow boost the price of gasoline to the levels in
Europe'' only after standing by that statement for over three
years and refusing to retract it before this Committee just in
March and went across the Hill to the Senate and told them how
he really felt.
When it comes to oil and gas drilling, however, the
Administration's actions simply don't match the President's
rhetoric. Pro-drilling actions at the federal level have been
few and far between, and while the President works hard to
claim credit for recent domestic energy production increases,
it is important to note that these come primarily from state
and private lands beyond the reach of his Administration or he
would probably preclude them too.
Faced with a direct and urgent opportunity to address U.S.
oil supply and infrastructure concerns, the President opposes
drilling in ANWR, restricts development in the Gulf of Mexico
and Outer Continental Shelf, rejects the Keystone XL pipeline,
and blocks over a million acres of public land from oil shale
development. But for these actions, America could be a seller
of energy, not a buyer of energy. It is extremely difficult to
consider this Administration's actions and conclude that the
President's strategy can be objectively characterized as ``all
of the above.''
Despite this backdrop, technology moves forward as is
evidenced by the ability of recent advancements in horizontal
drilling to safely and economically unlock vast amounts of oil.
For example, in 1995, North Dakota was estimated to hold 150
million barrels of oil. Today, thanks to technology, it is
estimated to hold 8 billion barrels. The economic benefits of
this newly enabled production are very dramatic. North Dakota
has the Nation's lowest unemployment rate, just 3.3 percent.
Jobs are so plentiful in Williston, North Dakota, that the
average salary is $90,000 per year and McDonald's is reportedly
hiring new workers at $18 an hour with a signing bonus.
A true all-of-the-above policy would be aggressively
looking to replicate the North Dakota economic success story.
But instead of unleashing technological innovation and energy
production, the President continues to ask multiple agencies to
regulate, delay, and raise the costs of American energy
production. Just this week, EPA is expected to issue new rules
restricting emissions from oil and gas operations.
As the Committee, we feel responsible for overseeing the
commercial application of energy technologies. We hope to learn
more today about the status of and outlook for efficiently and
economically increasing domestic oil production in the United
States. We will explore challenges and opportunities resulting
from new technologies such as horizontal drilling that are
enabling expanded production, and we will discuss how continued
technological development could position the United States as a
top global energy producer for decades to come.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hall follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Ralph Hall
Good morning, and welcome to this morning's hearing, entitled
Tapping America's Unconventional Oil Resources for Job Creation and
Affordable Domestic Energy: Technology and Policy Pathways.
Currently, gas prices average just under $4.00 per gallon
nationwide, and are expected to remain at that level through the spring
and summer. These prices are hurting consumers and the economy, and
have sparked yet another national debate on energy policy.
To address high energy prices, Republicans have long supported an
``all of the above'' approach which includes expanding supply and
production of our vast domestic energy resources and development of
market-based solutions to reduce demand and increase energy efficiency.
In recent weeks, President Obama also adopted the Republican ``all
of the above'' slogan to describe his own approach to energy policy.
His Energy Secretary, Steven Chu, has changed his tune as well, taking
back his remark that we need to ``somehow boost the price of gasoline
to the levels in Europe''--only after standing by that statement for
over three years and refusing to retract it before this Committee in
March.
When it comes to oil and gas drilling, however, the
Administration's actions simply do not match the President's rhetoric.
Pro-drilling actions at the Federal level have been few and far
between, and while the President works hard to claim credit for recent
domestic energy production increases, it is important to note these
come primarily from State and private lands beyond the reach of his
administration or he would probably preclude those too.
Faced with a direct and urgent opportunity to address U.S. oil
supply and infrastructure concerns, the President opposes drilling in
ANWR, restricts development in the Gulf of Mexico and Outer Continental
Shelf, rejects the Keystone XL pipeline, and blocks over a million
acres of public land from oil shale development.
It is extremely difficult to consider this Administration's actions
and conclude the President's strategy can be objectively characterized
as all-of-the above.
Despite this backdrop, technology moves forward as is evidenced by
the ability of recent advancements in horizontal drilling to safely and
economically unlock vast amounts of oil. For example, in 1995, North
Dakota was estimated to hold 150 million barrels of oil; today, thanks
to technology, it is estimated to hold eight billion barrels.
The economic benefits of this newly enabled production are
dramatic. North Dakota has the nation's lowest unemployment rate--just
3.3 percent. Jobs are so plentiful in Williston that the average salary
is $90,000 per year and McDonald's is reportedly hiring new workers at
$18 an hour with a signing bonus.
A true all-of-the-above policy would be aggressively looking to
replicate the North Dakota economic success story. But instead of
unleashing technological innovation and energy production, the
President continues to ask multiple agencies to regulate, delay, and
raise the costs of American energy production. Just this week, EPA is
expected to issue new rules restricting emissions from oil and gas
operations.
As the Committee responsible for overseeing the commercial
application of energy technologies, we hope to learn more today about
the status of and outlook for efficiently and economically increasing
domestic oil production in the United States. We will explore
challenges and opportunities resulting from new technologies such as
horizontal drilling that are enabling expanded production, and we will
discuss how continued technological development could position the U.S.
as a top global energy producer for decades to come.

I now recognize Ranking Member Johnson for a five minute opening
statement.

Chairman Hall. I now recognize Ranking Member Mrs. Johnson
for a five minute opening statement.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and welcome
to all of the panelists.
This is an interesting topic for this Committee to examine
today, and certainly, the oil and gas sector is one area in
which we see how advances in science and engineering can
translate into large-scale economic value, and our agencies
have played a historic role in unconventional fossil research
and development. But, being an election year and with gas price
on their way to new heights, I have little confidence that the
discussion will stay within the bounds of the jurisdiction of
this Committee today.
Even as late as decades ago, we had little idea of the
fossil resources that would be available today. But high energy
prices and a healthy dose of geologic luck aligned with some
critical research investments made by the Department of Energy
over 30 years ago to bring new natural gas online, and with it,
oil.
The Department of Energy program wrapped up in the early
1990s with a private company--when a private company took the
research performed by DOE and ran with it to ignite the oil and
gas boom we see today. I think my colleagues would agree that
that is the model for applied research programs we all hope to
see: federal investments shepherding transformational
technologies to the marketplace, even when the path is not
clear.
But that also begs the question: Being the Science, Space,
and Technology Committee, what are we really here to discuss
today? After all, it does not get much more commercial, much
more profitable, than oil and gas. At a time of severe fiscal
restraint, is it appropriate to talk about expanding the
federal role in technology development for the oil and gas
industry? What about the fear of government picking winners and
losers, crowding out private investment, or otherwise engaging
in market-supported activities that my Republican colleagues
are usually so quick to malign clean tech research programs for
supposedly perpetrating? How many decades and how many billions
of taxpayer dollars can we spend picking the same winners?
If sustained high oil prices are not enough to drive
further innovation in unconventional oil, is it really the job
of the taxpayer to buy-down the oil industry's risk? Are
billions of taxpayer dollars in subsidies not enough of a
handout for the most profitable industry in the world?
Maybe we are here to talk about the importance of oil to
the economy. If so, don't worry; we get that.
I am from Dallas, Texas, and Democrats drive cars too. Oil
and gas will play an important role in our Nation's economy for
decades.
The real reason we are here today is that it is an election
year, and this hearing is another installment in the losing
campaign to pin the Nation's escalating gasoline prices on
President Obama. To that, I add my voice to the bipartisan
chorus of industry and policy experts that consider that as
ridiculous as the notion that we can somehow drill our way into
low gas prices and energy independence.
The Republicans' multi-million dollar effort to create an
alternate reality in which a President controls gas prices is
backfiring. The American people are smarter than that, and are
coming to appreciate the real cost of our addiction to oil.
Even if the oil comes from our own backyard, and I have
relatives who had gas pumps in our backyards--I lived to see
that--you pay the global price. The only guaranteed relief from
the pain at the pump is to visit the pump less often. We need
more transportation options, with cars and trucks that are
dramatically more efficient, more alternative fuels, and more
vehicle electrification. The cheapest gas is the gas you don't
have to buy.
In closing, I would like to dispel the myth that President
Obama and the Democrats are mounting a war on fossil fuels. We
simply want future generations to have a choice. Where
Democrats differ from our Republican counterparts is that we
recognize that our Nation will be strengthened by diversifying
our energy supply and protecting public health, and that is
more important than short-term profits of industry. The oil
will be there. It is up to the markets to make the price right,
and the industry to make sure it can be produced sustainably.
Thank you, and I yield back, and I look forward to the
testimony.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Johnson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

This is an interesting topic for this Committee to examine today.
Certainly, the oil and gas sector is one area in which we see how
advances in science and engineering can translate into large-scale
economic value, and our agencies have played a historic role in
unconventional fossil R&D.
But, being an election year and with gas price on their way to new
highs, I have little confidence that the discussion will stay within
the bounds of our jurisdiction here.
Even as late as a decade ago, we had little idea of the fossil
resources that would be available today. But, high energy prices and a
healthy dose of geologic luck aligned with some critical research
investments made by the Department of Energy over 30 years ago to bring
new natural gas online, and with it, oil.
That DOE program wrapped up in the early 90's when a private
company took the research performed by DOE and ran with it to ignite
the oil and gas boom we see today. I think my colleagues would agree
that that is the model for applied research programs we all hope to
see--federal investments shepherding transformational technologies to
the marketplace, even when the path is not clear.
But that also begs the question: Being the Science, Space, and
Technology Committee, what are we really here to discuss today? After
all, it does not get much more commercial, much more profitable, than
oil and gas.
At a time of severe fiscal restraint, is it appropriate to talk
about expanding the federal role in technology development for the oil
and gas industry? What about the fear of government ``picking winners
and losers,'' ``crowding out private investment,'' or otherwise
engaging in market-supported activities that my Republican colleagues
are usually so quick to malign cleantech research programs for
supposedly perpetrating? How many decades and how many billions of tax
payer dollars can we spend picking the same winners?
If sustained high oil prices are not enough to drive further
innovation in unconventional oil, is it really the job of the taxpayer
to buy-down the oil industry's risk? Are billions of taxpayer dollars
in subsidies not enough of a handout for the most profitable industry
in the world?
Maybe we are here to talk about the importance of oil to the
economy. If so, don't worry, we get that. I am from Dallas, and
Democrats drive cars too. Oil and gas will play an important role in
our nation's economy for decades.
The real reason we are here is that it is an election year, and
this hearing is another installment in the losing campaign to pin the
nation's escalating gasoline prices on President Obama. To that, I add
my voice to the bipartisan chorus of industry and policy experts that
consider that as ridiculous as the notion that we can somehow drill our
way into low gas prices and energy independence.
The Republicans multi-million dollar effort to create an alternate
reality in which a President controls gas prices is backfiring. The
American people are smarter than that, and are coming to appreciate the
real cost of our addiction to oil.
Even if the oil comes from your own backyard, you pay the global
price. The only guaranteed relief from the pain at the pump is to visit
the pump less often. We need more transportation options, with cars and
trucks that are dramatically more efficient, more alternative fuels,
and more vehicle electrification. The cheapest gas is the gas you don't
have to buy.
In closing I would like to dispel the myth that President Obama and
the Democrats are mounting a war on fossil fuels. We simply want future
generations to have a choice. Where Democrats differ from our
Republican counterparts is that we recognize that our nation will be
strengthened by diversifying our energy supply and protecting public
health, and that is more important than short-term profits of industry.
The oil will be there. It is up to the markets to make the price right,
and the industry to make sure it can be produced sustainably.

Thank you, and I yield back.

Chairman Hall. I thank Ms. Johnson. We are neighbors and we
are good friends, but we don't always agree. So the gentlelady
yields back.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point, or when they do arrive here.
Our first witness is Mr. Andrew Slaughter, Chair of the
Resources and Supply Task Force of the National Petroleum
Council's report entitled ``Prudent Development: Realizing the
Potential of North America's Abundant Natural Gas and Oil
Resources.'' He is currently the Business Environmental Manager
for Shell's upstream America's exploration and production
business. In this capacity, he is responsible for strategic
counseling and analysis relative to North American crude oil
and natural gas markets covering short- and long-term supply,
demand, price and other regional market issues in support of
investment, planning and business strategy.
Our second witness is Karen Harbert, President and Chief
Executive Officer of the Institute for 21st Century Energy.
Mrs. Harbert is the former Assistant Secretary for Policy and
International Affairs at the U.S. Department of Energy and
served as the Deputy Assistant Administrator for Latin America
at the Caribbean and the U.S. Agency on International
development. Mrs. Harbert received her degree in international
policy studies and political science from Rice University in
Houston.
Our third witness today will be Dr. Michelle Michot Foss,
the Chief Energy Economist of the Center for Energy Economics
at the Bureau of Economic Geology at the University of Texas-
Austin. Hook 'em, Horns. Dr. Foss has over 30 years of
experience in energy and environmental. I couldn't help but put
that in there. Dr. Foss's expertise is in applied energy
economics and business development, enterprise strategy and
commercial operations and business-government relations across
the energy value chain. She received her Ph.D. in political
science from the University of Houston, a master of science
from the Colorado School of Mines and her bachelor of science
from the University of Louisiana-Lafayette.
And then our next witness will be James Brown, President
and Chief Operating Officer of Whiting Petroleum Corporation.
Mr. Brown has served in his current capacity since January
2011. He previously served as Senior Vice President of
Operations. Mr. Brown began his career with Shell Oil Company
in Houston, Texas, in 1975 and he has held engineering and
supervisory positions at American Petroleum, BP and Whiting
Petroleum Corporation. Mr. Brown received his bachelor's degree
in civil engineering from the University of Wyoming and a
master's of business administration from the University of
Denver.
Our final witness, or our last witness, will be Daniel
Weiss, Senior Fellow and Director of Climate Strategy, center
for American Progress. Before coming to American Progress, he
spent 25 years working with environmental advocacy
organizations and political campaigns. Mr. Weiss is an expert
in energy and environmental policy, legislative strategy and
tactics, and advocacy communications. Mr. Weiss received his
master's of public policy and a bachelor of arts degree from
the University of Michigan.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes, but you won't be held absolutely to that. You
have come a long way and you have prepared many years, and you
are kind enough to give us your time today. So we won't just
hold you to that, but do your best to stay as close to it as
you can. After which the Members of the Committee will have
five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Mr. Slaughter, for your
five minutes more or less.

STATEMENT OF MR. ANDREW SLAUGHTER,

BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT ADVISOR, SHELL EXPLORATION

AND PRODUCTION COMPANY, AND CHAIR,

RESOURCES AND SUPPLY TASK FORCE OF

THE NATIONAL PETROLEUM COUNCIL

Mr. Slaughter. Good morning, and thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member, distinguished Committee. Thanks for the
opportunity to be here and talk about unconventional oil
resources in America and their future development.
As Mr. Chairman said, my name is Andrew Slaughter. I work
on supply and market fundamentals for Shell. But today I am
here in my capacity as Chairman of the Resources and Supply
Task Group of the ``Prudent Development'' report, which was
recently published by the National Petroleum Council, an
advisory body to the Secretary of Energy.
This report was a comprehensive assessment of North
American oil and natural gas with a special focus on the
environmental issues associated with development and of course
the future productive capacity of that resource. The study was
commissioned in September 2009. The final report was delivered
in September 2011. And you can access and look at the report
and all the backup materials on the National Petroleum Council
website.
I did submit a written statement for the record with
further background on the NPC, the Prudent Development study
and its parameters. But today I will focus my shorter comments
on the study's conclusions and recommendations, mainly
addressing the size of unconventional resources and factors
that could increase or decrease their productive potential.
Let me first clarify what we mean by unconventional.
Unconventional resources are those oil and natural gas
resources produced by other means than by producing from a
defined reservoir through a vertical well bore using natural or
induced pressure. So basically it is using some different
technology or different production techniques to produce the
resource. These include heavy oil, bitumen or kerogen produced
through in situ thermal recovery. It includes tight oil
produced from source rock using horizontal drilling and
multistage hydraulic fracturing. And on the gas side, it
includes such resources as shale gas, tight gas and coal bed
methane.
So with regard to the scope of these resources, we analyzed
virtually every non-proprietary resource assessment conducted
by government agencies, the private sector and many
organizations from the United States and Canada, and the
conclusion was, the ultimate potential of the North American
unconventional oil resource is huge. It is composed of several
distinct resources, each at a different stage of development.
The unconventional oil in place in the United States and Canada
was estimated to be about 3-1/2 trillion barrels of oil with
technical recoverable resources today of about 180 billion
barrels. By comparison, the total conventional oil resource in
the United States is about 185 billion barrels. In terms of
natural gas, we have about 2,000 to 5,000 TCF of technically
recoverable resource. About half to two-third could be
considered unconventional.
So this leads to a potential for production. It is
important to say that not all the oil in place will be
produced. We concluded that about 1.1 trillion barrels could be
ultimately recoverable. And of that, approximately just under
180 billion barrels are recoverable using technology in place
today. With new technology and technology development, an
additional 1 trillion barrels is probably ultimately
recoverable with technology and other advances over the next
years and decades.
So in 2010, the United States and Canada produced 10
million barrels a day together. Approximately 2 million barrels
a day came from unconventional plays, mainly the oil sands, and
3 million barrels a day came from natural gas liquids, much of
which comes with unconventional gas production.
So there are potential development pathways for these
resources that depend on choices that are made from policy and
the investment and technology. In a limited production case,
total 2035 production was estimated at 10 million barrels a
day, but with a growing contribution from unconventional oil up
to 3-1/2 million barrels a day. But in a high potential case,
if we get supportive policy, access and fiscal support, total
North American production can grow to over 20 million barrels a
day by 2035 with further potential thereafter, and
unconventional oil comes to about 10 million barrels a day in
that total. The oil shale resource is not included in those
totals but could be of huge development potential thereafter.
For each of these sources of unconventional supply, the
path to production is unique. Oil and gas technology could lead
to surprisingly rapid production growth for tight oil but other
unconventional resources will be developed over a much longer
time period.
I will finish up here by just saying there are some three
principal recommendation areas to support prudent development
of these resources. First, establish an independent forum to
research the facts and potential of all the unconventional
hydrocarbon space to inform policy. Second, put policies in
place to support innovation and production growth, particularly
stable leasing access and fiscal regimes and technology support
regimes. And finally, work very closely with Canada, who have a
very successful track history in developing unconventional oil
resources, particularly in the Alberta oil sands.
And with that, I will conclude my remarks. My apologies for
running over time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Slaughter follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Hall. We thank you for your own time. Thank you,
sir.
Now I recognize Mrs. Harbert.

STATEMENT OF MS. KAREN HARBERT,

PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,

INSTITUTE FOR 21ST CENTURY ENERGY,

U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Ms. Harbert. Thank you, Chairman Hall and Ranking Member
Johnson, Members of the Committee. I represent the Institute
for 21st Century Energy, which is an affiliate of the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce.
I really appreciate the opportunity to discuss an issue
area that gets very little coverage in the public policy
debate. That is the potential benefits and the existing
obstacles to greater development of our vast unconventional oil
and natural gas resources. Rarely does public debate include
the fact that America has hundreds of years of supply stored in
unconventional formations in the United States. In fact,
Colorado, Wyoming and Utah alone contain more oil from oil
shale than all of the conventional oil contained in the Middle
East. These resources are so vast that when made commercial,
they have the real potential to completely alter the global oil
market and secure America's energy future. Yet today we have a
policy in this government to ignore the value of these
resources, sacrifice the revenue, the jobs and security
dividends that we could realize from developing them.
After the Arab oil embargo, the price of oil increased
tenfold by 1980, and as a response, the United States began a
very big development program for domestic oil including oil
sands and oil shale as a hedge against future supply
disruptions. Canada took a similar tack. However, in the mid-
1980s we saw the price of oil decline precipitously and the
United States stopped that program. Canada, notably, did not,
and Canada saw its oil production double between 1982 and 2008,
and the United States saw its production decrease by 43
percent.
The International Energy Agency says that global energy
demand is going to go up by 50 percent by 2035, and in that
time frame, fossil fuels will still dominate 80 percent of our
energy landscape. Countries around the world are increasing
their production and looking to acquire assets abroad but the
United States is on a different course. Under this
Administration, more than 86 percent of federal offshore lands
and 83 percent of federal interior lands are off limits for
exploration. The Interior's Bureau of Land Management reduced
the acreage for oil shale activities in Colorado, Utah and
Wyoming by over three-quarters and it reduced available acreage
in eastern Utah as it relates to oil sands by nearly 80
percent.
Recent claims that U.S. oil production is up are accurate
but the reason is much more telling. Production of oil from
federal lands is down 11 percent comparing 2011 to 2010 but is
increased by 14 percent on private and state lands. And of
course, we also have to remember, we are paying more for what
we import. In fact, we are accounting--our imports account for
60 percent of our total trade deficit, and fuel prices are
dominating the political and legislative debate for good
reason. Every 1-cent increase in the price of gasoline costs
Americans roughly $1 billion a year. The average American
household spent about 8.5 percent of its household income on
gasoline, which is the highest since 1981. And let us not
forget that every $10 increase in oil prices can knock a few
tenths of a percent off any increase in GDP.
Yes, it is true, there are a few mechanisms that the
Federal Government has its disposal to immediately lower fuel
prices but it is not accurate to say that the government can do
nothing to affect prices in the future. A signal to the global
energy market that the U.S. is committed and serious about
accelerating the development of its vast conventional and
unconventional oil resources would not go unnoticed.
Introduction of new supply from the North Slope of Alaska or
the North Sea in the early 1980s helped cause the global price
to collapse in 1986. And new commercial production in Alberta
also impacted global prices. So similarly, our unconventional
resources have the potential to be the game changer our U.S.
economy needs and upon which our future competitiveness can
depend.
According to the U.S. government, the country has an
estimated 2.7 trillion barrels of oil in place of oil shale and
oil sands but 80 percent of it is located on federal lands.
These resources would supply ourselves for at least 380 years.
These resources are twice the size of the entire world's proven
conventional oil reserves of 1.3 trillion barrels.
A paper by Anton Dammer, who is the U.S. government's
former head of oil shale reserves, said if we were to develop
our oil shale and oil sands resources as Congress instructed in
2005 in the Energy Policy Act, over the next 25 years we could
realize a gain in oil production of 1.1 billion barrels. We
could increase economic growth by $153 billion, government
revenue by $31 billion, and not send $129 billion overseas to
finance our demand for energy. Congress was clear in 2005 when
it created an interagency task force to look at this and make
recommendations, and the Administration complied with that in
2008 and made those recommendations. This Administration is now
walking those backwards. We are taking lands off the table. We
are picking energy favorites and we are trumping the Nation's
strategic interests. Lack of access has prevented oil shale
development technologies from aggressing as far as the oil
sands in Canada. But we need access to federal lands, not just
private lands.
As such, the policy pathway to realizing even a portion of
this huge asset is to allow access to our unconventional
resources which are in control of the Federal Government. This
Administration has ignored Congress's mandate, and unless this
approach changes, our largest strategic asset will remain
untapped until this or a subsequent Administration decides to
allow access to these strategic assets and to secure our energy
future. America's business depends on that decision. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Harbert follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Hall. Thank you, and well said, Ms. Harbert. Thank
you.
I now recognize Dr. Michot Foss for five minutes, and I
must warn you that when I said hook 'em Horns, the lady in red
here sent me a note, also put in the record, gig 'em, Aggies,
so they are equal, and since I have a granddaughter down at
A&M, I am forced to say that. We recognize you now for five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. MICHELLE MICHOT FOSS,

CHIEF ENERGY ECONOMIST,

CENTER FOR ENERGY ECONOMICS,

BUREAU OF ECONOMIC GEOLOGY,

UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS-AUSTINBUREAU

OF ECONOMIC GEOLOGY,

UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS-AUSTIN

Dr. Foss. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Johnson
and Members of the Committee. Thank you so much for inviting me
to join you today, and Chairman Hall, it is nice to see you
again and see you looking well. And let me say I am agnostic. I
have degrees from lots of different universities and support
them all.
I will add some comments to the record to supplement what
my colleagues have said already and to make a few key points
that I think are important for us to consider as you debate all
of these issues.
First of all, in my view, our major concerns should be
about replenishment and deliverability. I include some
information in my testimony to demonstrate long-term efficiency
of the industry, the U.S. industry. It is remarkable, really,
how well the industry has performed over time to sustain the
ability to deliver hydrocarbons when we need them and where we
need them. That is really the key thing is keeping that cycle
going. It is a long process to develop ideas, to develop
prospectively, to make the investments, to yield the supply, to
serve the market, and it can't be interrupted. Any interruption
is what creates distortions and disruptions that impact
customers.
The essential industry capability to maintain a long-term
reasonably steady balance between reserves and production is
one of the most important ingredients to U.S. energy security
and long-term prosperity. We really have to keep that in mind.
I want to make a point. A robust resource base, we have
known for a longtime that we have a robust resource base. This
alone does not fully protect producers and consumers from short
swings in price but it is key to restoring market balances at
times when we have very fast economic growth and we have
constraints in the system.
Now, the Committee asked me to take on four very large
questions, and I have attempted to do my best to address those.
The first one had to do with primary economic factors that
shape energy markets and prices with a focus on gasoline. First
and foremost, global oil markets are a complex daily dance, and
I put in a wonderful and very complex and detailed chart that
we came up for the U.S. Department of Energy's Energy
Information Administration to try to illustrate all of the
interactions that occur between buyers and sellers, producers
and customers, intermediaries, countries, governments,
independent and international companies, traders, brokers,
shippers, transporters and so on to try to deliver what we
really demand, which are the products from crude oil, not the
raw material itself. Price level is most immediately impacted
by cost of incremental supply to serve incremental demand at
any one time, and we look at lot at surplus capacity worldwide.
We measure it. We try to monitor it as best we can. One of the
most important things that U.S. government agencies can do is
keep the transparency between us and producing countries open
and vital and vibrant so that we can get the data that we need
to understand where at any one point in time deliverability
worldwide exists, and I showed an illustration of that using
the OPEC data and some points that you can ponder. Whenever
world demand grows as quickly as it has during the 2000s when
we have supply capacity constraints, you can expect an increase
in price, and that is what happened.
Variation also in price comes from incremental demand in
the United States, regionally, interregionally and
intraregionally, differences been domestic and international
crude prices, which is very strong right now, the cost of
inputs like steel and raw materials that are essential for
drilling, production and processing, and let me say also that
when it comes to the cost of inputs, these are critical not
just for oil and gas operations but all energy technologies. So
we have to think about preserving our ability to supply inputs
not just oil and gas production but also for alternative energy
technologies, renewable technologies and everything else that
use the same raw material inputs and require a hefty industrial
base to be able to supply those.
With regard to the potential impacts of supply and
production on energy prices in the national economy, we all
know that there are huge benefits that are delivered by the oil
and gas industries every day in terms of jobs and related
benefits for households and local economies and assortment of
other things, but we have to keep in mind that these fuels and
materials are important for the overall national economy and
really focus on that. What do these products and the supply of
these products on a competitive basis do for the overall U.S.
economy, not just local job creation in any one place where the
industry is active?
Hydrocarbons provide a greater measure of energy density
than other forms of energy. This is a key point that way too
often gets missed in the debate about what we should do and how
we should do it. This means that on a unit energy basis,
hydrocarbons actually yield environmental benefits over other
energy technologies that have lower energy densities and are
therefore harder and more expensive to build up, to scale up
and to manage when it comes to intermittent use.
Natural gas and gas-fired electricity have provided relief
from more expensive oil and gas products so we have savings
today. We have been having savings to consumers for the past
year or so because of lower natural gas prices and
commensurately lower electricity prices.
Finally, on the point of economic benefits, I want to make
an addition to Andrew's statements on the NPC study. I was on
the industrial subcommittee for that report. There was a lot of
discussion about what supports manufacturing in the United
States, and some very strong views about the role of not just
energy but all aspects of macroeconomic and monetary policy in
the United States. Industrial growth is more strongly linked to
gross domestic product than any other factor. Energy is
important but it is a relatively small part of the cost of the
manufacturing base in the United States. So many things affect
the health of the manufacturing sector. So much has to be done
if we want to actually build that sector back up. It goes well
beyond energy. But in terms of understanding what we can do
with our energy supplies, I included an example from the
trucking industry. This is new information that was presented
to me just recently on the status of the trucking industry
itself. We are looking at using incremental natural gas supply
as a clean fuel for trucking operations in a liquefied form in
particular but trucking companies are having a hard time
recruiting drivers. They have to deal also with a great deal of
federal and state regulatory compliance. They face high cost
structures, poor infrastructure and all of the other things
that affect the ability to move goods when and where we need
them in the United States, and so I think that is a very good
example to look to for the full picture of things that affect
our energy space.
When it comes to regulatory and supply chain hurdles, we
have a great deal of investment that needs to take place in the
midstream businesses, pipelines, gas processing, raw material
processing for the crude oil side. We have existing fairways
that have been very efficient in moving product, mainly to the
Gulf Coast. Those fairways need to be expanded and we actually
need to do some replumbing of our midstream network in the
United States to be able to move oil and natural gas and
natural gas liquids to different locations in the mid-
continent, the Northeast and other places where new capacity is
needed.
Unconventional plays are helping to insulate us against
Gulf of Mexico issues but I want to put into the record that we
have to sustain production from the Gulf of Mexico. There is no
choice. That is just too vital a province for the United
States.
Finally, on the role of technology, I appreciate all of the
comments about the role of federally supported technology and
the importance of all of that. I included an example for
everyone in order to understand the lead times. I think it is
worth thinking about the 30 years that it took before
horizontal drilling, just horizontal drilling by itself,
finally topped 50 percent of the overall market for drilling
services in the United States. I have intermittent experience
with that. I worked for Matt Simmons at Simmons and Company
International when the first horizontal drilling transaction
was done in the late 1980s. It is a long haul to get this stuff
working and to have it function the way that it needs to so
that the industry can benefit from all of those examples, all
of those technologies.
To close, when it comes to regulatory and policy
bottlenecks and the things you all can do, the Ranking Member
mentioned taxes. Yes, the oil and gas industry is profitable.
It is also one of the largest, if not the largest, taxpaying
industries in the country at all jurisdictions, federal, state
and local. Last time I checked, Apple was actually more
valuable than any one I believe of the energy companies, at
least on a cash basis, pays relatively little in taxes, I might
add, along with General Electric and a few others. So I think
we have to put some perspective on all of that. These companies
pay a great deal into the federal treasury, state and local
treasuries, into households and taxpayers' pocketbooks, and I
think it is important to recognize that and understand that
benefit that gets created. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr.. Foss follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Hall. Thank you very much. I must stay, you really
answered all the questions, but I need a little more time with
you on your chart sometime. Thank you, Dr. Foss.
I recognize Mr. James Brown now for your five minutes, or
more.

STATEMENT OF MR. JAMES BROWN,

PRESIDENT AND CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER,

WHITING PETROLEUM CORPORATION

Mr. Brown. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member and Committee
Members, thank you. It is a great honor and pleasure for me to
be here this morning.
I am going to step out on a limb and just think that maybe
many in the room haven't heard of Whiting Petroleum Company, so
Whiting is a Denver-based E&P company. The company was founded
in 1980. We have kind of endured the ups and downs of the E&P
business during that time. Whiting became a publicly traded
company in 2003, and through acquisitions doubled the size of
the firm in 2004 and again in 2005. Those acquisitions provided
three assets that today comprise approximately 70 percent of
our 345 million barrels of oil equivalent proved reserves that
we have in the company. Those assets are the Postle Field
located in Texas County, Oklahoma, out in the panhandle near
Guymon, the North Ward Estes Field located in the Permian Basin
out near the big town of Monahans, and also several assets up
in North Dakota that provided us the springboard to become the
number three oil producer in that state. What has enabled
Whiting to grow production from 33,000 BOE per day in 2005 to
over 76,000 BOE per day in 2012 is new technology. Today in the
Bakken, and I am going to say Bakken, and what I am referring
to is the total Bakken hydrocarbon system which includes the
Upper Bakken shale, all the Members of the Middle Bakken, the
Lower Bakken shale and the Three Forks, and for those that are
interested I brought samples of all those for you to look at
today if you have any interest in doing that.
Whiting drills down 10,000 feet vertically, about 2 miles,
turns and drills another 2 miles horizontally. We run 4-1/2-
inch pipe in the well with up to 40 sliding sleeves and swell
packers. The drilling rig is moved off. Production facilities
are constructed. Frack ranks are moved in, filled with water. A
pressure pumping company moves in and the wells are fracture
stimulated with sand in 30 to 40 stages, depending on how many
sliding sleeves we run. This entire fracture stimulation
treatment is completed in around 24 hours. The pressure pumping
company moves off location and the well is placed on
production. Our goal is zero gas emissions from the well during
flowback.
The gas produced with the Bakken oil must be processed
before it can be sold. Whiting has constructed two gas plants
in North Dakota with a combined processing capability of 120
million cubic feet per day. We process as much gas from other
operators' wells as we do from Whiting wells. We have built two
oil-gathering systems and we transport as much produced oil as
we can from the basin via pipeline.
I am going to switch gears and move over to our two
enhanced oil recovery projects. In Texas down in North Ward
Estes, we are utilizing CO
2
to recover an additional
15 to 20 percent of the oil in that mature reservoir. At North
Ward, we are injecting 325 million cubic feet of CO
2

a day, managing 790 patterns containing over 2,000 wells. The
CO
2
that comes back out of the producing wells is
recycled, separated using a membrane technology, and
reinjected. Approximately one-half of the CO
2
that
we inject stays in the reservoir and will be permanently
sequestered once that process ends.
Whiting recently executed a contract with the Texas Clean
Energy Project to use CO
2
from their coal
gasification plant in our North Ward Estes field.
Much of what I just discussed would not have been possible
even five years ago. Unconventional resource plays and
technology have impacted every facet of our business from
consummating the lease to drilling the well to reporting
production. We routinely drill a 20,000-foot horizontal well in
15 to 20 days. We use technology to send information being
recorded at the drill bit to the surface in real time that our
engineers and geologists in Denver can access at their desktop.
Sliding sleeve technology continues to improve. Whiting was
the first company to pump a 24- and 40-stage sliding sleeve
frack job.
We have constructed a rock lab in Denver where we have two
scanning electron microscopes to help us understand how oil is
produced from these unconventional reservoirs. Our goal is to
transfer this knowledge from the Williston Basin to other
basins across the lower 48. We are actively working in the DJ
Basin in Colorado and the Delaware Basin in West Texas where
recent results have been very encouraging. We believe there is
potential to utilize what we have learned in several other
prospects.
How does this translate into jobs? When Whiting went public
in 2003, we had 110 employees. As of April 1, 2012, Whiting
employed 746 individuals. We currently have 271 open positions
in the company. Currently, we have 19 drilling rigs in
operation in North Dakota. If you take the number of people
directly employed by the drilling company, add up all the
individuals that provide service and the vendors required to
drill a well, that amounts to 600 indirect jobs that we have
created in North Dakota. These people need homes, food,
schools, and other services. The economic impact of what we are
doing is far reaching.
As we have already heard this morning, the price of
gasoline at the pump is getting a lot of attention. It seems
that all oil companies get lumped together and get blamed for
this oil price. I just want to say in this regard, Whiting is
similar to the local farmer. We are price takers. Whiting tries
to protect our cash flow utilizing hedges and commodity markets
but we have little influence over the overall oil price. To
impose legislation that would make it more expensive to produce
oil makes no sense.
Along those lines, the Keystone XL pipeline was scheduled
to transport around 200,000 barrels of oil per day out of North
Dakota to markets. This would be very beneficial and help
alleviate the price differentials that we experience in North
Dakota. It would improve the net backs and increase royalties
paid to the Federal Government, the State of North Dakota and
the individual mineral interest owners.
I thank you for the opportunity to present to you today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brown follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Hall. I thank you. Mr. Brown.
Now the Chair recognizes our last witness, Dr. Daniel
Weiss, for five minutes, and thank you, sir.

STATEMENT OF MR. DANIEL WEISS

SENIOR FELLOW AND DIRECTOR OF CLIMATE STRATEGY,

CENTER FOR AMERICAN PROGRESS ACTION FUND

Mr. Weiss. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Hall, Ranking
Member Johnson and Members of the Committee, thank you very
much for the opportunity to testify today. I am Daniel J.
Weiss, a Senior Fellow at the Center for American Progress
Action.
High oil prices are responsible for high gasoline prices.
The Energy Information Administration estimates that 72 percent
of the cost of a gallon of gas was due to the cost of crude
oil. As Mr. Brown just noted, oil prices are set on the global
market, which is controlled by the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries, a cartel. The Federal Trade Commission
found that ``OPEC attempts to maintain the price of oil by
limiting output and assigning quotas.''
Canada, which produces most of its own oil, also has high
gasoline prices right now. On March 30th, the Edmonton Journal
reported that ``Canadians are paying some of the highest prices
they ever have for gasoline.''
The President has little control over oil prices, as
recently noted by the Wall Street Journal, the Cato Institute
and a survey of economists by the University of Chicago.
Gasoline prices are up 84 cents per gallon since Representative
Boehner became Speaker in January 2011, yet is he to blame for
the recent high gasoline prices?
The increase in shale oil production in places such as the
Bakken shale in North Dakota and Eagle Ford in Texas is due to
advances in horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracking
developed with the assistance of federal research, as Mr.
Slaughter noted.
As you can see on this slide [oil production v. gas
prices], more oil production cannot lower gasoline prices. The
Associated Press study of oil production and gasoline price
data from three decades determined that there was ``no
statistical correlation between how much oil comes out of U.S.
wells and the price at the pump.'' The red line is gasoline
prices. The blue line is U.S. oil production. And as you can
see, even as oil production has increased on the right-hand
side of the slide, gasoline prices have increased even more
dramatically.
Fortunately, we are using less oil due to modern vehicle
fuel economy standards adopted by President Obama in 2009. By
2025, the average car will go twice as far on a gallon of gas
compared to 2010. This will save 2 million barrels of oil per
day and save $8,000 in gasoline costs compared to a 2010
vehicle.
We are also producing more of our own oil. The Energy
Information Administration determined that in 2011, the United
States generated 3.7 quadrillion BTUs of energy from crude oil
produced from federal lands and waters compared to 3.3
quadrillion BTUs in 2008, a 12 percent increase in production
from federal lands and waters compared to 2008.
Continued dependence on a product where we consume 20
percent of the annual supply but have only two percent of its
resources will leave us vulnerable to oil and gasoline price
spikes. As Ms. Johnson noted in her opening statement, the most
effective way to reduce pain at the pump is to reduce our oil
use so we pump less. We must invest in alternatives to oil.
Plug-in hybrids and all-electric vehicles consume little or no
gasoline. During their first year, the combined sales of the
plug-in hybrid Chevrolet Volt and all-electric Nissan Leaf were
twice as large as the now-familiar Toyota Prius and Honda
Insight hybrids during their first year. In March, Chevrolet
sold more Volts than in any previous month.
Investments in buses, subways and trains can also reduce
our dependence on oil and create jobs. Public transportation
saves 4.2 billion gallons of gasoline annually. Every $1
billion invested in public transportation supports 36,000 jobs.
The House-passed fiscal year 2013 budget resolution
authored by Representative Paul Ryan would worsen pain at the
pump by slashing billions of dollars of investments in transit,
alternative fuels and clean energy technologies that will
reduce oil consumption. Instead, the budget would retain $40
billion in tax breaks for big oil companies.
We must also reduce Wall Street speculators' ability to
drive up prices. Many experts believe that these speculators
are driving up oil prices to make a quick profit preying on the
fears of a supply disruption. The reports of President Obama's
new plan to be announced today to fight Wall Street speculators
would reduce their ability to drive up prices and would put
more cops on the beat policing oil trades.
One so-called solution won't reduce gasoline prices. The
State Department determined that, and I quote--this is from
their analysis of the Keystone pipeline--``Building Keystone XL
would not of itself have any significant impact on U.S. total
crude runs, total crude and product import levels, or costs.''
Mr. Slaughter in his work with the National Petroleum
Council has put together essential recommendations that would
help protect public health as we develop our shale oil and
natural gas resources. This means avoiding, and I quote from
the NPC study ``air and water pollution that directly affects
public health as well as these and other impacts affecting
habitat, fisheries and the global climate.''
Lastly, I would also note that the NPC also strongly
advocates ``a mechanism for putting a price on greenhouse gas
emissions that is economy-wide.''
Thanks very much for the opportunity to testify and I would
be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Weiss follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Hall. Dr. Weiss, thank you very much, and I thank
all the witness. This Committee was dubbed the Committee of the
Day, and I see why. All five of you have certainly given us a
good basis for our questions, and I thank you for your
testimony. I will remind our Members that the Committee rules
limit questioning to five minutes. We will try to stay close to
that. The Chair at this time will open the round of questions,
and I recognize myself for five minutes.
I will start off. Mr. Slaughter, your testimony described
the National Petroleum Council's ``Prudent Development'' report
in detail. The report's findings on the amount of economically
recoverable oil and gas resources are very striking. Could you
describe just how much oil and gas we now think is recoverable
and what that means in the context of global energy resources
over the coming decades? How has the development of new energy
exploration and production technology increased the estimated
resource base? Those are three questions in one but you can
handle them any way you want to.
Mr. Slaughter. Sure, and just a clarification to start off
with, resource is a wider term than the reserves estimate,
which Mr. Weiss just mentioned. Reserves is a very narrow
definition based on current technology and current economics.
When we are looking at future development over several
decades, we look at technically recoverable resources and
ultimately recoverable resources. Today's technology, we define
the total unconventional resources at about 180 billion
barrels, which is additive to the conventional resources of
approximately 185 billion barrels. But as we move into
technology development in some of these longer-term plays, we
could be recovering over 1 trillion barrels of oil in several
decades if you include resources like the oil shale of
Colorado, which can be developed in several decades' time if we
keep working on the technologies to develop that. So these are
huge amounts of oil.
Chairman Hall. Yes, and I thank you.
Dr. Foss, given the potential amount of domestic energy we
now realize that we can access, it is really appropriate to
suggest that we only have two percent, as the President says,
of the world's oil resources, as President Obama suggests? How
correct is that?
Dr. Foss. Well, again, like Andrew, the use of the word
``resource'' and other words are often confused. I have a chart
that I submitted in testimony, and it is a big of an
exaggeration, admittedly, because I did the same thing but to
make a point. In our country, because we have transparent
government data, we have transparent industry data and lots of
processes for looking at that information, we feel comfortable
that we can look at our resource potential the way we do, and
it puts us at the top of the world in terms of overall resource
wealth. Now, what you do to deliver the ultimately recoverable
resource into the market at any one time, that is a different
question. We have much more than two percent of the world's
known resources. In fact, we have the majority of the world's
known resources if every country went out and did the same
things that we did to evaluate the resource base and maybe that
percentage would change. But for the time being, we are
extremely large.
Chairman Hall. I thank you for that. I have a minute and 42
seconds left. Let me ask one more question.
President Obama's position is that because the price of oil
is set on a global market, there is little or nothing that the
United States policymakers can do to impact gas prices. Ms.
Harbert and Dr. Foss, you both touched on this in your
testimony. If the President increased oil production or even
signaled that he intended to increase oil production in such
areas as Alaska where little ANWR is just 19 million acres, or
the Outer Continental Shelf, would prices be impacted?
Ms. Harbert. When you look at the statistics from the
International Energy Agency, the global demand for energy is
going to go up by 50 percent. If we do not increase supply, we
will be certain of one thing: prices will go up. So what are we
doing here at home to inoculate ourselves against that
inevitable price increase if we don't increase supply? We have
an opportunity to be part of our own solution which we are
depriving ourselves of. So if you look at the longer-term
market fundamentals that are basically supply and demand,
without more supply, and we have a lot of it, prices will go
up.
Chairman Hall. Dr. Foss?
Dr. Foss. Yes. Thank you. Studies of the type that have
been mentioned today looking at domestic gas production and
gasoline prices are inevitably flawed because they do not take
into account the impact of not having domestic production on
gasoline prices, which----
Chairman Hall. I just have about 10 more seconds, so go
ahead.
Dr. Foss. And I also think that one thing that we haven't
put on the table today is the cost of other things that impact
gasoline prices to customers: the ethanol mandate, taxes on
gasoline and other things that actually make gasoline purchases
expense for households.
Chairman Hall. I thank you, and I now recognize Mrs.
Johnson for her five minutes.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much. I noticed that some of
the testimony indicates support for a continued role for the
federal research into oil and gas drilling-related
technologies, and I realize that in many of your responses you
have already indicated that it would take decades to produce
from these sources that you are speaking of. In what way do you
think that the Federal Government should continue to invest in
research right now during this very scarce taxpayer dollars for
research?
Mr. Slaughter. If I can have a go at that, what we are
looking at here is some parts of the resource base which are
pre-commercial by quite a long time and so the private sector
by itself does not put a lot of investment focus on pre-
commercial resources, for example, the oil shale or the oil
sands or methane hydrates in natural gas. So in these
circumstances, to keep the necessary research and development
effort going, we in the NPC study recommended partnerships of
industry, academia and government to keep the momentum going on
those essential technology development programs.
Ms. Johnson. It really sounds great to talk about all the
drilling that we can do and all of the resources we have and we
talk about the oil shale and all. It would take decades to
produce, wouldn't it?
Mr. Slaughter. The development pathway for oil shale
particularly is long but if we want to have it available when
we need it, then we need to keep working on it. It won't be
available if we stop working on those questions now.
Ms. Johnson. How much do you think that the private
industry is willing to fill in while we don't have the dollars
for the research?
Chairman Hall. Ms. Harbert, you were trying to ask a
question or answer a question?
Ms. Harbert. I was just going to say, the Department of
Energy answered that question. They issued a report in 2007.
They were asked to look at all the private-sector activities
underway to develop the technology and they issued a report of
every--whether it is Exxon or Shell or Red leaf or Whiting, all
the multitude of companies that have been investing in
developing this technology on their own dime without asking for
any subsidies from the Federal Government. What the industry is
asking for is some certainty, that knowing that I can have
access to this resource base so I can develop the technology,
make it commercially viable and bring this resource to market
in a reasonable time frame, and adhering to all the
environmental regulations that are in place.
So we have a very good idea of the multitude of
technologies that are under development but if the
opportunities being closed down to access the resource base,
they are not going to develop the technology. I don't think you
will find anybody in the industry that is saying we need more
money from the Federal Government. They are saying we just need
the opportunity. The economic conditions have changed
dramatically for this resource and now they want to be able to
have the opportunity to develop it.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Brown, you mentioned some of the oil shale
availability. What is your company doing at this time to access
that resource?
Mr. Brown. Can I ask for a clarification? When you are
saying the oil shale, you are talking about like western
Colorado, the very--one of the companies that I mentioned the
acquisition that Whiting made early in their--well, after they
went public in 2003, one of those companies owned a very large
oil shale position in western Colorado, and we--and they owned
it outright. It was actually granted to them by the government
back in the 1930s to develop, and they own it in fees, so they
own the minerals, they own the--or we own the minerals, we own
the surface.
Currently, we are not doing anything out there. I mean, it
is not a lease that is going to go away on us. We are producing
hydrocarbons from other zones on that lease out there because
it is productive in the deeper zone for natural gas. But right
now we can't see a path forward that makes that an economic
project in any reasonable time.
Ms. Johnson. What do you mean, you can't see a path
forward?
Mr. Brown. You know, you have to somehow be able to
generate a lot of heat down in the reservoir to make this
project--to turn the kerogen into a liquid hydrocarbon product,
which Shell is actively pursuing out there right now. Right
now, we don't--to be able to do that, we can't see that it is
an economic venture for us to undertake at this time.
Ms. Johnson. I have less than 10 seconds, so I am going to
do Ms. Adams' technique. Just answer yes or no for all of you.
Is President Obama the cause for the high gas prices right now?
Just yes or no down the line.
Mr. Slaughter. No.
Ms. Harbert. Yes and no.
Ms. Johnson. I just need one of those.
Ms. Harbert. Yes and no. It is too complex to go to a yes
or no question--answer, quite honestly.
Ms. Johnson. Next?
Dr. Foss. Same for me.
Mr. Brown. No.
Mr. Weiss. No.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you for the truth. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. The gentlelady's time is up, and I recognize
the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Brooks. And thank you for
staying within the time, Ms. Johnson.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you.
I would like to hear Ms. Harbert and Dr. Foss expound on
why they believe that the White House policies are partially
responsible for our American soaring gasoline prices.
Ms. Harbert. Well, if we were to have access to federal
offshore and onshore lands, and then you take a much more
aggressive stance on unconventional oil shale, and then you add
to that the Keystone pipeline, which would bring more resources
to the--you combine all those together, there is a lot of
government revenue, a lot of new supply, and America then
stands on a very different energy footing, and those are just
three things to start, and that is jobs, it is revenue, it is
energy security, and that would dramatically alter our standing
in terms of our power within the global energy market.
Mr. Brooks. Dr. Foss?
Dr. Foss. I don't think the question is about gasoline
prices. I think that is the wrong way of looking at things. I
think the point is to look at household--the transportation
portion of household energy cost, and I think the problem is
that a lot of the alternatives that you are spending both
taxpayer dollars on and private money on are more expensive
than actually the things that can be done to encourage more
efficient use of the existing petroleum product base that we
have.
Mr. Brooks. Now, I presume each of you is aware that in
September of 2008, Dr. Steven Chu, the current Secretary of
Energy for Barack Obama, said ``Somehow we have to figure out
how to boost the price of gasoline to the levels in Europe.''
Currently, gasoline prices in Europe range from $6 to $8 per
gallon, and quite frankly, when I got gasoline a couple of days
ago coming into Washington, over $4 per gallon. That was a
first for me, and I searched for 30 minutes trying to find
something less expensive but finally gave up. Now, Secretary
Chu had the opportunity in this very room to backtrack on his
position; he did not. However, later in a Senate hearing, he
did backtrack. I personally believe that his original statement
that he wanted to essentially double gasoline prices on
American citizens reflects his true beliefs inasmuch as he
backtracked in the Senate after having had the opportunity to
do so here and did not but in the Senate. We all understand
this is an election year, and I would suspect that in an
election year setting, that had something to do with his views.
Perhaps we can give him the benefit of the doubt. The public
can make a final judgment on that.
But having said all that, if Secretary Chu's preference for
doubling American gasoline prices were to occur, what would it
mean for the United States economy if gasoline were at European
levels, and I would like to direct that question to Ms. Harbert
and Dr. Foss.
Ms. Harbert. We would look like Europe, which doesn't look
very good right now. I was just there a couple of weeks ago,
and there is a great deal of discussion about how to change
this very entrenched, very long-term approach towards taxing
fuels. I think there is proof in the pudding coming up this
summer. Given the weakness of the European economy, the cost to
customers and businesses, I think that we are going to be
seeing some pretty interesting eruptions with respect to how
fuels are taxed over there.
Americans are already paying 8.5 percent of their household
income on gasoline, and that would go up. That is the highest
level since 1981. It would impact certainly the economic
recovery, our GDP, and it would affect business investment. Let
us not forget that manufacturing is starting to figure out how
it can get back on its feet based on low natural gas prices. We
have the chemical industry that left this country and went to
the Middle East because there were lower natural gas prices
there. They are now coming back, and we want to see those types
of things happen. And so price matters, and that matters in our
economy, it matters in business decisions, it matters in
investment decisions, and it certainly matters at the family
dinner table. So it would have a very bad knockoff effect on
the economy.
Mr. Brooks. But again, I personally believe for emphasis
that it is the White House strategy to drive up energy prices
in order to make them more competitive with the exotics that
this Administration is pouring so many billions of tax dollars
into. But having said that, President Obama repeatedly claims
he supports an all-of-the-above energy strategy. However, the
President's rhetoric rarely matches his Administration's
actions, especially when it comes to the EPA and its regulatory
culture. Can you please describe what EPA's numerous proposed
regulations such as the recently proposed New Source
Performance Standards for Power Plants and Cross State Air
Pollution Rule as well as forthcoming rules on greenhouse gas
emissions at drilling sites and tier three refining standards
mean for the United States energy use and energy prices? And
again, Dr. Foss or Ms. Harbert, very quickly.
Ms. Harbert. The real answer is that no one knows because
the modeling of those combined rules and regulations have not
been done, and so we really don't know the ultimate cost and
what it is going to do to energy prices. And that is why in
some cases the court system has stepped in and stalled the
implementation of some of these regulations until more review
has been done.
Mr. Brooks. Well, Mr. Chairman, if I could just add a
comment, since my time is expired, for Dr. Foss. I sincerely
believe that it is another effort to jack up prices.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Miller, the gentleman from North Carolina, is
recognized for five minutes. Is he here? All right. Who is
next? Mr. McNerney, you are recognized for 5-1/2 minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the panel. I think all your testimonies
were very well thought out and I appreciate what you are
bringing to the table here.
Mr. Slaughter, all Americans are clearly struggling with
the price of gasoline now, and there is no doubt in my mind
that there is a lot of gas or a lot of oil there from all
sources within our borders. But I am worried about the costs
both direct and indirect of extracting some of these
unconventional sources. For example, I worry a little bit about
the effects of global warming as do a lot of people, but let us
talk about the economics here. Are the unconventional sources
more expensive per barrel to extract than conventional sources?
Mr. Slaughter. That depends. Not all unconventional sources
look alike. Many of the tight oil resources that have been
ramping up production now and over the last couple of years are
actually not on the margin as the most costly production. Some
of the more frontier-type resources like, for example, the oil
sands tend to be the most expensive but they are economic in
today's environment.
Mr. McNerney. Well, the unconventional sources have unique
risks regarding the environment. What safeguards do you think
should be in place to reduce the risk of extracting these
hydrocarbons in a safe manner?
Mr. Slaughter. The NPC study did a tremendous amount of
work on this question, and the oil and gas companies take this
very seriously. So there is a lot of recommendations in that
study about disseminating best practices, developing
responsible extraction technologies, about promoting councils
of excellence to raise the game in terms of environmental
performance. This is something we have to do and we have to
take it seriously.
Mr. McNerney. I agree. If local extraction causes local
environment pollution and contamination of groundwater, local
communities will turn against that. So we want to make sure
that that doesn't happen as part of the outcome.
Ms. Harbert, thank you for your testimony again. In your
written testimony, I believe I took that you indicate that
while U.S. demand for oil has decreased in recent years, an
increasing international demand has led to increasing prices in
gas at home. How much impact do you think recent American
policy has on domestic gasoline prices?
Ms. Harbert. Well, you know, the reason we have decreased
demand is for a very unfortunate reason, which is the recession
that we have all been suffering through. So we certainly don't
want to substitute that for an energy policy. We know the
economy is going to recover. We will hope it recovers as fast
as it possibly can and that is going to command more energy,
you know, consumed domestically. So if we look at, you know,
what is the effect of the recession on the global energy price,
I don't know that anybody knows the answer to that. Maybe my
friend here to the left that is an economist can quantify that
for us.
But I will say when we look outwards and we look at the
increasing demand from China, India, the Middle East--which is
the second-fastest growing region for energy consumption--we
know we are going to need more supply. And so it is incumbent
upon us to look at all of our tools in our toolbox, whether it
is increasing access, whether it is examining taxes, whether it
is examining all the different things that we have to ensure
that we are maximizing our competitive advantage here, because
we do have a lot of resources and we could certainly be using
that as the foundation to compete more effectively in a very,
very globally competitive market.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. Mr. Weiss, you have----
Mr. Weiss. Mr. McNerney, two things about that: first,
studies have indicated the reason why demand is down is due to
increased fuel economy standards that this Congress passed in
2007 and Mr.--President Obama implemented in 2009; second, the
International Energy Agency reports that estimated demand
worldwide for oil is only up about one percent this quarter
compared to the previous quarter. So I don't believe there is a
huge increase in demand that is driving up oil prices, and in
fact, research by McClatchy and others indicates that it is
Wall Street speculators that are helping to drive up the price
of oil due to preying on fears of a supply disruption in the
Persian Gulf.
Mr. McNerney. I think you sort of answered my next question
to Ms. Harbert.
We have heard a lot about domestic production; we haven't
heard a lot about efficiency of our automobiles. Do you think
that that has had any impact on the price we are paying for
gasoline today?
Ms. Harbert. I think everybody recognizes that, as an
economy, we certainly can become more efficient and that means
in our transportation sector and in our electricity
infrastructure without a doubt. Since the fuel standards that
were put in place and are coming into the marketplace, they--a
lot of people haven't bought cars recently. The new cars that
have the efficiency standards, just based on our economy, will
they have an impact on reducing the amount of consumption over
time? I mean I think that was the--ultimately the purpose of
that. And I think we have to examine all ways we can become
more efficient without a doubt. But the real answer is that the
reason we have had decreased demand is directly tied to the
economy, but the fuel standards will certainly have some
beneficial impact in the out years.
Mr. Weiss. One point of fact: the auto companies are on
record to produce more--sell more cars this year than any year
since 2007.
Mr. McNerney. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I had better yield back or I will get the
gavel.
Chairman Hall. You won't get the gavel but thank you for
yielding back.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Harris, the gentleman from
Maryland.
Dr. Harris. Thank you very much. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman for holding a hearing on a very important subject. As
people go to that gas pump and see that $4 a gallon at the top
and the farmers in my district paying $4 a gallon for diesel
and the watermen, they are interested in this. Here is the yes
no question. If the President had an epiphany today, got up
tomorrow and, you know, in the White House, had a press
conference, said that we are going to increase onshore and
offshore drilling in the United States, we are going to
maximize American energy production, he announced that the $4
billion Department of Energy budget was going to go to research
programs to convert natural gas to liquid fuels and--what would
the response of the oil market the next day be--price on the
oil market? Would it go up or down? Mr. Slaughter? The
President announces the United States is going to become an
energy leader in the world.
Mr. Slaughter. The oil market is very complex. It depends
on many factors----
Dr. Harris. Will it go up or down? Because we--it has been
done before. See, President Bush did it once so we don't--you
know, we actually have historical evidence of what happens.
Mr. Slaughter. Yeah, I have to pass on that one.
Dr. Harris. Okay. Ms. Harbert?
Ms. Harbert. You point out an interesting thing. When
President Bush lifted the moratorium, the price of oil went
down $9 overnight. I don't know exactly what happened. It is
complex. And I will be serious because this is----
Dr. Harris. Yeah.
Ms. Harbert. --a serious issue and we have----
Dr. Harris. Sure.
Ms. Harbert. --to take it seriously. There are a lot of
different complicating things in there, but the long-term price
signals of the market would be is that America is back open for
energy business.
Dr. Harris. Thank you very much.
Dr. Foss, you are an economist. What happens to the
speculators? What do they get worried about the next day?
Dr. Foss. Perception is reality and I agree with my friend,
Karen Harbert, that a signal like that would have a huge
impact, especially given everything else that is going on.
Dr. Harris. Sure.
Mr. Brown?
Mr. Brown. You know, I have been in the business trying to
predict the oil price for a long time here, but if you have the
ability to do this, let us talk later because we--it could
really work to my benefit.
Dr. Harris. That is what I thought.
Mr. Weiss?
Mr. Weiss. It would make no difference and would take seven
years to produce any oil from increased offshore oil drilling.
Dr. Harris. Mr. Weiss, the question was----
Mr. Weiss. It would make no difference----
Dr. Harris. --the next day, the next day----
Mr. Weiss. --no difference----
Dr. Harris. --there is no difference?
Mr. Weiss. No difference.
Dr. Harris. Let us talk about Mr. Weiss' testimony because
it is kind of a tome here. Mr. Slaughter, Mr. Weiss says the
Council--the National Petroleum Council ``also strongly
advocates a greenhouse gas pollution reduction regime.'' I read
that report. I don't see an advocacy for greenhouse gas
reduction regime. I see a statement that if you are going to do
one, here are the things you ought to do. Did the Council
strongly advocate a greenhouse gas reduction regime?
Mr. Slaughter. No, we were all----
Dr. Harris. Thank you very much.
Ms. Brown--Mr. Brown, the Secretary of Energy was here and
admitted that the Department of Energy spends 1/8 of one
percent of their budget on natural gas research, 1/8 of one
percent. Now, what can the Federal Government do to help you
and your companies develop unconventional oil? Do you think
that is an adequate amount for the Department of Energy to
spend on research into this field?
Mr. Brown. You know, for what we do, we try to react very
quickly. The reason we built the rock lab for ourselves in
Denver is because the commercial labs that are out there will
do what we want to do; they won't do it quick enough for us. So
if the government is going to invest money in research, it has
to be on some of the subjects we talked about earlier. It has
to be long-term, has to be something out there. We operate in a
much--we have even had these discussions. We support all the
universities across Montana, North Dakota--we haven't got to
Wyoming yet but we are working on that one--Colorado School of
Mines. Academia does not work fast enough for us.
Dr. Harris. Sure. So we----
Mr. Brown. So that----
Dr. Harris. I know they need the help. Mr. Brown, the
testimony from Mr. Weiss says that the price of oil coming out
of the ground is $15 a barrel and of course you are selling it
for $100. Mr. Brown, what is your average price of the oil that
you produce?
Mr. Brown. Oh, wow.
Dr. Harris. I know because $15 is not what American
companies are paying to produce oil. What do you charge or what
your cost is?
Mr. Brown. That is in our SEC filings. You can see our
finding cost for oil is around 25 bucks a barrel----
Dr. Harris. Twenty-five.
Mr. Brown. --25, 27, somewhere in there.
Dr. Harris. So they are off by a factor of, oh, 60 percent
or so. Okay. So it is a second thing and I will look through
the rest of this and I will submit some questions for the
record later.
Ms. Foss, let me ask you a question. The--what will the
effect--the President says, you know, there is $4 billion, oh
my gosh, we have to reduce all these subsidies to oil companies
at $4 billion. How--if we do that, how in the world are they
going to do research if we eliminate the advantages that we
give to all businesses whether it is pharmaceutical industry,
whether it is the music industry--Apple gets the same benefits.
How are we expecting the--because Mr. Brown just suggested that
actually you have to be nimble. You actually have to be able to
produce some of this research for these groundbreaking
technologies. How are we going to do it if we remove that $4
billion in tax incentives that every manufacturing business in
the country gets?
Dr. Foss. Thank you for making the point that way because
that is something that doesn't get spoken correctly I think to
the wider audiences. I--we have been through every bit of
taxing and forms of taxing and subsidies and credits on
different industries and there is no difference between what is
done for oil and gas versus anything else. There are very large
upfront research and development costs. Exploration is a
research and development business. And so in that way,
pharmaceuticals is a great example. You sink a lot of money
into the business without knowing what you are really going to
get for it.
I think the key thing is transparency and predictability
and feeling like there is a fiscal regime in the country that
is clear, is not going to be handled capriciously, that is
consistent. I think all business in the United States
appreciates that, not just the oil and gas industry.
Dr. Harris. I think you are right.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. And thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Lujan, gentleman from New
Mexico.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Appreciate
the testimony today and you bringing us here today, Mr.
Chairman.
A lot of conversations about who is to blame for high gas
prices, anyone that truly believes that President Obama or
Secretary Chu or Speaker Boehner or Congressman Lujan wants
higher fuel prices for the American people, it is not true. And
I think that we need to get past this so that way we can start
solving the problems. People are paying more at the pump.
People are paying more for eggs. Our farmers as well are paying
more for diesel. And there are some things that we can do as
well. Why is the United States exporting more diesel now in
2011 than ever before? If my farmers are paying more for diesel
or we are moving signs or this weekend I was on the Bobcat
cleaning up around our sheet bars moving that dirt and it did
cost a bundle to be able to fill up that Bobcat. Why are we
exporting more diesel?
And therein lies some of the questions that I have is if we
produce more oil and natural gas in the United States, we are
going to increase supply, correct? That means lower gas prices
at the pump for the American people? And I would ask the
witnesses yes or no. Mr. Slaughter, we will start, just come
down the line.
Mr. Slaughter. All things being equal, more supply in the
market of----
Mr. Lujan. All things being equal, if the United States
increases its supply, will fuel prices at the pump go down for
the American people?
Mr. Slaughter. It would reduce the supply of crude oil.
Refined product prices have more complex dynamics. But all
things being equal, it reduces the----
Mr. Lujan. Ms. Harbert?
Ms. Harbert. Demand is going up, we need more supply. We
don't have the supply, the prices go up. So if we have more
supply, the prices will--that price increase will be somewhat
ameliorated, if not go down.
Mr. Lujan. Okay. Let us stay there for a second. So if the
United States increases supply, fuel prices will go down is
what you are saying. All right. So do you support--you support
increasing production in the United States?
Ms. Harbert. Is that a question?
Mr. Lujan. Yes.
Ms. Harbert. Yes.
Mr. Lujan. Do you support keeping any increased production
in the United States for American consumption to be refined in
the United States only?
Ms. Harbert. To be refined here and then kept here for use?
Mr. Lujan. Yes.
Ms. Harbert. So putting up trade barriers to----
Mr. Lujan. Call them whatever you want.
Ms. Harbert. --to keep those molecules back in the United
States?
Mr. Lujan. I am saying if we are going to increase
production in the United States, shouldn't we keep it in the
United States to be able to help the American consumer and
American businesses, the people that you represent?
Ms. Harbert. We are not going to be able to put a ring
around the United States, erect a wall and have the price, you
know, be dramatically different on the island of the United
States versus what it is set on the world market. So--but when
you look at the overall world market----
Mr. Lujan. So then if there is not a little island around
the United States, then we won't be able to impact prices. Is
that what you are saying?
Ms. Harbert. No, that is not what I am saying.
Mr. Lujan. So then if we are able to create this magic ring
around the United States and increase production in the United
States, shouldn't we keep it here?
Ms. Harbert. We are not----
Mr. Lujan. That is what I mean.
Ms. Harbert. --able to build a hypothetical wall around the
United States so this--you started the conversation very----
Mr. Lujan. Well, then how are we going to----
Ms. Harbert. --importantly. You said this is a very
important subject to maybe get beyond some of this.
Mr. Lujan. Ms. Harbert, my time is limited. I apologize.
If----
Chairman Hall. You have time to let her answer the
question.
Mr. Lujan. Well, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that but it is
my line of questions so we will get through this and I will try
to be----
Chairman Hall. Well, I am trying to help you.
Mr. Lujan. Well, I want to be respectful to our colleagues
so I appreciate that, sir. We will submit some things in
writing as well.
But these have been conversations we have had in the
Natural Resources Committee as well. If I remember correctly,
back when the United States built a pipeline after the oil
embargos in the early '80s, there was a requirement that was
put in place by this Congress by one of our Republican
colleagues that authored the amendment that said any oil that
flows through this pipe is for American consumption. They built
a little circle around us then and it helped the American
people, right? So I don't know why we are having this
fundamental disagreement today where if we are going to
increase production, American people are hitting $4 a gallon,
some places higher. Diesel, which is a byproduct that we are
exporting more now is hitting our farmers and ranchers even
harder. Why don't we say----
Chairman Hall. All right. The gentleman is using all of his
time for his question. If we can get to the question and let
them give a quick answer.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman--one second. Mr. Chairman, if I may
ask that time be suspended and ask a personal inquiry here, the
rules allow for a Member to get five minutes to be able to ask
questions in any way that they so choose, but when Members of
the other side of the aisle are interrupting answers that are
coming in, no one was correcting to be able to ask the
witnesses to respond in a certain way.
Chairman Hall. I tried to give everybody five minutes, but
if some of you go over and some of you go over with your
questions.
Mr. Lujan. But it is important.
Chairman Hall. All right. Go ahead and go with it. How much
time did he have coming?
Mr. Lujan. I was about 1 minute 40 if I am not mistaken,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. All right.
Mr. Lujan. So if that is the case, I don't understand why
we are not trying to learn what we have done in the past. If
there is going to be support across the aisle to work together,
which was done after the oil embargos in the '70s to say what
can we do to increase production but make sure that we keep it
in the United States for American consumption to truly help us
here, why that is just not even put on the table any longer?
And I guess that is something I can't get my hands around.
Dr. Foss. Congressman, if I could I think I have some ideas
that might help you understand the issues. The places in the
United States where we have the cheapest fuel prices right now
are where the new sources of production are located. You can
look at----
Mr. Lujan. So this----
Dr. Foss. --this--you can look at----
Mr. Lujan. Dr. Foss, if I may----
Dr. Foss. Let me finish, please.
Mr. Lujan. No, Dr. Foss, this is my line of questioning
here. So do you support keeping increased production in the
United States and not exporting it?
Dr. Foss. No, I don't.
Mr. Lujan. Okay----
Dr. Foss. What I was going to distinguish was----
Mr. Lujan. Well, I appreciate that but my line of
questioning is quick here. So--but I do have an area where I
think that there is a silver lining for us and we talked about
this in the Natural Resources Committee as well. This is
something that the Chamber I believe supports as well and I
think that there may be support across the panelists. There is
a piece of legislation that was authored in the previous
Congress that has been reintroduced in this Congress. And we
talk about using natural gas. Natural gas in New Mexico right
now, we know production is down because of where the price is.
There is a piece of legislation that would actually encourage
natural gas use in 18-wheelers. So as we talk about moving the
largest vehicles across the country, using a domestic resource,
keeping the dollars in the United States, there is a piece of
legislation ready to go and I hope that there is a way that we
can work together to get our leadership to get this bill
moving.
Lastly, I will say is that, you know, with all this
pushback against biofuels and making investments in other
sources of energy, 80 percent of convoys in Iraq and
Afghanistan are for fuel and it is estimated that 46 convoys
resulted in a casualty. From 2003 to 2007 we lost 30--we lost
3,000 uniformed and civilian contractors. Something has got to
change.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. I interrupted you and cost you about 30
seconds. Would you like to have 30 seconds back to give Dr.
Foss a chance to answer as you asked?
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, I think what I will do is I will
just put some questions in writing there and I will get them to
the witnesses.
Chairman Hall. Okay. You have that right.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Rohrabacher, gentleman from
California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And, Mr. Chairman, just for the record, I
think the--our colleague did have a point that he does have a
right to control those five minutes any way we sees fit and
just would--with due respect, I think that that is something
that--he did point out that quite often I will question a
witness and demand an answer and interrupt if they are trying
to elongate the answer. So--but I do that with respect and I
know you are just trying to make sure we get all the
information out. Sometimes the rules are contradictory to that
but sometimes they are meant to keep things fair.
Let me just note here that if the gentleman's point is that
new energy--if we keep it here rather than let it go into the
world market that that will create lower prices here, why is he
stopping with oil? What about food? Why don't we just say any
agriculture products that are made in the United States can
only be sold in the United States? Well, think of how low the
price of food would go or anything else that we manufacture.
The reason we don't do that is because it creates other
barriers that will hurt our economy and put other people out of
work and hurt the overall prosperity of our country because it
is more than just a one-step process. But we do know if you
increase the supply of something, usually that means that the
prices--that the pressure for higher prices go down.
Let me note--and correct me if I am wrong, Mr. Weiss, how
many oil refineries have we built in this country in the last 3
decades?
Mr. Weiss. Oil refinery capacity has increased dramatically
in the last 3 decades.
Mr. Rohrabacher. How many new oil refineries?
Mr. Weiss. None, but we have expanded----
Mr. Rohrabacher. None. That is a good answer. Thank you.
And I will follow my colleague's lead. Yes, we have built none.
Mr. Weiss. We have expanded capacity.
Mr. Rohrabacher. No new refineries have been built.
Luckily, our--the people who run our refineries now are trying
their very best to keep up with technology.
Let me ask, I have heard some really incredible analyses of
how much oil we--and gas we have in this country but also I
hear something which seems contradictory to that from Mr.
Brown. Ms. Harbert, the predictions you said about how much oil
and gas we have, was that including the predictions from shale
oil? And Mr. Brown suggested that we don't really have the
technology now to get that.
Ms. Harbert. The specific figure that I referenced, which
is 2.7 trillion barrels, that is in-place oil shale and oil
sands----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Um-hum.
Ms. Harbert. --important to note that 80 percent of those
resources however, are on federal lands, not private lands.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right.
Ms. Harbert. In order to develop those, the Federal
Government has to allow access.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Now, I am just thinking about the
technology now. Do we have the technology to get that shale
oil?
Mr. Slaughter. We are working on the technology. Shell has
had a project--a research project going for ten years or so. It
is a very long process to make that technology work.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Does that mean no?
Mr. Slaughter. It means we need to work on it----
Mr. Rohrabacher. I know but----
Mr. Slaughter. --and it is the same basis.
Mr. Rohrabacher. --we don't have it now.
Mr. Slaughter. We do not produce commercial oil shale
today, no.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. So----
Ms. Harbert. But in order for those investments to continue
and to grow, there has to be some certainty that ultimately
they are going to be able to produce this resource in the
United States----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay, but----
Ms. Harbert. --and right now, that is one of the----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, we didn't know how we would get a
lot of gas before fracking came up. We didn't know how we were
going to get a lot of the oil, so we would hope the technology
was there, but I am just trying to get right now how much
reserves we can actually count on.
Mr. Brown, there is--I read an article somewhere that
suggested that there was a new method of fracking that was not
going to be using water, that would be using some sort of
explosives, a fuel of some kind. Do you know anything about
that? Could you enlighten me to that?
Mr. Brown. There is a technology out there called GASFRAC--
--
Mr. Rohrabacher. Um-hum.
Mr. Brown. --and they actually use--they--you can use any
propane--or any hydrocarbon product. I think the one they are
currently using is propane. So instead of using water, you use
propane to move your materials.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. And that would make it less likely
to have water pollution? Why would someone use that?
Mr. Brown. Part of the issues we have--like with this
Bakken shale--not so much in the Bakken shale but some of the
other formations that we are looking at you have in the porous
space in the rock you have some clay particles in there similar
to bentonite that would swell up when they are contacted with
water, which is what we currently use for fracking----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Um-hum.
Mr. Brown. --so you try to frack them with something other
than water.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So that would make it more efficient.
Mr. Brown. Yes. Yeah.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So I have no doubt that we are going to
have technological advances that will increase our ability to
obtain this type of fuel and energy for our country as long as
the--our government has the purpose and it is the purpose of
government to increase the amount of energy in our country and
I would suggest that it is the purpose of this government not
to increase oil and gas production out of some unfortunate
loyalty to this idea that CO
2
is creating huge
changes in our climate which will result in the fact that we
are not going to develop those energy sources.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back. Thank you.
Recognize Mr. Quayle, gentleman from Arizona, for five
minutes.
Mr. Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Brown, the President routinely has been claiming
recently that under his Administration America is producing
more oil today than at any time in the last eight years. This
is a few years after the fact the President actually said
during an editorial board meeting--I believe it was in San
Francisco--that under his Administration energy prices would
necessarily skyrocket. And Secretary Chu I believe has been
quoted as saying that he would like to see gas prices in the
United States to be at European levels. So I think that that
kind of shows where the Administration is.
But even though he is trying to say all this, the reality
is that most of the domestic production has occurred on state
and private lands, not federal land, which the Administration
actually has. And I believe Ms. Harbert said that in her
testimony that the data shows that oil production on federal
lands declined by 11 percent and natural gas production on
federal lands declined by 27 percent in 2009 to 2011.
Now, in Arizona where I am from and in many of the Western
States, much of our land is federal. It is under federal
control. And I really--routinely hear from companies with
renewable energy and also traditional energy that they are
extraordinarily frustrated by the permitting problems and the
administrative roadblocks that are put up when people are
trying to get projects on federal lands. And in your testimony
you said that ``it is fortunate that Bakken exists in North
Dakota because most of the surface and mineral ownership is by
private individuals with minimal federal ownerships.'' Could
you expand on this because this is the big thing that we have
been hearing over and over again is that, wow, oil and natural
gas production is going up and this is because the
Administration's actions when in actuality it is in spite of
the Administration's actions because most of this has been
developed on state and private land. So could you expand on
what you are talking about with the Bakken field?
Mr. Brown. Sure. One of the projects that we are developing
in North Dakota is an area or a prospect we call Pronghorn. It
is located in Stark County, North Dakota, and that project
butts right up against the Theodore Roosevelt National Park up
there. The park is off limits. We can't drill in the park; we
can't even drill under the park so that is totally off limits.
There is a halo of federal acreage around the park that is
administered by the BLM. We are able to get drilling permits in
North Dakota from--on state and on fee ground in something
around 60 days. On the acreage or the leases that we have that
are federal, the current--and this is their number; this isn't
our number--the current number is 298 days to get a permit.
As I mentioned in my testimony, we currently have 19
drilling rigs running in North Dakota and trying to make--
trying to get the logistics to all this to work, when you--you
know, you are saying--when you start in they are going--they
are saying a permit may take 6 months to get. You plan on 6
months. The 6 months gets there, you don't have a permit, but
you have got a drilling rig you have got to do something with.
So it has just been--it adds another level of complexity,
another level that we have to take into our planning right now.
The other--I mean--so that--you know, we are waiting almost a
year to go drill a well. We are waiting almost a year to start
paying royalties that would be going to the Federal Government.
The other issue we have is there are leases within the area
that we are drilling that we have nominated to come up on the
lease schedule that just isn't occurring. And so we are not
able to drill federal--or fee minerals that surround this
particular federal lease just because we can't get access to
that federal lease that may exist right in the middle of one of
our spacing units.
Mr. Quayle. And when you say it was 296 or 298----
Mr. Brown. Two hundred and ninety-eight.
Mr. Quayle. Two hundred and ninety-eight days. Is that on
the low end? That is a low-end estimate and usually it is
longer than that or----
Mr. Brown. Well, that is their average over--I think it was
the last 9 months or something like that. That was--when--Mr.
Salazar went to North Dakota a couple of weeks ago. That was
the number that they put out in the print to BLM.
Mr. Quayle. Okay. Dr. Foss, a recent report by Citigroup
declared that North America is the new Middle East and that--
this is a quote--``the only thing that can stop it is
politics.'' And can you explain some of the hurdles that
politics could pose to the timely, safe, and economic recovery
of hydrocarbon resources and how our current policies are
impacting energy development?
Dr. Foss. Actually, I was thinking of an example as I was
listening to Mr. Brown. We have something like 110 species on
the watch list in Texas, endangered species. You probably have
something like that in Arizona. And currently, there are
attempts to use the ESA to try to slow down oil and gas
development in West Texas. This is of concern to the State
because of the impact on oil and gas severance tax receipts and
other receipts. The point that we have made is that these same
species that are being discussed also impact non-hydrocarbon,
nontraditional alternative energy projects, as you have well
pointed out because they are in the same places that people
want to use the development of those energy technologies.
So I think that the thing to focus on is the constellation
of federal policies, the fact that they often are in conflict
with each other, there is no one-stop shopping. We created one-
stop shopping in the State and other States are trying to do
the same thing to at least be able to streamline the process
for developers so that they can understand what permits they
need to get, what the timeline is going to look like, what
their responsibilities are, what they have to do to mitigate
any impacts they are creating, and so on. The overall
management of the process has to be improved. There is just no
doubt about that.
Mr. Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Hall. Thank you for yielding back.
Mr. Cravaack from Minnesota for five minutes.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the panel
for being here today.
A couple questions in regards to--Dr. Foss, can you tell me
if--we have all heard about you got to pay your fair share and
we have seen that paying your fair share for some of the oil
companies if you take a look at, for example, Apple like you
said, Johnson & Johnson, McDonald's, for example, they are
paying--they get quite a bit of tax credits in relation to what
the oil companies get. Now, if the oil companies lost their tax
credit, what happens? What happens to the consumer?
Dr. Foss. Not all of the industry is the same. It is a
pretty diverse cluster of companies, large, small, some of them
are publicly traded, some of them are privately financed so the
impacts would be different. If the standard deductions that
businesses get to cover the cost of making investments were
removed or if the standard investments for aging equipment and
assets, whether it is depletion allowances for, you know, aging
oil and gas fields, new oil and gas industry or whether--or its
depreciation associated with drilling costs and other expenses,
then obviously companies are going to look at their investments
in a different way. It will slow down the cycle time. They will
move more slowly. They will choose not to make certain
investments in certain places. And the likelihood is that we
would actually have a reduction in our potential domestic
production as a result of that.
Mr. Cravaack. So when I go plug in at the pump, gas is
going to go up. Are we going to pretty much say that?
Dr. Foss. It would have a very big impact.
Mr. Cravaack. Okay. So now let us talk about--that is gas
at the pump. I am going to plug in, average American, who pays
the ultimate price for this? The average American is going to
pay the ultimate price for the tax if President Obama has his
way in regards to eliminating the tax credits that are given to
the oil companies.
Okay. Let us take it one step further. When I go into town
halls, I ask people, how many people have 401(k)'s? How many
people have IRA's? You know, how many people have pension
plans? A lot of people have big oil in their pension plans,
would you agree? So what is the bottom line going to happen to
the pension plans and IRA's and 401(k)'s? Those are probably
going to go down as well, would you agree with that?
Dr. Foss. Well, to the extent that the industry would be
perceived to be both more expensive and less valuable, then,
yes, it would affect market capitalization and affect holdings
of those.
Mr. Cravaack. So what the President, then, is proposing is
going to affect the average American at the pump and also in
their long-term retirement plans in the 401(k)'s, IRA's and
their pension plans as well. So it is a negative effect overall
for these two things as well.
Now, let us talk another thing. Let us say we start ramping
up oil production in the United States, America. Let me ask you
this question, Mr. Slaughter. You know, we start ramping up--
and also Mr. Brown, too--we start increasing our oil
production, we start investing into the infrastructure in the
United States. What happens when you do that? What do you also
create in the sidelines?
Mr. Slaughter. There is a tremendous amount of associated
job creation potential around the oil industry from the service
sector, the supply chains, and all the supporting dollars in
that. So there is a tremendous effect which spreads through the
economy.
Mr. Cravaack. Creates jobs, wow, what a concept. I think we
are in need of that, aren't we, creating jobs? So--okay. So if
we lower--get rid of the tax credits we are going to lower
IRA's, 401(k)'s, and people are going to have in their pension
plans, we are going to increase the price of gas, but if we
start investing in our infrastructure, we will start creating
jobs which we need badly in the United States as well.

Now, let me ask you this question. We talked, Mr. Weiss--we
said something about supply if the supply isn't affected
whatsoever. The Strait of Hormuz goes down. Ms. Foss, can you
tell me Strait of Hormuz goes down, Iran becomes potentially a
nuclear weapon, Strait of Hormuz goes down, 30 percent of the
oil goes through the Strait of Hormuz, we have harassment from
pirates going through the Red Sea, lack of supply, what is
going to happen to gas?
Dr. Foss. It will go up.
Mr. Cravaack. Gas is going to go up. So therefore, the
Strait--so supply going down, gas is definitely going to go up.
Now, let me take this one step further. Say we do go into a
possible wartime scenario where we possibly have actually a
two-theater war concept where both sides, both coasts are--sea
lanes are shut down, supply is down. Mr. Brown, can you tell me
do we have enough oil in this country to keep the United States
running in the present?
Mr. Brown. We do not.
Mr. Cravaack. So therefore, we could consider oil
production within the United States of America as a national
asset. Would you agree with that statement?
Mr. Brown. I would, yes.
Mr. Cravaack. Okay. Now, it is not too long ago I think we
fought a world war, a lot of it initiated because of oil. Would
that be a correct statement for Japan?
Mr. Brown. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Cravaack. So now we are figuring out that oil
production within the United States is a national asset, will
create jobs and creating a tax decrease--our tax credit
decrease is going to be negative to our economy and possibly
negative to job production as well. Wow. It seems pretty
straightforward to me on where we are going here.
So let me ask--Mr. Weiss, let me ask you a quick question.
Do you believe that CO
2
is the cause of climate
change?
Mr. Weiss. Ninety-eight percent of the scientists who have
done research on this in this field have concluded that it is
human-caused production of carbon dioxide and other global-
warming pollutants that are responsible for global warming.
Mr. Cravaack. Let me ask. I only have a couple seconds. Do
you think we have more CO
2
in the air than we did in
1976 versus where we are today? Do you think we are more
environmentally friendly today than we were in 1976?
Mr. Weiss. Yes, we are more environmentally friendly----
Mr. Cravaack. Hugely. Okay, let me----
Mr. Weiss. --but we have more CO
2
in the air
than we did in 1976 in the upper atmosphere, yes.
Mr. Cravaack. Okay, well, I would debate that because of
the--looking at the arctic ice going down, first off, it says
that CO
2
follows temperature increase, does not
initiate it. Second thing is in 1976 I was in high school. You
look around the same generation as I. Do you remember when the
big theory was then the polar caps were going to expand so
dramatically it was going to tilt the whole world?
Mr. Weiss. There had been not as much research then on that
theory as their as has been now on global warming.
Mr. Cravaack. I would disagree with you, sir, and looking
at the arctic caps today, it has been proven that temperature
follows--or CO
2
follows temperature.
And with that, I am over time and I will yield back, sir.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back.
And the very patient lady from Florida is recognized for
five minutes.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A lot of my questions
have been answered, but I do want to touch back on something.
Ms. Harbert, I know you answered this earlier but I just
want to hear it again because some of these rules, you know,
the EPA's numerous proposed regulations such as recently
proposed New Source Performance Standards for power plants and
Cross State Air Pollutant Rules are very burdensome, especially
to States like mine in Florida, as well as forthcoming rules on
greenhouse gas emissions at drilling sites and tier three
refining standards. What does that mean for our energy use and
energy prices?
Ms. Harbert. Well, the reality is that industry cannot
figure out how to navigate this regulatory tsunami. If you look
at all of the regulations from EPA from 2011 out to 2014, which
is what their planning horizon is, there are tens--many, many,
many, many large-scale regulations that are coming forward and
nobody has taken a look at the complete amalgamation of all of
these regulations, what the impact would be on GDP, what the
real impact is and benefit is to the pollutants they are
intended to regulate, and what will affect business. And that
is really troubling that we have all of these regulations
coming all in a short period of time and nobody can honestly
say that we understand what the complete cumulative impact will
be.
Mrs. Adams. Now, would you say they would affect prices?
Because I pulled up to the gas pumps just a couple days ago at
home and the car before me must have had a heart attack because
on the gas pump it was $81.10. So I can only imagine what my
constituent was thinking at the time when they were filling up
their gas tank. Would those regulations, a combination of such
also add to the cost?
Ms. Harbert. We certainly need to take a look first at
electricity because we are seeing this play out in real time
for us as the implementation of these regulations is already
underway, plants are shutting down, and the local regulators
are trying to figure out how to keep the lights on. There is a
big reliability issue and I can tell you the economic impact of
having a reliability problem in our grid is significant and
very, very frightening for the American economy and the
American business community.
On the transportation side of things, I mean these are
going to be coming in over the next couple of years and we are
going to see the impact. It certainly is going to do nothing to
decrease prices.
Mrs. Adams. And we have seen what happens if we lose a grid
as seen in the Northeast, correct? So----
Ms. Harbert. Very, very, very big impacts on the economy.
Mrs. Adams. Mr. Slaughter, I understand you also work for
Shell North America. What is Shell doing to increase energy
production in the United States? And also, what challenges has
Shell faced such as acquiring necessary production permits from
the Department of Interior or the EPA? And how long did it take
Shell to acquire a producing permit for the lease in Alaska's
Outer Continental Shelf? And is that--how does that compare to
historical timelines?
Mr. Slaughter. Well, on the first part of the question, we
are investing billions of dollars a year, $3 to $5 billion a
year in onshore oil and gas exploration, more in the Gulf of
Mexico. We are also investing in other sources of energy like
wind power, very big wind power developer. So we have a very
robust investment plan because we think the resource is there
and we think we can develop it for the long-term.
In terms of the permitting and regulatory experience in
Alaska, you have to recognize that these are federal offshore
leases which have a ten-year life. We are almost halfway
through that ten-year period and we are only now beginning to
get the necessary permits in place. So we never anticipated the
complexities and difficulties of navigating that regulatory
process, which has caused significant risk to that offshore
drilling program in Alaska.
Mrs. Adams. And how would that compare to historical
permitting timelines?
Mr. Slaughter. I would have to research that. I think
Alaska is a bit of a special case because offshore developments
in Alaska is a new activity.
Mrs. Adams. Well, Mr. Brown, we have heard a great deal
about the dramatic economic turnaround in North Dakota, you
know, that is occurring because of--thanks a lot to the oil
production. Can you describe the current economic outlook for
your operations in North Dakota and what is the current average
salary for your employees? How many people has Whiting hired
since the beginning of this boom? And what is your company's
short- and medium-term growth potential?
Mr. Brown. Wow. When we made our first acquisition in North
Dakota--and this would have been back just before we went
public in 2003--we had zero employees in North Dakota. We are
currently at about 270 employees in North Dakota. As I
mentioned, we have 270 openings in the country right now,
approximately 100 of those are in North Dakota. As you are well
aware, you know, there is--in order to get employees up there,
we have bought housing, we have bought apartments, we are doing
everything we can to make it, you know, hospitable for the
folks that we move up there. We moved one gentleman from
Shreveport, Louisiana, up there. He is wondering if we moved
him to the end of the world.
Our outlook for growth, we are currently spending about
$800 million in North Dakota this year. That level will
continue to grow next year, and so we are--I mean North Dakota
is just a very--one of the foundation blocks for Whiting right
now.
Mrs. Adams. Average salaries?
Mr. Brown. Oh, man. I am going to guess. The last time I
saw the average salary we were paying up there was approaching
$100,000 a year.
Mrs. Adams. So this process has been economically good for
North Dakota and the United States?
Mr. Brown. Correct.
Mrs. Adams. And it created jobs?
Mr. Brown. Both direct and indirect. I mentioned all the--
you know, we hire--a lot of what we get done up there is
through contractors. And so we--it just, you know, dominoes
through the economy.
Mrs. Adams. And I realize I went over, Mr. Chair, but I
would like for Ms.--Dr. Foss, if she would like to finish her
response to my colleague when she was talking about
distinguishing if that would be appropriate?
Chairman Hall. Without objection, you are recognized.
Dr. Foss. This is to Congressman Lujan's point you mean?
Here is the issue--and this is why the debate around Keystone
and other infrastructure--siting infrastructure like that is so
important. We have low fuel prices in the middle of the country
where supply is abundant. The bulk of the population is in
coastal areas. We don't have good ways right now to move supply
from the interior of the country where Whiting and other
companies like Shell are operating to the points where people
are. And without being able to address that problem, then we
are not going to be able to provide everyone with more
opportunities to have more competitively priced energy.
The other thing I would like to suggest the Committee think
about is our own waterways--our own coastal waterways by law we
cannot move production in our own waterways that is
domestically produced because of restrictions in the Jones Act.
I know this is controversial but I did put it in my testimony.
I want to go on the record as suggesting that everyone does
need to look at that and the constraints that it poses. It is
really--it is a shame. I do agree it is a shame to think about
exporting our production outside of the country when we could
be our own best customers. But we can't get there and that is
something that people could think about.
Chairman Hall. All right. The gentlelady yields back. And I
thank you for that.
And I certainly do thank all of you. I think we are out of
questionnaires and questions completed. And I thank you for
your very valuable testimony and the Members for their
questions. And this has been a wonderful--I think a wonderful
presentation on all five of your parts. And I thank you and I
know the Committee thanks you. And these empty chairs here
shouldn't have any effect on you because this is all taken
down. They will all be given to their committee staffs and they
will either read them to the Congressmen or let him read it or
her read it themselves. So it is available to them and you have
made that possible and I sure do thank you.
The Members might have some additional questions for any of
you and we will ask you to respond to those in writing if they
submit them to you. The record will remain open for a couple of
weeks for additional comments.
At this time, I would like to enter into the record three
items--and this is without objection--the Executive Summary of
the National Petroleum Council report that Mr. Slaughter has
testified on today. That is the first one. Second, an editorial
from Investor's Business Daily summarizing the massive amount
of U.S. oil resources that we could potentially access. That is
number two. Number three, an article from yesterday's E & E
News detailing comments made by the Texas Railroad Commission
Chairman that lifting regulatory burdens could allow Texas oil
production to quadruple to four million barrels per day.
Without objection, it is so ordered.
[The information appears in Appendix II.]
Chairman Hall. And at this time, if there are no further
inquiries, we are adjourned. And thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:13 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Mr. Andrew Slaughter

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Ms. Karen Harbert

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Michelle Michot Foss

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. James Brown

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. Daniel Weiss

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Executive Summary of the National Petroleum Council report submitted by
Chairman Ralph Hall
To view PRUDENT DEVELOPMENT: Realizing the Potential of North
America's Abundant Natural Gas and Oil Resources, National Petroleum
Council Report(2011) visit http://www.npc.org/reports/NARD-
ExecSummVol.pdf.
Article submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Article submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


