- OVERVIEW OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERVIEW OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE
OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, MARCH 6, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-66

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

73-124PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             PAUL D. TONKO, New York
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               JERRY McNERNEY, California
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
Tennessee                        HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation

HON. BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona, Chair
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
Tennessee                        BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
RALPH M. HALL, Texas

EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Tuesday, March 6, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Benjamin Quayle, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Donna Edwards, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    12
Written Statement............................................    13

Witnesses:

Dr. Patrick Gallagher, Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards
and Technology and Director, National Institute of Standards
and Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    17

Discussion
...............................................................    33

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Patrick Gallagher, Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards
and Technology and Director, National Institute of Standards
and Technology.................................................    40

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Submitted by Dr. Patrick Gallagher, Under Secretary of Commerce
for Standards and Technology and Director, National Institute
of Standards and Technology....................................    50

OVERVIEW OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE
OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 6, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Benjamin
Quayle [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Quayle. The Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation will come to order.
Good morning. Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``An
Overview of the National Institute of Standards and Technology
Budget for Fiscal Year 2013.''
In front of you are packets containing the written
testimony, biographies and Truth in Testimony disclosures for
today's witness. I now recognize myself for five minutes for an
opening statement.
Today we will be discussing the fiscal year 2013 budget
request for the National Institute of Standards and Technology
and gathering details about NIST's priorities. I would like to
thank Dr. Gallagher for appearing before us today. NIST has
been well served by your leadership.
Before getting into the specifics of NIST's request, I
would like to briefly discuss the President's 2013 budget
proposal. Unfortunately, the budget submitted by the
Administration a few weeks ago continues to promote the same
failed policies that have made our economic situation worse.
The President's budget includes the most government spending in
history, the biggest tax increase in American history, and the
biggest debt in history. This proposal increases overall
spending $200 billion, to a total of $3.8 trillion, nearly a
quarter of our gross domestic product. The budget will increase
taxes on American families and job creators by $1.9 trillion.
While paying lip service to the need to cut debt and deficits,
under the President's framework, our gross national debt will
increase from $15 trillion today to approximately $26 trillion
ten years from now. The Administration has failed to rein in
spending and has failed to lay out a credible plan for bringing
the deficit and debt under control. This is unsustainable and
irresponsible.
Today, we examine one portion of that budget proposal, the
President's fiscal year 2013 budget request for NIST. While
NIST is a smaller agency, this request does not exist within a
vacuum and must be weighed in the context of our fiscal
situation. NIST is a non-regulatory laboratory of the federal
government tasked with making contributions to our Nation's
innovation and industrial competitiveness by advancing
measurement science, standards and technology. NIST works
closely alongside industry to make sure their activities
improve the quality of life of Americans and the economic
security of our Nation.
Although we may not be aware of NIST's impact in our lives,
NIST research advances a variety of national priorities and
challenges related to advanced manufacturing and materials,
nanotechnology, cybersecurity, health information technology,
advanced communications networks, and disaster resilience.
The fiscal year 2013 budget request for NIST totals $857
million, an increase of $106.2 million, or 14.1 percent, from
the fiscal year 2012 enacted level. The Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology has a long, bipartisan record of support
for NIST and its contributions. Given the value of NIST
research to our Nation's competitiveness, we are strongly
supportive of NIST's scientific and technical research and
services. We also recognize the work of NIST's industrial
technology services. However, I believe we need to do a better
job of prioritizing our investments, and a 14.1 percent budget
increase is simply unrealistic in our current fiscal
environment.
While we can all agree that the research NIST conducts is
important for our economy, we simply cannot afford to continue
spending at these rates, given our current fiscal reality. I
have every reason to believe that NIST will continue to conduct
innovative research while seeking ways to improve the
efficiency of its programs so that this research is undertaken
in a fiscally responsible manner.
I am appreciative of the opportunity to learn more about
how fiscal year 2013 funds will be prioritized by NIST, and I
thank our witness, Dr. Gallagher for his time, today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Quayle follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Ben Quayle,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives
Good Morning. I would like to welcome everyone to today's hearing.
We will be discussing the fiscal year 2013 budget request for the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), and gathering
details about NIST's priorities. I would like to thank Dr. Gallagher
for appearing before us today. NIST has been well served by your
leadership.
Before getting into the specifics of NIST's request, I would like
to briefly discuss the President's 2013 budget proposal. Unfortunately,
the budget submitted by the Administration a few weeks ago continues to
promote the same failed policies that have made our economic situation
worse. The President's budget includes the most government spending in
history, the biggest tax increase in American history, and the biggest
debt in history.
This proposal increases overall spending $200 billion, to a total
of $3.8 trillion--nearly a quarter of our gross domestic product (23.3
percent). The budget will increase taxes on American families and job
creators by $1.9 trillion. While paying lip service to the need to cut
debt and deficits, under the President's framework, our gross national
debt will increase from $15 trillion today to approximately $26
trillion ten years from now. The Administration has failed to rein in
spending and has failed to lay out a credible plan for bringing the
deficit and debt under control. This is unsustainable and
irresponsible.
Today, we examine one portion of that budget proposal, the
President's FY 2013 budget request for NIST. While NIST is a smaller
agency, this request does not exist within a vacuum and must be weighed
in the context of our fiscal situation. NIST is a non-regulatory
laboratory of the federal government tasked with making contributions
to our Nation's innovation and industrial competitiveness by advancing
measurement science, standards, and technology. NIST works closely
alongside industry to make sure their activities improve the quality of
life of Americans and the economic security of our Nation.
Although we may not be aware of NIST's impact on our lives, NIST
research advances a variety of national priorities and challenges
related to advanced manufacturing and materials, nanotechnology, cyber
security, health information technology, advanced communications
networks, and disaster resilience.
The fiscal year 2013 budget request for NIST totals $857 million,
an increase of $106.2 million or 14.1 percent from the FY 2012 enacted
level. The Committee on Science, Space, and Technology has a long,
bipartisan record of support for NIST and its contributions. Given the
value of NIST research to our nation's competitiveness, we are strongly
supportive of NIST's Scientific and Technical Research and Services. We
also recognize the work of NIST's Industrial Technology Services.
However, I believe we need to do a better job of prioritizing our
investments, and a 14.1 percent budget increase is simply unrealistic
in our current fiscal environment.
While we can all agree that the research NIST conducts is important
for our economy, we simply cannot afford to continue spending at these
rates, given our current fiscal reality. I have every reason to believe
that NIST will continue to conduct innovative research while seeking
ways to improve the efficiency of its programs so that this research is
undertaken in a fiscally responsible manner. I am appreciative of the
opportunity to learn more about how fiscal year 2013 funds will be
prioritized by NIST, and I thank our witness, Dr. Gallagher for his
time, today.

Chairman Quayle. I now recognize the gentlelady from
Maryland, the Ranking Member, Ms. Edwards, for her opening
statement.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Chairman Quayle, and thank you very
much for holding today's hearing to examine the
Administration's fiscal year 2013 budget request for the
National Institute of Standards and Technology, and I want to
thank Dr. Gallagher also for appearing before us this morning
and for your leadership at NIST. And while it would be
interesting to hold a hearing about the overall budget
priorities in the Administration's budget, our task today is
really specifically with respect to NIST and putting that into
a context in which we examine where we want to be in terms of
our future in manufacturing and research and development and
NIST's role in that. And so it is that framework from which I
will be asking questions today because I am sure Dr. Gallagher
doesn't have expertise on the larger federal budget.
And although NIST is a relatively small agency, it is an
extremely important player in federal efforts to spur
innovation and economic prosperity in the country, and for more
than 100 years, NIST has supported the competitiveness of U.S.
industry by advancing measurement science, standards and
technology. NIST's broad and deep technical expertise, as well
as its ability to serve as a bridge to U.S. businesses, is
really unparalleled.
And I am pleased that the President's fiscal year 2013
budget request draws on the strengths of NIST and gives the
agency a prominent role in the Administration's strategy to
revitalize American manufacturing, and I think there is no one
in this country who couldn't agree that we have to revitalize
American manufacturing in order to be competitive for the 21st
century, and NIST's role in that is really paramount.
Since 2000, the United States has lost over 650,000 high-
tech manufacturing jobs. It is really shocking. Our trade
deficit in advanced technology products is growing and China is
now the world's biggest exporter of high-technology goods. The
truth is that our position as the global leader in innovation
and technology is being threatened as developing nations build
up their capabilities to become not only the technology
assembly line, but also the creator of new and innovative
technologies, that is, linking manufacturing with their
domestic production capacity.
The Administration's budget proposal includes a number of
initiatives that can reverse these disturbing manufacturing
trends. For example, the establishment of industry-led public-
private consortia is exactly what ``the doctor ordered'' to
address the pre-competitive challenges faced by U.S. companies.
The Advanced Manufacturing Technology Consortia, or AMTech,
program included in the budget request will tackle technical
issues that are prohibiting the growth of advanced
manufacturing here at home, and will provide a foundation for
new and existing companies to flourish, producing high-quality,
well-paying jobs which are key to the growth of our economy and
the middle class.
I am interested in learning more today about the
Administration's proposal to launch a National Network for
Manufacturing Innovation. From what I gather, this proposal is
based in part on a successful model, the Fraunhofer
Institutes--we will have a chance to talk about later--
implemented in Germany with the support of its government. This
is certainly a promising model that I believe we should fully
explore in this country and I am eager to hear whether the
network is in fact intended to spur these sorts of public-
private research partnerships. Again, another example of the
international community investing in advanced manufacturing and
the United States taking a back seat. We hope to change that
today and hope to do that with the President's budget.
And so whether you agree with it or not, the truth is, most
of our competitors are putting significant and targeted
resources towards helping businesses, small and large,
accelerate commercialization of innovative technologies. The
current budget request finalizes the termination of the
Technology Innovation Program, or TIP. And it marks the first
time in years that NIST--in 25 years in fact that NIST lacks a
mechanism to provide competitive grants to U.S. companies to
accelerate the development of promising technologies that hold
the potential for significant commercial payoff and widespread
benefits for the United States. I am troubled by the void that
will be left by the termination of TIP and am interested in
exploring with the Chairman and Under Secretary Gallagher the
possibility of establishing a new program, or even
reconstituting a previous one, at NIST for this important
purpose.
I am also interested in learning more today about how the
current budget request will advance NIST's efforts in forensic
science. As you know, the National Research Council released a
report in 2009 that highlighted the fragmented nature of
forensic science in the United States, and expressed concern
over the lack of a rigorous scientific base for the field. The
NRC also emphasized the role NIST can and should play in
addressing the identified weaknesses, and I applaud the
strategic initiative outlined in NIST's budget proposal and
look forward to hearing how this initiative will strengthen
forensic science.
We could go on, but Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you again
for holding the hearing and I look forward to working with you
and our colleagues to ensure that NIST has the resources it
needs to fulfill its critical role in promoting innovation,
commercialization and business growth, and with that, I yield
the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Edwards follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Donna Edwards,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives
Thank you, Chairman Quayle. And thank you for holding today's
hearing to examine the Administration's fiscal year 2013 budget request
for the National Institute of Standards and Technology. I'd like to
thank Dr. Gallagher for appearing before us this morning and for his
leadership at NIST.
Although NIST is a relatively small agency, it is an extremely
important player in federal efforts to spur innovation and economic
prosperity in this country. For more than 100 years, NIST has supported
the competitiveness of U.S. industry by advancing measurement science,
standards, and technology. NIST's broad and deep technical expertise,
as well as its ability to serve as a bridge to U.S. businesses, is
unparalleled.
I am pleased that the President's fiscal year 2013 budget request
draws on the strengths of NIST and gives the agency a prominent role in
the Administration's strategy to revitalize American manufacturing.
Since 2000, the U.S. has lost over 650,000 high-tech manufacturing
jobs. Our trade deficit in advanced technology products is growing and
China is now the world's biggest exporter of high-technology goods. The
truth is that our position as the global leader in innovation and
technology is being threatened as developing countries build up their
capabilities to become not only the technology assembly line, but also
the creator of new and innovative technologies.
The Administration's budget proposal includes a number of
initiatives that can reverse these disturbing manufacturing trends. For
instance, the establishment of industry-led public-private consortia is
exactly ``what the doctor ordered'' to address precompetitive
challenges faced by U.S. companies. The Advanced Manufacturing
Technology Consortia, or AMTech, program included in the budget request
will tackle technical issues that are prohibiting the growth of
advanced manufacturing here at home, and will provide a foundation for
new and existing companies to flourish--producing high-quality, well
paying jobs which are key to the growth of our economy and the middle
class.
I'm interested in learning more today about the Administration's
proposal to launch a National Network for Manufacturing Innovation.
From what I gather, this proposal is based in part on a successful
model--the Fraunhofer Institutes--implemented in Germany with the
support of its government. This is certainly a promising model that I
believe we should fully explore in this country and I'm eager to hear
whether the Network is in fact intended to spur these sorts of public-
private research partnerships.
Whether you agree with it or not, the truth is most of our
competitors are putting significant and targeted resources towards
helping businesses--small and large--accelerate the commercialization
of innovative technologies. The current budget request finalizes the
termination of the Technology Innovation Program, or TIP. And it marks
the first time in 25 years that NIST lacks a mechanism to provide
competitive grants to U.S. companies to accelerate the development of
promising technologies that hold the potential for significant
commercial payoff and widespread benefits for the U.S. I'm troubled by
the void that will be left by the termination of TIP and am interested
in exploring with the Chairman and Under Secretary Gallagher the
possibility of establishing a new program, or even reconstituting a
previous one, at NIST for this important purpose.
I'm also interested in learning more today about how the current
budget request will advance NIST's efforts in forensic science. As you
know, the National Research Council released a report in 2009 that
highlighted the fragmented nature of forensic science in the U.S., and
expressed concern over the lack of a rigorous scientific base for the
field. The NRC also emphasized the role NIST can and should play in
addressing the identified weaknesses. I applaud the strategic
initiative outlined in NIST's budget proposal and look forward to
hearing how this initiative will strengthen forensic science in the
U.S.
I am equally interested in NIST's cybersecurity activities and am
interested in hearing more about how the FY 2013 request will help
ensure that NIST continues to play an important role in the Federal
Government's cybersecurity efforts, particularly as it relates to the
development of cybersecurity standards and guidelines for Federal
agencies and U.S. industry.
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for holding this hearing and I look
forward to working with you and our colleagues to ensure that NIST has
the resources it needs to fulfill its critical role in promoting
innovation, commercialization, and business growth. I yield back the
balance of my time.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Ms. Edwards.
If there are members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time I would like to introduce our witness. Our
witness is Dr. Patrick Gallagher, the Under Secretary of
Commerce for Standards and Technology and the Director of the
National Institute of Standards and Technology. Thanks again to
our witness for being here this morning.
As our witness should know, spoken testimony is limited to
five minutes. After presenting your spoken testimony, members
of the Committee will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our witness, Dr. Patrick Gallagher, for five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF PATRICK GALLAGHER, UNDER SECRETARY

OF COMMERCE FOR STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY,

AND DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY

Dr. Gallagher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member Edwards. I want to thank you both for your kind
words and recognition of my leadership and the work of NIST. I
want to recognize and thank all the members of the Subcommittee
for your support to NIST and for the opportunity to testify
today about the Administration's fiscal year 2013 request for
NIST.
This year's request can be summarized in two words:
advanced manufacturing. The President's request reflects his
strong commitment to accelerate the pace of innovation and to
better enable the transfer of technologies and products to help
American manufacturers to, as Secretary Bryson put it, make it
here and sell it everywhere.
NIST is an agency whose mission, rooted in the Constitution
is specifically charged with supporting U.S. industry,
especially the manufacturing sector, by advancing measurement
science, supporting standards and testing, and accelerating
commercialization of new technologies.
This year's request builds on our past successes and on
your past support of our mission. The overall discretionary
request for fiscal 2013 is $857 million. This is an increase of
$106 from the fiscal year 2012 enacted level. And to just focus
on the significance of manufacturing to our request, over $156
million in total is dedicated to areas specifically part of
advanced manufacturing-related programs and activities.
NIST's discretionary budget contains three accounts, and
let me briefly summarize them. The request for our laboratory
programs, which is the largest program at NIST, is $648
million. This is an increase of $81 million. Over half of that
proposed increased is focused specifically on advanced
manufacturing. The remaining increase includes targeted areas
of research in advanced communications, forensics, disaster
resilience, and the National Strategy for Trusted Identifies in
Cyberspace, or NSTIC, and for the establishment of Centers of
Excellence to accelerate innovation through knowledge transfer
and collaboration.
The request for the Industries Technology Services account
is $149 million. This is an increase of $20 million over fiscal
year 2012. Within that account is a request for $128 million
for the Hollings Manufacturing Extension Partnership Program
and $21 million for the Advanced Manufacturing Technology
Consortia, or AMTech. AMTech will support R&D in advanced
manufacturing and strengthen long-term U.S. leadership in
critical and emerging technologies.
Our Construction of Research Facilities request is $60
million. This is an increase of nearly $5 million. The CRF
account funds construction and facility maintenance and
operations activities on both of our campuses. This request
includes funds for the renovation of the 60-year-old Building 1
in Boulder, Colorado, which is completely inadequate and cannot
support our scientific mission at this time.
The request also proposes two mandatory accounts. The first
one would provide $300 million to address and support critical
barriers to innovation and accelerate the delivery of new
products and services for public safety communication. This
program was included in the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job
Creation Act of 2011, which was recently signed into law.
The second account would catalyze a National Network for
Manufacturing Innovation. The President views this one-time
investment of $1 billion as crucial to revitalizing U.S.
manufacturing. This program would be in direct collaboration
between NIST, the National Science Foundation, the Department
of Defense and the Department of Energy, and we look forward to
working with this Committee on the necessary legislation to
establish this program.
Mr. Chairman, NIST's mission is to work with industry to
benefit the competitiveness of American industry, and it could
not be more relevant to today's challenges. This concludes my
testimony, and I am looking forward to any questions you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gallagher follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Dr. Gallagher.
Now I just want to remind members that the Committee rules
limit questioning to five minutes. The Chair will at this point
open the round of questions, and I recognize myself for five
minutes.
I first want to--you know, at the end of your testimony,
you said how NIST works well with industry, and you absolutely
do and it is a great way to show how the regulatory body and
also industry can actually work together to come up with the
type of standards that will work for everybody, but I want to
go to one of the mandatory programs that you were talking
about, so the request proposed the creation of a mandatory $1
billion account to establish a multi-agency National Network of
Manufacturing Innovation, aimed at bridging the gap between lab
and the market, and I am a little skeptical of the proposal
just because if I understand, NIST would be charged with
leading a program with a funding level that is greater than its
total annual budget. We haven't received any justification
describing how this account may differ from the MEP or from
AMTech program that the Administration is proposing. So could
you please describe the reason for this new account and also
what role NIST will play in managing it?
Dr. Gallagher. Thank you. The details of the National
Network of Manufacturing Institutes has not been really
announced except for this sort of framework that was included
in the request. So I actually don't have a lot of detail at
this time to share with you, and I understand that it is going
to be announced quite shortly.
What I can tell you is that the program is specifically
looking at stimulating private sector R&D, that advanced
manufacturing, in particular, depends on a robust transfer of
knowledge from research and development into industry, and the
President laid out a goal when he first came into office that
we had to increase the R&D intensity in the United States.
Well, the majority of R&D in the United States is private
sector, and so the focus here is really to create a venue where
companies can pool resources and invest in that transfer of R&D
to industry.
With regards to the capacity within NIST, you are quite
correct, it would be a sizable account. It is one-time funding
so it would be presumably available over some period of time so
on an annual basis, this probably is not exceeding what we
would have managed in the past. It certainly would not exceed
what we have dealt with successfully under the Recovery Act. So
I think we are comfortable there, and I think also the fact
that all of the science agencies are directly involved--
Defense, Energy. NSF also brings a lot of capacity to the
table.
Chairman Quayle. Do you know or can you provide any insight
into how the $1 billion number was chosen? I mean, we haven't
gotten any of the details and I look forward to seeing what the
details are, but when you have a mandatory program that is
outside of the Congressional appropriation process, immediately
you kind of start to raise some alarm bells just because the
mandatory spending that we are incurring year over year,
obviously this is a one-time expenditure but those things are
troubling to me, especially without any of the details coming
out of the Administration.
Dr. Gallagher. And it is hard for me to answer your
question without any of those same details out there, and so I
think we would want to work closely with you as soon as those
details are out. It would clearly require legislation to put
into place, and I think the justification for the size is
probably related to the intensity of effort, and again, I hope
that is part of the announcements.
Chairman Quayle. I was just also--is there any duplication
amongst them--we are talking about manufacturer programs. Is
there any duplication amongst NIST extramural programs--the MEP
and the proposed AMTech? I just want to make sure that we
aren't overlapping in any areas that we don't need to and
making things as efficient as possible.
Dr. Gallagher. So as you can imagine, looking at program
overlap and program efficiency, particularly across agencies,
has been a high priority so there has been a lot of effort at
the interagency level making sure these things are not in
duplication. Certainly in the context of NIST, this has really
no resemblance at all to MEP. MEP is a public-private
partnership, that is true. It also includes partnerships
directly with the states. But the purpose of that program is to
support small and mid-sized businesses, existing manufacturers,
to make them more competitive, accelerate their adoption of new
technologies. The innovation network is really about supporting
advanced R&D efforts by industry in a collaborative way.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. Thank you very much.
I will now recognize the Ranking Member, Ms. Edwards, for
five minutes.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you, Dr. Gallagher, for your testimony.
I am curious as to where you perceive the gaps that this
budget attempts to fill with respect to pushing forward on the
President's agenda for more advanced manufacturing and
developing that capacity that is coupled with an R&D capacity,
and I referred in my opening statement to the Fraunhofer
Institutes. I wonder if you could discuss in this budget the
relationship between what you see, for example, in Germany and
other countries doing and where we are trying to get and how
that what is accomplished in the budget.
Dr. Gallagher. So I think that as soon as you look at
advanced manufacturing, it is really the intersection between
our capacity to innovate new technologies and our capacity to
produce and sell them. That is really the nexus we are talking
about. So the role of NIST in that space, we don't produce
anything so our real role is to work with industry to support
what is really the advancement of the measurement capacity that
enables those new technologies to move from a laboratory
environment into the market--that is quite a transformation--
and in some cases, the standards infrastructure or the
standards framework that drives both those technologies and the
markets that they go into. So the gaps that we are always
looking at are the ones where there is an emerging technology
arena, where the technology space is quite new and we want to
advantage the producers in the United States to exploit those
new technologies. So most of the increases that you see in our
2013 request are in emerging technology areas, looking at
nanotechnology and biotechnology, looking at advanced smart
manufacturing infrastructure that is needed.
With the context to Fraunhofers, I don't want to speculate
on how much the Fraunhofers specifically have been a model for
what has been proposed but there has been a lot of interest in
looking at the German model of partnership because what is
intriguing about the institutes is that they combine very
efficiently, apparently, a federal government, state
government, and industry partnership, and I think that is
probably intrinsic to almost anything we do in manufacturing
because you are coupling this public sector-funded R&D
enterprise with a robust private sector-funded and carried out
commercial activity, and making sure we don't have unnecessary
barriers there is really the heart of the matter.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you. And I want to go for a minute to
the TIP program. The budget for fiscal year 2013 doesn't
include any funding for new projects within the Technology
Innovation Program, which is aimed at speeding the development
of industry-led high-risk transformative research. This
decision comes on the heels of the previous budget, fiscal year
2012 appropriations bill, rather, that failed to provide any
funding to TIP and forced NIST to begin the process of shutting
the program down. I wonder if you could talk for a minute about
the decision to end TIP and the void that is going to be left
at NIST and the Federal Government as a whole by the
termination of the program, and I wonder if you can relate that
to the predecessor ATP program because I am looking at the
Advanced Technology Program that existed and the number of
successes that that program had, and can you relate the two and
is this is an area that we need to reconsider?
Dr. Gallagher. So thank you. I think you are correct. The
TIP program was defunded for 2012, and we are currently in the
process of shutting that program down, and that is why it was
not included in the 2013 request. The TIP program was a
bipartisan effort that came out of the first America COMPETES
Act. It specifically is looking at the gap of--it is in this
valley of death space where it is even pre-angel and pre-VC
where you are looking at taking a technological concept and
turning into a pre-competitive technology. So while those
private sector venture funds are really looking at the business
risk, there is still this big problem of de-risking the
technology, getting it further down the path. This has been a
very natural focus as soon as innovation became one of the main
drivers for R&D investments: how do you efficiently move ideas
further down the path so that they can be harvested and used
and exploited commercially.
I think the ATP program, which was envisioned to be a
civilian DARPA looking at this high-risk, high-payoff space was
very successful, in terms of the value it generated. I think
TIP, while a much younger program, was showing similar signs of
targeting new technologies exceptionally well, and I think
really what happened was, the scale of the program combined
with the fiscal environment and the need to make priorities,
and that is really what happened with regard to TIP.
Ms. Edwards. And then would you say--I mean, would you care
to characterize it? Are we really missing something here?
Dr. Gallagher. Well, I believe everyone who is looking at
this is quite concerned about the high friction between taking
what we believe to be and what I believe to be the world's best
R&D enterprise and making sure that we take every advantage to
be able to leverage that in terms of creating new companies,
developing new products and new technologies. And we have some
points in that value stream, if you will, that are very
inefficient, and these programs were specifically designed--
these are proof-of-concept-type programs that are specifically
designed to take a research result and demonstrate an actual
concept, and you need that to be able to sort of begin the
business process of developing a business.
So this is not a secret. I think every S&T agency in the
Federal Government is looking at this. States are looking at
this. Other countries are looking at this and investing a lot
of money in this area, and it is something that I would like to
continue to discuss and work with this committee in terms of
how we effectively operate, but it is very much in this public-
private space, and I think we have to get it right.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Ms. Edwards.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Illinois, Mrs. Biggert,
for five minutes.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing, and Dr. Gallagher, the mission of NIST is to
promote U.S. innovation and competitiveness by advancing
measurement science, standards, and technology in ways that
enhance economic security and improve our quality of life, and
I think in this role, NIST has done a good job of coordinating
the development and dissemination of codes and standards for
use in the private sector.
I have heard that the implementation of codes and standards
varies across sectors and municipalities sometimes becoming a
barrier for innovation. For example, I have heard that the
innovation in the commercial kitchen equipment and laundry
sector is not largely being adopted for a variety for reasons
like the cost to purchase the new standards or lack of training
in enforcing them and the level of efficiencies in those
products really could offer enormous savings to taxpayers in
the energy or water bills if they were able to use them. Does
NIST also hear the same thing, and if so, could you elaborate?
Dr. Gallagher. Yes. Thank you very much. We hear this type
of claim all the time. The United States has a very
interesting, and as a result, very complex standards framework
so standards are the realm of the private sector. We are
probably one of the only industrialized countries in the world
where the standard setting is not done by government mandate.
So the role of NIST is to coordinate, to make sure the best
science is there, to make sure there is a sound foundation for
this, to bring stakeholders together. I think it is one of the
reasons our track record for working with industry is what it
is, that we are above the technical but a non-regulatory
agency. We can bring folks together.
And of course, you are right. Making a standard itself is
not enough. It has to be put into meaningful practice at a
broad enough cross-section of the market to make a difference,
and that is often where I think the efforts flag. There is
often competing interests. A standard is really a collective
behavior on the part of often-competing interests and companies
and so there is a lot of intrinsic tension in sort of pulling
this together and yet the advantages, as you point out, can be
considerable.
So we are always weighing what is our appropriate role. We
don't want to supplant the natural forces in the market to make
choices about what the right solutions are but there is
always--very often strong public interest as well and it may be
things like a municipal interest to provide safe and effective
infrastructure, promote energy or water efficiency and so
forth.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you. The release of the latest smart
grid framework updates the previous version. Can you explain
NIST's role in the continued development of the smart grid and
specifically what steps are being taken to ensure the safety
and security of the smart grid technologies?
Dr. Gallagher. Thank you very much. So the smart grid
effort was just released last week, a version 2.0--we are
adopting IT terminology here--of the standards framework or
roadmap for smart grid. The NIST efforts really have been
overtaken by what is really an all-industry effort now. The
NIST Smart Grid Interoperability Panel has over 700 direct
participants in the process, and they have made enormous
progress in identifying a framework, a set of priorities, and
in particular working on these new technologies.
Very recently, I just received the first advisory committee
report on smart grid. The keys I think moving forward are to
develop testing and certification framework so very much to
your first question so that the market understands that devices
that are bought and put in practice in a grid or in a home or
in a business are safe, interoperable and meet the requirements
of this overall framework so that we turn what is really a
disparate set of technologies into a functioning system, which
was really the goal of the project.
Mrs. Biggert. In one of the communities in my district,
they are putting in the home devices and there is a lot of
concern from some members of the community that it is not safe
or that it is Big Brother watching over the use of water and
all the other things that they will be doing.
Dr. Gallagher. Well, you are right, and with any IT-related
technology, you immediately get into very directly now concerns
of cybersecurity because now it is not just data but it is
control of electricity--the stakes are quite high--and also
privacy. I mean, both the power of this technology to give
consumers the information to make choices has the other side
which is, there is a lot of data about what consumers are using
with this and we have to make sure that the consumer and the
public utility interests move--and that is why that stakeholder
group was so large in smart grid. That is very important.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mrs. Biggert.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Neugebauer,
for five minutes.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing.
Dr. Gallagher, as you can imagine, right now it is budget
season in the United States Congress. Your President has sent
over his budget. We are going through the budget process and,
you know, everybody that is testifying, as you can imagine,
understands the depth of our deficit problem, but what we still
see is people coming over and saying, you know, we still need
more money. And I noticed that the budget that we are looking
at from NIST right now, basically you added some new programs
but we really didn't see very much reduction in the existing
programs. If we are going to prioritize, you know, how we spend
the American taxpayers' money, by the way, and we don't have
all the money we are spending, we are borrowing 40 cents for
every dollar we are spending, when does a department like yours
start to take that leadership role and say you know what, we
are going to have to go in and prioritize our programs, we may
not be able to do all the things that we have been doing and so
we need to prioritize that. Did you go through that process?
Dr. Gallagher. Yes, sir, we did actually, and you are
correct. In an environment like this, I would say that looking
at internal efficiencies, looking at program efficiencies has
been really unprecedented. I certainly appreciate the difficult
task you have within Congress as this all comes up from
different agencies to look at that.
From the NIST side, what I can tell you is that we have in
fact made probably the most significant priority decisions we
have ever made. Two of our four programs were terminated and
defunded. In fact, one was terminated and one was moved
entirely to private sector funding. We have reduced
administrative programs by over $12 million within NIST and are
continuing to make further cuts. We have been reprogramming
activities within the agency. And I think the NIST budget
request--and you are quite correct, it is significantly up--was
done in the context of an overall discretionary budget request
that was flat. So what the Administration has tried to do is
make relative priorities within the Budget Control Act number
that put a premium on some of the high growth and I think the
science and technology agencies have been the beneficiary of
that.
Mr. Neugebauer. So when you say you went through a very
rigorous process to evaluate and to prioritize, what measures
are in place today to evaluate these programs? I mean, where
can someone go and look at the documentation of the
evaluations?
Dr. Gallagher. So NIST looks at--because of the
heterogeneous nature of the NIST programs, we evaluate them
differently. So in the case of some of the technology transfer
programs we were talking earlier about, the TIP or Advanced
Technology Program where NIST funded these high-risk payoffs,
we actually have metrics that look directly at the value
generation of the companies that were started, the new revenue,
the new products, new services. I just looked at a review last
week of the overall return on investment. For 36 companies we
looked at it was something like 27 to 1.
In the case of our Manufacturing Extension Partnership
program where we are providing services to small and mid-sized
manufacturers, we look directly at jobs saved or created, we
look at new investments, and there is a whole set of metrics
that support that. We would be happy to provide that.
And the laboratory programs are a little bit more difficult
because we are working farther upstream in the science and R&D
side. We do a couple of things. One is to make sure that our
work is meeting industry needs, so we do a lot of work looking
at industry roadmaps and consortia and things of that type to
make sure that the NIST programs are there. We look at the
things we sell. We actually sell primary calibration services
and standard reference materials. We are looking very carefully
at that. And lastly, we also do economic impact studies where
we do selective retrospective studies to look at the value of
those programs, and we would be happy to share all of that
information with you.
Mr. Neugebauer. Now, recently, I was at a firm that does a
lot of high-tech work and actually participates in some of the
programs that you are talking about, and I posed this question
to them and I think it kind of caught them off guard, and the
question that I asked them was what if instead of you
leveraging federal dollars, because many of them, they put the
public-private partnership, rather than leveraging a small
amount of your money with a large amount of federal money, what
if we changed the corporate tax structure in such a way that
most of the money was your money, would you still be investing
in those same kind of research, or because of the speculative
level would you probably not. Because I think where we have to
begin to look at it and when we prioritize how we spend
American taxpayers' money, we have to make sure that we are
investing it in places where we get high degrees of return, and
I submit to you that I think a lower corporate tax structure
and allowing these companies to invest in the technology they
think has longer prominence puts a little of a market
perspective over research and development rather than trying to
put together academic standards that these may or may not be.
What would be your response to that?
Dr. Gallagher. I would actually be in strong agreement. I
think that in this space between the public sector and private
sector, there is both pushes and pulls. I think that the market
forces are incredibly important, possibly the most important. I
think that is why the Administration has also supported the R&D
tax credit and looking at corporate tax reforms for the very
reasons you articulated.
I also think that there is in some cases push from the
technology sector. What is happening in the labs opens up
opportunities that the market may not see or understand, and so
in some cases we have to make sure that those are made visible
to them as well, and you are highlighting really one of the
most important areas, which is this intersection, how do we
make this operate effectively without getting in the way of the
market itself.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Neugebauer.
I now recognized Mr. Hultgren for five minutes.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a couple questions dealing more with manufacturing and
jobs. The President stated in his State of the Union address,
and I know you have reaffirmed in your testimony--I apologize,
we had a couple other meetings going on at the same time--but I
know you testified that one of the goals of this budget is to
encourage high-tech manufacturing in the United States. I
certainly agree with this admirable goal and want to be
fighting for that as well, but wonder if any amount of federal
spending on science and technology will lead to more high-
technology manufacturing without significant regulatory and tax
reform.
So I wonder, can you provide us with your thoughts on this
as well as how to create the optimal environment to support
high-tech manufacturing and job creation here in the United
States? Since the United States has one of the highest
corporate tax rates, do you believe we can attract business to
the United States and keep them here without reducing
regulation and reforming the tax code?
Dr. Gallagher. Thank you very much. I certainly agree
wholeheartedly that the set of conditions that a manufacturer
will use to make a decision to site in the United States or to
grow are more than just the R&D piece itself and it is going to
be access to the workforce, it is going to look at the tax and
cost structure, it is going to be a whole host of things, and I
think the NIST manufacturing efforts should be viewed really in
the fabric of a much larger effort that looks at how do we set
the right macroeconomic conditions to support investments in
advanced manufacturing and so forth. That includes trade,
workforce, tax structure and so forth.
But I think that in the context of R&D-intensive
industries, ones that are really dependent on the flow of new
ideas, there is an important touch point and I think that
setting the right structure is really about making sure that we
both facilitate the scale-up problem, taking an idea from a lab
and how does it look in full scale-up and which is often a very
deep measurement problem, and the other one is getting the
market right, and you are exactly right. Many of these new
emerging technologies are touching potential regulatory issues.
So if you look at biotech where we are looking at the promise
of an incredibly fast production of new biomaterials and new
bioproducts, everyone concludes in the sector that I have
talked to that we have to do something to make sure the
regulatory process that protects the safety and efficacy of
these materials keeps pace with that. And so what we are trying
to do in NIST is to make sure that to the extent that this can
be done through measurement, and the way to think of that is
through quality control and quality assurance processes within
industry itself, that we might be able to set from the
technology side a better barrier so that we have smart and
nimble regulation or requirements.
One of the goals in standard setting is certainly if
industry has broadly adopted a set of practices that are self-
protective, that goes a long way to addressing the type of
breakdowns or market breakdowns you would expect to look at and
regulations, so that is true in our nanotechnology where we are
looking at environment, safety and health issues, how do we
measure with nanoparticles and also looking at biotech.
Mr. Hultgren. You touched on this a little bit but I guess
just to delve in a little bit deeper, you talked about a number
of distinct manufacturing initiatives and programs that NIST
supports. I wonder if you could give your view more broadly of
the direction of concern about U.S. manufacturing and making
sure that it is growing, that that is a vital part of our
economy, always has been and I believe needs to be going
forward. I wonder if you could kind of give your thoughts of
how you see that going in the near future and then longer term
from the work that you have been doing at NIST but also just
recognizing, do you feel like there is enough leadership coming
from Washington, from agencies, from the Administration on
manufacturing and how could the Administration coordinate
manufacturing activities amongst the different federal agencies
more effectively?
Dr. Gallagher. I have to tell you that in my 18 years in
the Federal Government, I have never been more optimistic about
manufacturing than I am today. I think a tone has changed. I
think for a while there was a feeling that it was just
inevitable, that we didn't have to worry about manufacturing,
we could simply invent it here and it would go somewhere else
and that was okay. I think that has changed. I think there has
been recognition not just within the Federal Government but
every discussion I have had in Congress has sort of reaffirmed
this, and most importantly, the business community has really
stepped up and begun to make the case very strongly that there
is a deep interplay between our capacity as a country to
innovate and our capacity as a country to produce a benefit
from those innovations.
And in fact, we probably should have known this because our
competitors were doing this to us. They would start with the
low-end manufacturing, which had no R&D, and work their way up
the value chain until they were eventually building out R&D
infrastructure and so that interplay was obvious to them, and I
think we may have just taken it for granted since it had been
such a core part of our strength for so many years. But I think
that has really changed. I think the dynamic, as I said, is as
robust as I have ever seen it. Now I think what we have to do
is use that window of opportunity wisely and begin to craft
some programs that work effectively because, as I said, the
Federal Government doesn't manufacture anything. What we want
to do is make sure we are providing an environment that is
conducive to that set of industries.
Mr. Hultgren. Just real quickly on that, is there some
coordinated effort going on again amongst--I am glad to hear of
your optimism from your perspective but is there some
coordination as far as making sure that the effort really is
being productive among different agencies from what you have
seen?
Dr. Gallagher. Yes. The answer is again as much I have ever
seen, so when Secretary Bryson was confirmed as Commerce
Secretary, he was made a co-chair of a new office called the
Office of Manufacturing Policy. This was a Cabinet-level group.
In fact, I was at the first meeting. I had the privilege of
sitting on the side wall while they met. And in fact, we have
had vigorous and active participation by most of the Cabinet
actually. It has been remarkable. The President himself was
personally engaged in manufacturing. And at the working level
in the advanced manufacturing space, NIST was named as the
coordination agency, so we were given what was called a
National Program Office to specifically provide the support for
robust, all-of-government effort, and I would say routinely
every day one door down from my office, Mike Molnar, who heads
that office, is coordinating with Defense and Energy and NSF.
So it is extremely active at this time.
Mr. Hultgren. My time is expired. I yield back. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Hultgren, and I want to
thank Dr. Gallagher for his valuable testimony and the members
for their questions.
The members of the Subcommittee may have additional
questions for you, Dr. Gallagher, and we will ask you to
respond to those in writing. The record will remain open for
two weeks for additional comments and statements from members.
The witness is excused. Thank you all for coming. The
hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Patrick Gallagher, Under Secretary, Commerce for
Standards
and Technology and Director, National Institute of Standards and
Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Submitted by Dr. Patrick Gallagher, Under Secretary of Commerce
for Standards and Technology and
Director, National Institute of Standards and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


