- OVERVIEW OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS AND PRIORITIES AT THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERVIEW OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAMS AND PRIORITIES AT THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 15, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-7

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-052                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DAVID WU, Oregon
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 PAUL D. TONKO, New York
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JERRY McNERNEY, California
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
Tennessee                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation

HON. BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona, Chair
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                DAVID WU, Oregon
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
Tennessee                        BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Hearing Date

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Benjamin Quayle, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     7
Written Statement............................................     8

Statement by Representative David Wu, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Panel I:

Dr. Tara O'Toole, Under Secretary of Science and Technology,
Department of Homeland Security
Oral Statement...............................................    11
Written Statement............................................    13
Biography....................................................    19

Mr. Warren Stern, Director of the Domestic Nuclear Detection
Office, Department of Homeland Security
Oral Statement...............................................    20
Written Statement............................................    22
Biography....................................................    28

Panel II:

Dr. James Carafano, Director of the Douglas and Sarah Allison
Center for Foreign Policy Studies at the Heritage Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    43
Written Statement............................................    44
Biography....................................................    50

Mr. Marc Pearl, President and Chief Executive Officer, Homeland
Security and Defense Business Council
Oral Statement...............................................    51
Written Statement............................................    53
Biography....................................................    57

Mr. David Maurer, Director of the Homeland Security and Justice
Team at the U.S. Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    57
Written Statement............................................    59
Biography....................................................    68

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Tara O'Toole, Under Secretary of Science and Technology,
Department of Homeland Security................................    78

Mr. Warren Stern, Director of the Domestic Nuclear Detection
Office, Department of Homeland Security........................    84

Mr. Marc Pearl, President and Chief Executive Officer, Homeland
Security and Defense Business Council..........................    86

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Testimony From Dr. Michael B. Silevitch, Robert D. Black
Professor, Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering and
Co-Director, Awareness and Localization of Explosives Related
Threats (ALERT), A Dept. Of Homeland Security Center Of
Excellence, Northeastern University............................    90

OVERVIEW OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
AND PRIORITIES AT THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

----------

Tuesday, March 15, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:08 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Benjamin
Quayle [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

An Overview of Science and Technology Research

and Development Programs and Priorities at

the Department of Homeland Security

tuesday, march 15, 2011
10:00 a.m.-12:00 p.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

Purpose

On Tuesday, March 15, 2011 the Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology will hold
a hearing to review activities at the Science and Technology
Directorate of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS S&T) and the
Domestic Nuclear Detection Office at the Department of Homeland
Security (DNDO). There will be two panels; one panel will include
Administration witnesses from DHS S&T and DNDO providing testimony for
each agency, and the other panel will include stakeholders of the DHS
enterprise.

Witnesses

Panel I

Dr. Tara O'Toole, Under Secretary of Science and
Technology, Department of Homeland Security.

Mr. Warren Stern, Director of the Domestic Nuclear
Detection Office, Department of Homeland Security.

Panel II

Dr. James Carafano, Director of the Douglas and Sarah
Allison Center for Foreign Policy Studies at the Heritage
Foundation.

Mr. Marc Pearl, President and Chief Executive
Officer, Homeland Security and Defense Business Council.

Mr. David Maurer, Director of the Homeland Security
and Justice Team at the U.S. Government Accountability Office.

Brief Overview

The hearing will examine various elements of DHS S&T including the
recent reorganization of the Directorate, the strategic planning
process, stakeholder involvement in setting research priorities, and
the role of research and development in the DHS S&T portfolio. Many of
the areas reflect ongoing interest from Members of the Technology and
Innovation Subcommittee.

Background

The Department of Homeland Security's research and development
portfolio is concentrated in DHS S&T and DNDO. DHS S&T is responsible
for carrying out research on behalf of federal homeland security needs
and coordinating this research with other federal research entities.

The FY 12 budget request for DHS S&T is $1.2 billion and would
increase by $170 million or 16.9 percent from the FY 10 enacted. Most
of this increase reflects the transfer of research and development
programs from DNDO to DHS S&T, which will consolidate all DHS basic
research within DHS S&T. The FY 12 budget request for DNDO is $331.7
million, an overall reduction of $51.3 million or 13.4 percent. This
includes a transfer of $108.5 million from the Transformational
Research and Development account to DHS S&T. This transfer was also
proposed in FY 11. If the DNDO transfer and funding for the
construction of the NBAF is removed, the DHS S&T budget request
represents an 11 percent decrease from FY 10 enacted.

Organization of the Science and Technology Directorate

DHS S&T is currently comprised of four groups that address basic
research through advanced technology development and transition. An
organizational realignment took place effective in late 2010.

Issues and Concerns

Science and Technology Research and Development Prioritization
Witnesses will discuss the methods and criteria used to develop
long-term basic research and development priorities at DHS S&T and how
these methods and criteria may be improved. Concerns continue to emerge
in the current budget environment that in responding to immediate
needs, DHS has experienced challenges in pursuing basic research and
development that could potentially help aid the development of the
innovative long-term capabilities needed to protect the homeland years
down the road. In addition, witnesses will assess how research
priorities align with the needs of DHS stakeholders, and how the
Department coordinates its efforts with other federal research
entities.

Reorganization Impacts and Implications
The Subcommittee has requested that witnesses address the impact of
the changes that have occurred at DHS S&T following the Quadrennial
Review \2\ and the Bottom-Up Review \3\, including the 2010 realignment
of DHS S&T, and the recent portfolio analysis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Department of Homeland Security, Science and Technology
Directorate, Quadrennial Homeland Security Review Report: A Strategic
Framework for a Secure Homeland, February 2010,
\3\ Department of Homeland Security, Science and Technology
Directorate, Bottom-Up Review Report, July 2010, http://www.dhs.gov/
xlibrary/assets/bur--bottom--up--review.pdf.

Stakeholder and Private Sector Engagement
DHS S&T has cited an increased emphasis on partnerships to increase
the efficiency and timeliness of delivering needed capabilities.
Witnesses will address the manner in which DHS S&T and DNDO
collaborates throughout the various DHS offices, as well as the
relationship and interaction between DHS science and technology
programs and the private sector. Also, the Subcommittee has asked
witnesses to discuss the manner in which DHS responds to customer and
stakeholder needs through collaborative agency partnerships.

Science and Technology Informing DHS Program Decisions
The Subcommittee has requested that witnesses address the DHS
research and development information provided in the recent GAO report:
``Opportunities to Reduce Potential Duplication in Government Programs,
Save Tax Dollars, and Enhance Revenue''. \4\ The GAO has identified
concerns regarding the manner in which DHS completes testing and cost-
benefit analyses in the acquisition process. One of S&T's FY 12
strategic initiatives is focused on acquisition support. Specifically,
DHS S&T has established an Acquisition Support and Operations Analysis
group. The Subcommittee has asked witnesses to discuss the current and
potential role of science and technology research and development
programs at DHS in supporting the technology acquisition programs of
the Department and whether a more active role for DHS S&T could assist
with reducing costs affiliated with acquisition programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\  http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d11318sp.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Quayle. The Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation will come to order.
Good morning, everybody. Welcome to today's hearing
entitled ``An Overview of Science and Technology Research and
Development Programs and Priorities at the Department of
Homeland Security.'' In front of you are packets containing the
written testimony, biographies and truth in testimony
disclosures from today's witnesses.
Before we get started, this being the first meeting of the
Technology and Innovation Subcommittee for the 112th Congress,
I would like to ask the Subcommittee's indulgence to introduce
myself and welcome Members. It is an honor and a pleasure for
me to chair the Technology and Innovation Subcommittee for this
Congress and it is a position that I do not take lightly. I
want all Members of this Subcommittee to know that my door is
always open and that I will endeavor to serve all Members
fairly and impartially. I will also work to serve the best
interests of all Americans and this Congress to ensure that the
agencies and programs under our jurisdiction are worthy of the
public's support.
Today's hearing includes two panels. Our first panel will
feature Department of Homeland Security Under Secretary for
Science and Technology Dr. Tara O'Toole, and Mr. Warren Stern,
Director at the Department's Domestic Nuclear Detection Office.
Our second panel will feature Dr. James Carafano from the
Heritage Foundation, Mr. Marc Pearl from the Homeland Security
and Defense Business Council, and Mr. David Maurer, Director of
the Homeland Security and Justice Team at the U.S. Government
Accountability Office.
I now recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement. I would like to welcome everyone to today's hearing,
my first as chairman of the Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation. I look forward to working with you. We have a
distinguished panel of witnesses before us who will discuss the
Department of Homeland Security's research and development
programs. At the outset, I wish to extend my appreciation to
each of our witnesses for taking the time and effort to be here
and appear before us today. Please know that your testimony
will help the Members of this Subcommittee understand the
strategic direction of research and development at the
department, and determine how Congress can support efforts to
ensure the security of our homeland.
I am pleased to discuss activities at the Science and
Technology Directorate and the Domestic Nuclear Detection
Office at the Department of Homeland Security. The hearing will
examine the recent reorganization of the Science and Technology
Directorate, the strategic planning process, stakeholder
involvement in setting research priorities and the role of
research and development in the DHS S&T portfolio. Many of
these areas reflect ongoing interest from Members of the
Subcommittee. There will be two panels. The first panel will
include Administration witnesses from DHS S&T and DNDO, and the
second panel will include stakeholders of the DHS enterprise.
This Subcommittee has always encouraged Administration
witnesses to testify on panels with non-governmental witnesses,
allowing for a beneficial interaction amongst stakeholders.
While it is unfortunate that the two panels couldn't have
served together this morning to provide a more cohesive
conversation, the Subcommittee appreciates the opportunity to
hear from both industry experts and senior agency officials.
I note that the budget requests for DHS S&T and the DNDO in
fiscal year 2012 cumulatively represent more than $1.3 billion.
DHS S&T's budget would increase by 17 percent, however, most of
this increase reflects the transfer of research and development
programs from DNDO to DHS S&T. Excluding the DNDO transfer and
new funding for the construction of a National Bio and Agro-
Defense Facility, the DHS S&T budget request represents an 11
percent decrease.
In the current budget environment, there continue to be
concerns that DHS is having difficulty responding to immediate
needs, while also pursuing basic research and development that
can help with the long-term capabilities needed to protect the
homeland in the future.
In my home State of Arizona, violence and security issues
along the border are, tragically, a regular occurrence. In a
recent study conducted by the Government Accountability Office,
the Border Patrol reported that only 44 percent of the border
was under operational control. This has to be improved. I am
particularly interested in learning about the research and
development activities conducted by the DHS components before
us today that support border security, as well as border
crossing efficiency. How can we find ways to reduce the cost of
maintaining our safe borders? Are technologies being developed
to help support safe and secure crossings?
Thanks again to our witnesses, and I look forward to a
productive conversation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Quayle follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Ben Quayle
Good morning. I'd like to welcome everyone to today's hearing, my
first as Chairman of the Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation. I
look forward to working with you all.
We have a distinguished panel of witnesses before us who will
discuss the Department of Homeland Security's research and development
programs. At the outset, I wish to extend my appreciation to each of
our witnesses for taking the time and effort to appear before us today.
Please know that your testimony and wisdom will help the Members of
this Subcommittee understand the strategic direction of research and
development at the Department, and determine how Congress can support
efforts to ensure the security of our homeland.
I am pleased to discuss activities at the Science and Technology
Directorate (S&T) and the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office (DNDO) at
the Department of Homeland Security. The hearing will examine the
recent reorganization of the Science and Technology Directorate, the
strategic planning process, stakeholder involvement in setting research
priorities and the role of research and development in the DHS S&T
portfolio. Many of these areas reflect ongoing interest from Members of
the Subcommittee. There will be two panels; the first panel will
include Administration witnesses from DHS S&T and DNDO; and the second
panel will include stakeholders of the DHS enterprise. This
Subcommittee has always encouraged Administration witnesses to testify
on panels with non-governmental witnesses, allowing for a beneficial
interaction amongst stakeholders. While it is unfortunate that the two
panels couldn't have served together this morning to provide a more
cohesive conversation, the Subcommittee appreciates the opportunity to
hear from both industry experts and senior agency officials.
I note that the budget requests for DHS S&T and the DNDO in fiscal
year 2012 cumulatively represent more than $1.3 billion. DHS S&T's
budget would increase by 17 percent; however, most of this increase
reflects the transfer of research and development programs from DNDO to
DHS S&T. Excluding the DNDO transfer and new funding for the
construction of a National Bio and Agro-Defense Facility, the DHS S&T
budget request represents an 11 percent decrease.
In the current budget environment, there continue to be concerns
that DHS is having difficulty responding to immediate needs, while also
pursuing basic research and development that can help with the long-
term capabilities needed to protect the homeland in the future.
In my home state of Arizona, violence and security issues along the
border are, tragically, a regular occurrence. In a recent study
conducted by the Government Accountability Office, the Border Patrol
reported that only 44 percent of the border was under operational
control--this has to be improved. I am particularly interested in
learning about the research and development activities conducted by the
DHS components before us today that support border security, as well as
border crossing efficiency. How can we find ways to reduce the cost of
maintaining our safe borders? Are technologies being developed to help
support safe and secure crossings?
Thanks again to our witnesses, and I look forward to a productive
discussion. With that, I now recognize the gentleman from Oregon, Mr.
Wu, for his opening statement.

Chairman Quayle. With that, I now recognize the gentleman
from Oregon, Mr. Wu, for his opening statement.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much, Chairman Quayle.
As this is our first hearing of this Congress of this
Subcommittee, I want to take a moment to welcome you to the
Full Committee and to this Subcommittee. We have already had a
fruitful private meeting. I look forward to working with you
and to find common ground on many of the important issues that
fall within this Subcommittee's jurisdiction.
I want to thank also Mr. Lujan, who will be the ranking
member for the second half of this meeting. Here in the
Congress, March Madness refers not only to basketball, but also
to this pressing period when so many of our constituents come
to Washington, D.C., for about a month-and-a-half to two-month
period.
And finally, I want to thank our first panel, Under
Secretary O'Toole and Director Stern, for appearing before us
today. I do believe that this marks the first time that either
one of you has appeared before this Subcommittee, so welcome. I
look forward to hearing your testimony.
In fact, I couldn't be more pleased that our first hearing
is on research and development at the Department of Homeland
Security. The work that you do is critically important,
literally life and death. It is work to keep the American
people and our first responders safe. Precisely because the
work you do is so important, we hold you to the highest of
standards. We can't and should not ignore the problems that
have plagued both the Science and Technology Directorate and
the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office in past years. However, I
do believe that both of you are taking energetic steps to get
the components of your programs on the right track and I
commend each of you for that.
That being said, we need to do everything we can to make
sure that things continue to improve. When I was chairman of
this Subcommittee, I repeatedly expressed concern that the S&T
Directorate did not effectively prioritize its research
activities and I questioned whether its investments were
targeted first to the most critical threats. I also criticized
the Directorate for not being sufficiently responsive to the
needs of its customers, its end users, particularly first
responders, when developing new technologies, making research
decisions and taking deployment issues into account.
I recognize that efforts are well underway to address these
problems, including the reorganization that was implemented
late last year and the creation of the first responder IPT. I
want to know when we can expect the rubber to hit the road with
respect to these efforts and start seeing results. I also want
to get an update on the status of your strategic planning
efforts. When the Directorate last testified in front of this
Subcommittee in 2009, we were told that a new and improved
strategic plan was under development to supplement or replace
the 2007 plan, which really wasn't of a long-term strategic
nature, but here we are a year and a half later and we do not
have an updated strategic plan in hand. I also want to learn
about any new efforts including those reflected in the fiscal
year 2012 budget request to carry our your responsibilities
more efficiently and, more importantly more effectively.
I also look forward to hearing from our second panel of
witnesses about additional steps that the Directorate can take.
In the past, I have also made my concerns clear over the
testing and evaluation of technologies at DHS within the S&T
Directorate, DNDO and other DHS components and the extent to
which the results of those tests are guiding acquisition
decisions. Is the testing rigorous enough? Is DHS evaluating
the likelihood that a new technology will be accepted by those
who will use it?
Today I hope that we can get a good sense of what, if
anything, S&T and DNDO are doing to help ensure that DHS's
testing and evaluation shortcomings are indeed a thing of the
past.
Thank you again for being here and I look forward to your
testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wu follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member David Wu
Thank you, Chairman Quayle. As this is our first hearing of the
Congress, I want to take a moment to welcome you. I am confident that
we will find common ground on many of the important issues that fall
within this subcommittee's jurisdiction, and look forward to working
with you.
I also want to thank our first panel, Under Secretary O'Toole and
Director Stern, for appearing before us today. I believe this marks the
first time that either of you have appeared before this subcommittee,
so welcome. I look forward to hearing your testimony. In fact, I
couldn't be more pleased that our first hearing is on research and
development at the Department of Homeland Security. The work that you
do is critically important--literally, life and death. It is work to
keep us, our constituents, and our first responders safe.
Precisely because the work you do is so important, we hold you to
the highest of standards. We can't--and shouldn't--ignore the problems
that have plagued both the Science & Technology Directorate and the
Domestic Nuclear Detection Office in the past. However, I believe that
both of you are taking the steps that need to be taken to get your
components on the right track, and I commend each of you for that.
That being said, we need to do everything we can to make sure that
things continue to improve. When I was chairman of this subcommittee, I
repeatedly expressed concern that the S&T Directorate did not
effectively prioritize its research activities and questioned whether
its investments were targeted to the most critical threats. I also
criticized the Directorate for not being sufficiently responsive to the
needs of its customers, particularly first responders, when developing
new technologies and making research decisions.
I recognize that efforts, are well underway to address these
problems, including the reorganization that was implemented late last
year and the creation of the First Responder IPT. I want to know when
we can expect the rubber to hit the road with respect to these efforts
and start seeing results. I also want to get an update on the status of
your strategic planning efforts. When the Directorate last testified in
front of this Subcommittee in 2009, we were told that a new and
improved strategic plan was under development, but here we are--a year
and a half later--without an updated strategic plan in hand. I also
want to learn about any new efforts, including those reflected in the
FY 2012 budget request, to carry out your responsibilities more
efficiently and more importantly--more effectively. I also look forward
to hearing from our second panel of witnesses about additional steps
that the Directorate can take.
In the past, I have also made clear my concern over the testing and
evaluation of technologies at DHS--within the S&T Directorate, DNDO,
and other DHS components--and the extent to which the results of those
tests are guiding acquisition decisions. Is the testing rigorous
enough? Is DHS evaluating the likelihood that a new technology will be
accepted by those who will use it? Today, I hope that we can get a good
sense of what, if anything, S&T and DNDO are doing to help ensure that
DHS's testing and evaluation shortcomings are a thing of the past.
Thank you again for being here. I look forward to your testimony.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Wu.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time I would like to introduce our first panel of
witnesses and then we will proceed to hear from each of them in
order. Our first witness is Department of Homeland Security
Under Secretary for Science and Technology Dr. Tara O'Toole.
Prior to serving at DHS S&T, Dr. O'Toole was the CEO and
Director of the Center for Biosecurity at the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center and Professor of Medicine and of
Public Health at the University of Pittsburgh. Next we will
hear from Mr. Warren Stern, the Director at the department's
Domestic Nuclear Detection Office. Prior to joining DNDO, Mr.
Stern served as the head of the International Atomic Energy
Agency's Incident and Emergency Centre, where he led
international efforts to prepare for and respond to nuclear and
radiation emergencies.
Thanks again to our panel for being here this morning. As
our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited to five
minutes each. After all witnesses have spoken, Members of the
Committee will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Tara O'Toole, Under
Secretary for Science and Technology at the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security.

STATEMENTS OF DR. TARA O'TOOLE,

UNDER SECRETARY, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Ms. O'Toole. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
distinguished Members of the Committee. It is a pleasure to be
here today to talk to you on behalf of the Department of
Homeland Security about the Science and Technology Directorate
of which I became Under Secretary November 2009.
S&T, as we refer to the Directorate, was one of the few
pieces of the Department of Homeland Security to be created de
novo in 2002 by an act of Congress, and it was given a huge
task, that is providing research and development for all of the
activities of this enormously broad set of missions which is
the Department of Homeland Security. So we remain a young
organization but I think we have evolved considerably over the
past nine years and continue to do so.
With your permission, Mr. Chairman, I would ask that my
written testimony be entered into the record and I will
summarize briefly some of the highlights.
S&T is responsible for conducting all of the research and
development, both basic and applied, needed by the components,
the operating components, of the Department. We also have a
statutory responsibility to serve the science and technology
needs of the larger Homeland Security enterprise including
first responders and other State and local entities who have to
respond to disasters, intercept illegal aliens, et cetera, et
cetera.
I want to make clear that although we do a lot of work in
developing or adapting technologies for use by Homeland
Security, we also have a big responsibility to do assessments,
analyses and develop knowledge products such as the bio threat
risk assessment for the Department and for the entire Federal
Government.
S&T acts as the technical core of the Department of
Homeland Security. Many of our operating components do not have
rich R&D histories or experience bringing technology available
in the public sector or in the private sector or being
developed by universities into use, and we are their principal
advisor in that endeavor and we hope to become ever more useful
to the operating components in that capacity.
We also maintain fundamental research investments in S&T in
Homeland Security-related endeavors, particularly through our
maintenance and funding of the Centers of Excellence, which now
comprise over 200 universities across the country.
This exceptional breadth of the Homeland Security mission
which we are charged to serve and the urgency of the
operational needs in DHS which we are trying to meet not only
by increasing the capabilities of DHS components through new
technologies but also by making their operations more
effective, more cost efficient and safer requires us to be very
clear about our priorities, to constantly reevaluate where we
are investing and how we are doing and to be as efficient as we
can within S&T as is feasible. We have R&D projects ongoing now
in all five DHS mission areas: counterterrorism, border
security, immigration, cybersecurity and disaster resilience.
We have undertaken a strategic planning process and a
realignment of the structural organization of S&T to help us
deliver products and technologies to use in the field. Our
first priority in that strategic planning was to deliver
products to use in the field.
There is, as is well known in R&D worlds, a very difficult
transition, often referred as the valley of death that occurs
after you have developed a successful prototype of a new
technology that has been proven to work in an operationally
realistic setting and deployment of that technology on a wide
scale for routine use. Crossing that valley of death has many
aspects to it, and we are very mindful of these different
facets of transition in S&T but we have done a number of things
to try and make that transition faster and more likely.
First of all, we know from lots of experience in the R&D
world generally that it is critically important to understand
your user's needs in detail and with fidelity. We are making
several moves to make sure that we understand what the
components' mission needs are. Translating those needs into
testable requirements against which you can build technologies
is another critical step, and we have reorganized to create an
office of operational analysis and acquisition support to help
the components do just that: develop clear, testable
requirements.
Secondly, we are instituting a much more far-reaching and
disciplined process of what we call technology foraging. We
want technologies very quickly within a year or two but the
usual R&D process to go from an idea developed on a laboratory
bench to use in the world is about a decade, on average. So we
want S&T to become extremely disciplined and very efficient at
scanning the whole environment of available technologies in the
commercial sector, in universities and other uses in the
federal agencies and so forth to make sure that there isn't
something out there that we can go and get and adapt to DHS
uses. We do technology foraging now. We are going to become
more disciplined, more effective and more far-reaching at it.
An example of this is our new partnership with In-Q-Tel, which
I would be happy to talk more about, but I want to end with a
note on first responders.
I am very focused on meeting their needs as required by the
Homeland Security Act. I think we all recognize that their
needs are different from those of the DHS components. Being a
firefighter in a small town in Arizona is very different from
meeting the requirements implicit in firefighters in New York
City. So we have stood up a component office that is
specifically focused on understanding the first responders'
needs and delivering to them the knowledge products and the
technologies that they most require, again in a timely and
efficient way, and the head of that office is himself a former
fire chief of Loudon County with a Ph.D..
Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to answer further questions
but I think I will stop there for now.
[The prepared statement of Dr. O'Toole follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Tara O'Toole

Strategy and Goals of the DHS Science and Technology Directorate

Good afternoon, Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Wu, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. I am honored to appear
before you today on behalf of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
Science and Technology Directorate (S&T). My testimony will describe
the Directorate's strategic direction and top priorities, as well as
some of the challenges facing our comparatively modest research and
development (R&D) organization in our efforts to support the third
largest federal agency.

Mission of the DHS S&T is Broad, Varied and Serves Many Partners

The mission of the S&T Directorate is to:

Strengthen America's security and resiliency by providing knowledge
products and innovative technology solutions/or the Homeland Security
Enterprisel. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The Homeland Security Enterprise is defined in the Quadrennial
Homeland Security Review (QHSR) as ``the Federal, State, local, tribal,
territorial, nongovernmental, and private-sector entities, as well as
individuals, families, and communities who share a common national
interest in the safety and security of America and the American
population''.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress created S&T as part of the Homeland Security Act of 2002
to ``conduct basic and applied research, development, demonstration,
testing, and evaluation activities relevant to any or all elements of
the Department''. S&T also has a statutory responsibility to transfer
useful technologies and information to state and local governments, the
first responder community and the private sector. During the past eight
years, S&T has undergone many changes and continues to mature. Because
DHS's mission is so broad, S&T's work must address a wide and varied
range of programs. DHS is primarily an operational agency, and its
components need analyses and technologies that provide near-term
improvements in operational effectiveness; our staff serves as the
technical core of the Department. Moreover, some of S&T's most
important contributions are not technologies alone, but knowledge
products-assessments of technical problems or feasible solutions;
analyses of complex issues; objective tests of proposed technologies;
and the creation of consensus standards which enable cost-effective
progress across many fields.

S&T Strategic Planning Process and Key Goals

Shortly after I was confirmed as Under Secretary, S&T instituted an
inclusive and comprehensive strategic planning process. All S&T
employees were invited to participate in a questionnaire, and
interviews were held with Congressional staff, first responder
representatives, and leaders of the DHS components. We also held two
off-site meetings to have more in-depth conversations with S&T senior
executives and project managers. We heard similar messages from many
directions, and used this input to establish our key goals for the next
year. These are described below:

S&T Goal #1 - Rapidly develop and deliver knowledge, analyses, and

innovative solutions that advance the mission of the Department.

This first goal is intended to place a strong emphasis on
transitioning products to use in the field -a goal which is in keeping
with the intense operational focus of the Department and the need for
near-term improvements in operational capabilities, efficiencies and
security. Research and development efforts are notoriously
unpredictable. Research is inherently about discovery -but this path is
rarely linear or straightforward. By its very nature, R&D takes a long
time. The usual estimate of the time required for a ``new idea''-a
novel understanding of how nature works-to be translated into effective
technologies is about a decade, which is longer than S&T has been
around. To implement the goal of transitioning products to use in the
field, S&T must do three things well:

We must become ``best in class'' at technology
foraging.

We must invest more resources on the ``back end'' of
R&D projects, i.e. on transitioning projects through
operational testing and pilots to adoption by the customer.

We must closely manage individual projects and
continuously review our entire R&D portfolio to ensure projects
are making clear progress and that we are investing in high
impact projects for DHS.

Becoming Best-in-Class at Technology Foraging

Technology foraging refers to a complex process of scanning the
horizon for technologies that are already in use or being developed,
and adopting these technologies for new purposes, new environmental
conditions, or at new scales. Technology foraging leverages the work
being done in other federal agencies, at universities, by our
international partners, and in industry against possible applications
to DHS needs. The breadth and scope of DHS's mission, requires us to
look at the good ideas and investments being made by others, to forage
for solutions among existing ideas and technologies, and harvest them
in the most cost-effective way possible. It is an extremely challenging
task because of the vast and continuously shifting body of R&D
unfolding in public and private sectors around the world. However, when
done correctly, technology foraging can have a large impact on S&T's
efficiency and effectiveness.
Technology foraging has always been a part of S&T and has yielded
some significant successes in the past year. For example, through our
Integrated Product Team (IPT) Process, the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG)
identified a need to be able to track small vessels approaching a
seaport. While most large vessels have tagging systems for
identification, there is a gap in our capability to track small vessels
with no tag. Drug running and other illicit activities will use craft
that lack the required communication and tracking devices. These ``dark
boats'' represent a significant security and law enforcement challenge.
S&T, in partnership with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) and USCG, has developed software that can use
currently deployed coastal NOAA weather radar systems to process the
radar signal differently, enabling the USCG to identify and track small
vessels. This is a new capability for the USCG that was realized with a
relatively small S&T investment and leverages the already-deployed NOAA
radar infrastructure.
Another example is the investment in software by the Department of
Defense (DOD) to predict high threat areas in Iraq where improvised
explosive devices may be placed. S&T has worked with DOD to alter those
computer programs so they can identify commercial aviation routes most
at risk to a potential attack by analyzing flight information data,
suspicious activity and other intelligence indicators. This information
is used to help determine on which flights Federal Air Marshals should
be deployed.
We plan to institutionalize technology foraging best practices to
ensure we harvest the best technologies, at the lowest cost, and in the
timeliest manner possible.

Leveraging the Private Sector to Maximize Efficiency

S&T has also begun engaging with the private sector through its
investments in In-Q-Tel. In 1999, the CIA supp0l1ed the establishment
of In-Q-Tel as a not-for-profit strategic investment firm designed to
bridge the gap between new advances in commercial technology and the
technology needs of the U.S. intelligence and security communities.
Most In-Q-Tel investments combine funds from more than one partner
agency, allowing S&T to leverage significant investments from the
Intelligence Community. According to In-Q-Tel's figures, $1 of
government investment can attract over $10 in private-sector funding.
In addition to rapidly delivering innovative technologies to their
government customers, In-Q-Tel also supports small businesses that may
not normally work with the government. In-Q-Tel estimates that
following investments via In-Q-Tel, companies have created more than
10,000 jobs.

Overcoming Hurdles in Project Management

Research and development efforts often confront difficulties when
crossing the ``valley of death''-the phase of technology development
between the creation of a successful prototype and the routine use of
the technology in operational environments. There are many reasons for
this gap. Successfully transitioning projects demands a close working
relationship with the customer and a deep understanding of the
operational needs and constraints associated with the problem to be
solved. To better bridge this gap, it may be necessary on a case-by-
case basis for S&T to bear some of the costs of operational testing and
piloting of new technologies. This could shift S&T spending to fewer
projects as well as a continuous assessment of projects' progress.

Apex Projects Solve Strategic Component Needs

S&T must also ensure that R&D investments meet the longer-term
strategic needs of DHS and first responders. This is a challenging task
in an environment where urgent operational needs are constantly
pressing. To this end, and to provide DHS Component leaders with an
understanding of S&T capabilities, we have instituted ``Apex''
projects, which are intended to collaboratively solve a problem of
strategic operational importance. Each Apex project is a joint
agreement between the head of a DHS operational component and me.
Together, we must approve the project's goals and approach, providing a
leadership imprimatur which energizes both S&T and the partner
organization. Apex programs are team-based and interdisciplinary. Best
practices learned in these projects will be documented and infused
throughout the rest of our activities. S&T already has one Apex project
underway, focused on improving the protective mission of the U.S.
Secret Service. Another under development is a partnership with U.S.
Customs and Border Protection to develop a secure transit corridor for
goods shipped between Mexico, the U.S., and Canada.

Ongoing Review of the R&D Portfolio

To ensure that individual R&D projects are meeting the goals
established by our partners in the operating components and the broader
homeland security enterprise (HSE), S&T has committed to an annual
review of our portfolio of basic and applied R&D and all proposed ``new
start'' projects. The review process consists of written materials, an
oral presentation by the project manager, and careful analysis of the
project's likely impact and feasibility (or ``riskiness'') as judged
against specific metrics determined by S&T with input from the
operating components. These metrics are designed to address elements
essential to programmatic success in the context of the DHS's QHSR
missions, namely:

Impact: Is our portfolio making a significant impact
on our customer's mission?

Transition: Are we transitioning relevant products to
the field?

Technical Positioning: Is our investment positioning
the organization for the future?

Customer Alignment: Are our projects aligned with
well-understood customer requirements?

Customer Involvement: Do we have the appropriate
level of customer interaction?

Innovation: Are we sufficiently innovative in the way
we approach our challenges?

A review panel of S&T leaders, the DHS Component representatives,
and outside experts evaluates and rates each project. By measuring all
of our projects against this framework, we will: provide a transparent
and ``shareable'' view of all R&D within S&T; enable more strategic,
longer-term budget decisions; ensure efficient delivery to the
component or end user; and nurture effective communication throughout
the process. This particular review model has been used by both federal
and private R&D organizations, including the prize-winning Army
Engineering, Research and Development Laboratory.

S&T Goal #2 - Leverage technical expertise to assist DHS Components'

efforts to establish operational requirements, and select and acquire

needed technologies

A critical part of successfully transitioning technology is gaining
an accurate understanding of the customer needs at the beginning of the
project. This is true not only for the technology products that S&T
develops, but also for more near-term technologies that components may
acquire from the commercial sector. In both cases, the specification of
operational requirements is critical. While S&T has been statutorily
designated the important role of independent Test and Evaluation
authority within the DHS, this role addresses the ``back end'' of
acquisition programs. S&T is currently working with the DHS Under
Secretary for Management on a plan to use our collective expertise and
resources to better address the ``front end'' of the acquisition cycle,
namely, the translation of mission needs into testable requirements. To
focus efforts in this area, S&T has established an Acquisition Support
and Operations Analysis (ASOA) Group to provide a full range of
coordinated operations analysis, systems engineering, test and
evaluation, and standards development support to the DHS Components.

S&T Goal #3 - Strengthen the Homeland Security Enterprise and First

Responders' capabilities to protect the homeland and respond to
disasters

In addition to serving the technical needs of the DHS Components,
S&T is also committed to addressing the needs of the larger HSE-
especially first responders-for technologies and knowledge based on the
best science. The nation's first responder community incorporates a
range of organizations, including law enforcement, fire suppression,
emergency management, search and rescue, emergency medicine and public
safety communications. Despite a wide array of defined
responsibilities, their job descriptions vary dramatically based on
geography, population, and climate. Above all, they are the groups we
call upon to tackle unexpected events as they occur in real time, and
must therefore maintain a wide breadth of expertise, adapt at a
moment's notice, and protect citizens' lives. Additionally,
communication poses significant challenges with first responder groups
because of varying local, state, and national levels of hierarchy.
Realizing this, S&T has made serving the homeland security needs of
first responders a top priority. To this end, we have created an
organization dedicated to understanding first responders' operational
needs and delivering technologies, knowledge products, and services to
the first responder community. Many of these technologies target
improved interoperability, such as Virtual USA for federal, state, and
local data sharing and multi-band radios for voice interoperability.
They also range from everyday technologies, such as a lightweight self-
contained breathing apparatus for firefighters, to standards that many
local agencies may only need occasionally, such as white-powder
response standards.

S&T Goal #4 - Conduct, catalyze, and survey scientific discoveries and

inventions relevant to existing and emerging homeland security
challenges

Supporting 12 University Centers of Excellence

S&T relies upon the University Centers of Excellence (COEs) -a
consortium of universities and colleges -to tap the expertise and
resources of academia to provide critical homeland security tools,
technologies, training, and talent. The COEs maximize S&T's investment
by working closely with academia, industry, the DHS components, and
first responders to develop customer-driven research solutions. Their
collective portfolio is a mix of basic and applied research addressing
both short-and long-term needs. To better tackle urgent needs, the DHS
components can directly engage the COEs for specific research. To date,
these DHS offices have invested a total of $22.6 million in targeted
research programs, resulting in over 70 technologies for use across the
HSE.

Investing in the Homeland Security Workforce of the Future

S&T's university-based educational programs develop essential
scientific and technical expertise through a suite of scholarship,
fellowship, and research opportunities. These programs prepare the next
generation of scientific and engineering leaders to work in the
homeland security arena.
S&T's Minority-Serving Institution (MSI) programs engage
traditionally underserved universities in research and education to
confront homeland security challenges and ensure that the face of
America is reflected in the future homeland security science and
engineering workforce. Our MSI Scientific Leadership Awards are
designed to incorporate select MSIs into the fabric of the COEs and
provide a path to technological employment for MSI students.

S&T Goal #59 Foster a culture of innovation and learning in S&T and

across DHS that addresses challenges with scientific, analytic, and

technical rigor

Build a Culture of Innovation and Learning

The development and translation of science and technology from
ideas to products requires technical competence, creativity, agility,
sustained effort and strong teamwork. To maintain a high level of
success, S&T needs to constantly evolve. We have to approach R&D
problems from a multidisciplinary and collaborative perspective that
can only be achieved by having experts from all fields working at close
proximity in an open environment.
S&T is working to truly achieve an ecosystem of innovation. We
encourage collaboration through Apex projects that bring together teams
of experts from all of our groups to focus on a single critical problem
highlighted by our DHS partners. S&T is increasing the interaction
between our program managers and Component operations to better
understand operational constraints and conditions and deliver cross-
cutting products.
We have recently expanded our access to online scientific journals,
which are the lifeblood of scientific discourse. And we are reworking
offices and collaborative spaces to create a more open environment
while introducing new technologies that can help us communicate ideas
and viewpoints. Our staff is highly educated and technical; however,
that high level of technical knowledge is perishable. Scientists must
constantly stay in tune with new developments in the field. We are
starting new programs at our COEs to encourage our employees to pursue
advanced degrees, increasing S&T's expertise and effectiveness.

Realignment of S&T

New Structure Emphasizes Cross-S&T Communications and Teamwork

The structural realignment of S&T provides the organizational
framework needed to implement our top strategic goals. The number of
direct reports to the Under Secretary was reduced from 21 to 10,
streamlining the chain of command. This structure allows for efficient
interaction among four ``Group Leads,'' and creates a leadership cadre
that spans the extent of S&T's work.
The four Group Leads are:

Homeland Security Advanced Research Projects Agency (HSARPA)

The HSARPA Office includes seven technical divisions:

Borders and Maritime Security

Chemical/Biological Defense

Cybersecurity

Explosives

Human Factors/Behavioral Sciences

Infrastructure Protection & Disaster Management

Special Projects (Classified and Intelligence-related
programs)

The former office of cybersecurity has been elevated to a division
within HSARP A. Uniting all of the technical divisions will encourage
collaboration across divisions, and enable the interdisciplinary work
that is required for today's R&D.

Homeland Security Enterprise and First Responders Group

As discussed in our goal to strengthen first responders'
capabilities, S&T realizes that it takes a unique mindset, direct
experience and an operating structure different from traditional R&D to
understand and serve first responders. The first responder community is
broad and varied and their challenges and opportunities differ from
those of federal agencies.
By establishing this Group, S&T will be able to respond to the
different needs, acquisition methods, implementation requirements, and
management structure of first responders. This group will put
particular focus on improved best practices, standards for equipment
and interoperability, and information sharing. Finally, the Group
includes a leader and staff who have first responder backgrounds,
including some who work or volunteer part-time in the field when not
working at S&T. This Group consists of:

Office for Interoperability and Compatibility

Office of First Responder Technology Clearinghouse

Acquisition Support and Operations Analysis (ASOA) Group

Establishing the ASOA Group is part of the next evolution of S&T.
My predecessor performed an invaluable service by connecting S&T
projects to the operational DHS Components, developing the IPT process
to identify component technology needs, and linking S&T investments to
those needs. The ASOA Group will leverage S&T's critical mass of
technical capability within DHS and will work with the Under Secretary
for Management to: aid the components in developing high-fidelity,
testable operational requirements for their acquisitions; aid in
executing an analysis of alternatives to ensure that the most
appropriate technical approach is taken; and partner with the
components throughout an acquisition so that user needs are translated
into real capabilities that can be validated upon delivery and deployed
without delay. To do this, we've established three elements within
ASOA:

Capstone Analysis and Requirements Office

Systems Engineering Office

Test and Evaluation and Standards Division

Research and Development Partnerships Group (RDP)

The Research and Development Partnerships Group is comprised
of:

Interagency Office

International Cooperative Programs Office

Office of National Labs

Office of Public-Private Partnerships

Office of University Programs

The RDP was created to ensure that S&T has a rich ``situational
awareness'' of-and is able to use and leverage-the scientific research
and technology development occurring in the public and private sectors,
across federal agencies, and in the international sphere. Furthermore,
through RDP, S&T is fostering an openness to work collaboratively with
these partners on challenges facing the Department.
The Office of Public-Private Partnerships continues to increase its
outreach to the private sector, gathering a growing repository of
capabilities from over 500 small businesses potentially aligned to DHS
technology needs. S&T's Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
program and Long Range Broad Agency Announcement contracting vehicle
are open solicitations designed to seek private sector ideas and
technologies. Responses are reviewed by the S&T technical divisions
seeking technologies that may be further developed with S&T funding.
This outreach has already been a success. This year, an S&T staffer
was awarded one of the eight Small Business Administration's 2011
Tibbetts Award for outstanding service to small businesses in the SBIR
program.
The RDP acts as a critical portal to S&T, providing commercial
entities with easy access to the information on DHS needs, while
enabling S&T program managers to make connections across the entire
horizon of R&D. RDP also allows S&T to leverage the investments and
innovations of other federal agencies, foreign governments,
universities and the private sector through mutually beneficial
partnerships.

Conclusion

S&T strives to provide cutting edge scientific knowledge, technical
analysis, and innovative technologies to the third largest federal
agency, to first responders, and to the HSE. The missions and technical
needs of homeland security are broad in scope, varied, and constantly
evolving. To meet the challenges of this mission, S&T must also evolve.
I believe that the implementation of the strategic plan and our
organizational realignment are important steps toward realizing the
technical needs of homeland security.
Thank you for inviting me to appear before you today. I look
forward to answering your questions and to working with you on S&T's
evolving strategic direction and other homeland security issues.

Biography for Dr. Tara O'Toole

Dr. O'Toole was sworn in as Under Secretary of the Science and
Technology (S&T) Directorate at the Department of Homeland Security on
November 12, 2009.
Created at the same time as the Department, S&T's mission is to
strengthen America's security and resiliency by providing knowledge
products and innovative technology solutions for the Homeland Security
Enterprise. S&T's partners comprise the Department of Homeland
Security's operational components; first responders; the private sector
and other members of the Homeland Security Enterprise. As Under
Secretary for S&T, Dr. O'Toole oversees the Directorate and serves as
the science advisor to the Secretary of Homeland Security.
Dr. O'Toole is internationally known for her work on biosecurity
and on health and safety issues related to the U.S. nuclear weapons
complex. Prior to serving at S&T, Dr. O'Toole was the CEO and director
of the Center for Biosecurity at the University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center (UPMC) and Professor of Medicine and of Public Health at the
University of Pittsburgh from 2003 to 2009. Prior to founding the UPMC
Center, Dr. O'Toole was one of the original members of the Johns
Hopkins Center for Civilian Biodefense Strategies, serving as its
director from 2001 to 2003. At both centers, she created independent
organizations dedicated to improving the country's resilience to major
biological threats.
Dr. O'Toole was a founding coeditor-in-chief of the journal
Biosecurity and Bioterrorism: Biodefense Strategy, Practice, and
Science. She was a principal author and producer of Dark Winter, an
influential exercise conducted in June 2001 to alert national leaders
to the dangers of bioterrorist attacks. She was also a principal writer
and producer of Atlantic Storm, an international ministerial-level
biosecurity exercise held in 2005. She is a member of the Council on
Foreign Relations and served as chair of the board of the Federation of
American Scientists.
From 1993 to 1997, Dr. O'Toole served as Assistant Secretary of
Energy for Environment, Safety and Health. In this position, she was
principal advisor to the Secretary of Energy on environmental
protection and on the health and safety of the approximately 100,000
workers in the U.S. nuclear weapons complex and Department of Energy
(DOE) laboratories. She developed the first overall management and
safety plan for dealing with the highly enriched uranium, plutonium,
spent fuel, and radioactive waste that had been left in place when
nuclear weapons production was stopped in the early 1990s. She ran the
multi-agency, multimillion-dollar task force that oversaw the
government's investigations into human radiation experiments conducted
during the Cold War. And she led the U.S. delegation to Russia to
establish the U.S./Russia cooperative effort to study radiation
exposure and environmental hazards of the Russian nuclear weapons
complex.
Prior to her work at DOE, Dr. O'Toole was a senior analyst at the
Congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA). Dr. O'Toole also
practiced general internal medicine in community health centers in
Baltimore from 1984 to 1988. She is board certified in internal
medicine and in occupational and environmental health.
Dr. O'Toole holds a Bachelor's of Science from Vassar College, an
MD from the George Washington University, and a Master of Public Health
degree from Johns Hopkins University. She completed internal medicine
residency training at Yale and a fellowship in Occupational and
Environmental Medicine at Johns Hopkins University.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Dr. O'Toole.
Now I would like to recognize Mr. Warren Stern, Director of
the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office at the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security, to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF WARREN STERN, DIRECTOR OF

THE DOMESTIC NUCLEAR DETECTION OFFICE,

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Stern. Thank you, Chairman Quayle. Good morning,
Ranking Member Wu and distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee. I have submitted written testimony and I would
like to now highlight some of the main points of that
testimony.
I have been at DNDO now for a little more than six months
and I have tried to bring three basic principles: discipline,
transparency and intellectual rigor. In terms of discipline, I
am encouraging DNDO to focus on our legislative mandates and
our Presidential directives. We also are going to be
disciplined in our utilization of resources. We have developed
a solutions development process which I believe we have
provided to your staff which ensures that for any activity we
undertake, material or non-material, we follow a process that
ensures that there is proper coordination within DNDO and
outside DNDO and at each transition point there is a stage gate
to make sure that the basic requirements have been met before
proceeding to the next part of the process, but this discipline
I think will help ensure that some of the problems we faced in
the past we won't face in the future.
In terms of transparency, I fundamentally believe that we
need to make sure that Congress is aware of all of our
activities, and I will do my best to make sure that your staff
is aware of our projects currently and planned and we try our
best to be transparent with the public too.
In terms of intellectual rigor, I am trying very hard to
ensure that all of our activities have the intellectual rigor
that will allow outsiders to examine what we do and to defend
what we have done in an intellectually honest way.
Within the context of these three principles, one of the
first things we did when I arrived at DNDO was to develop a
GNDA strategic plan. Congress had pressed for such a strategic
plan for several years. We worked hard with seven different
agencies and within four months delivered to Congress this
strategic plan, which you should have. I think that plan and
the effort involved reflected those three principles: the
discipline to deliver something to you on time, the
transparency which the plan gives to you, and the intellectual
rigor which was necessary to go into the plan.
In terms of strategic changes I am working within DNDO to
bring is the way we look at the architecture. We have looked at
the architecture in a very static way, which has the problem in
terms of intellectual rigor in that looking at the architecture
this way doesn't reflect physical reality. It is extremely hard
to detect certain types of nuclear material and it is quite
likely that in the case of some sort of illicit trafficking of
nuclear material or weapons or radiological material or
weapons, there will be some intelligence information, so the
new way we are trying to look at the architecture is
intelligence-informed architecture and we are developing
scenarios with the intelligence community and we are going to
try our best to develop an architecture that can respond to the
information that may be available. I believe this is the most
intellectually rigorous way we can approach the architecture,
and I also believe this approach will allow us to develop
metrics to deliver to Congress that will help ensure that you
are able to judge our degree of success in developing the
architecture.
In terms of technology development testing and evaluation,
there are two key changes we hope to implement and are
beginning to implement at DNDO. First, in terms of testing, as
you may know, the National Academy of Sciences has recommended
that we move to what is called the model test model approach
for examining new technology, and we are in fact doing that.
Historically, we have done actual testing to examine different
systems, physical testing. By moving to a model test model
approach, we can in a sense make a model or have industry make
a model, test to the model and then examine a number of
scenarios with the model so we fully endorse the National
Academy recommendation for testing and we are moving very
quickly in that direction.
In addition, we are looking outside in terms of
transitioning detector technology that exists outside to a
greater extent than we have before. We find ourselves now six
years after the creation of DNDO in a situation where a lot of
technology that didn't exist in the commercial sector six years
ago does exist now and so we are going to enhance our focusing
in developing standards and testing and modeling to those
standards based on technology that is available in the
commercial world. Now, that doesn't mean we won't be doing
internal development. There are certain elements, certain
technologies that just don't exist in the commercial world, and
through our various parts of DNDO we will be developing new
technologies and both pushing out to users and trying to ensure
that users can pull technologies out from us. One of the good
examples is this long-range radiation detector system which to
me is really the first new piece of technology I have seen in a
long time and we are pushing out this to engineers in a
demonstration in a few weeks, first responders, the military,
others, so they can examine and see if there are applications
for this.
With that, I would just like to conclude. Again, thank you
again for the opportunity to talk before you and answer your
questions. Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Wu, I am happy to
answer any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Warren M. Stern follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Warren M. Stern

Introduction

Good morning Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Wu, and distinguished
Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today with my colleague Dr. O'Toole to discuss research and
development (R&D) programs at the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS). In order to fully express the Domestic Nuclear Detection
Office's (DNDO) R&D efforts, I would first like to share my strategic
vision for DNDO and provide insights into our programs.
The Domestic Nuclear Detection Office's (DNDO) mandate is to
improve the nation's capability to detect and report unauthorized
attempts to import, possess, store, develop, or transport nuclear or
radiological material for use against the nation, and to further
enhance this capability over time. With assistance and participation
from a wide variety of U.S. government departments and agencies, DNDO
synchronizes and integrates inter-agency efforts to develop technical
nuclear detection capabilities, characterizes detector system
performance, ensures effective response to detection alarms, integrates
nuclear forensics efforts, coordinates the global detection
architecture and conducts a transformational research and development
program for advanced technology to detect nuclear and radiological
materials. Countering nuclear terrorism is a whole-of-government
challenge and DNDO must work with federal, state, local, international,
and private sector partners to develop and implement the Global Nuclear
Detection Architecture (GNDA).

Three Principles

My strategic vision for DNDO is based on three key principles that
I think will help shape the office and all our activities: discipline,
intellectual rigor, and transparency.
One of the first things I would like to build upon at DNDO is the
discipline with which we approach our work. In DNDO's nearly six years
of existence, the office has embarked on many efforts to enhance the
GNDA, but in order to ensure that we address the most pressing and
impactful needs, we must carefully review all our plans and
expenditures so that we exercise discipline in utilization of
resources. While we have implemented a range of measures designed to
provide oversight and instill appropriate processes for administrative,
management, and program activities within DNDO, we must find ways to be
more efficient, especially in the current budget climate.
Building upon a disciplined approach to executing our mission, we
must also ensure that there is intellectual rigor behind our analyses,
strategies, and programs. Our decision making and planning must be
supported by strong methodologies and analyses. This includes making
use of available expertise and tools, like peer review, that can assist
us in developing the best strategies and solutions. We must make sure
that our assumptions, strategies, and solutions reflect thoughtful and
deliberate analyses and defensible conclusions.
Finally, I support increased transparency at DNDO. Transparency is
essential in providing an understanding of our mission and receiving
the necessary oversight and feedback to improve our operations. I
pledge that DNDO will work with all relevant stakeholders and provide
as much insight as possible into our programs and planning for our
partners, including Congress, the Government Accountability Office
(GAO), and the American public. Working within all applicable laws and
classification regulations, we will provide as much information as
possible about our programs.

GNDA Strategic Plan

As you may know, National Security Presidential Directive (NSPD)-
43/Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD)-14 and the Security
and Accountability For Every (SAFE) Port Act of 2006 (P.L. 109-347)
require that DNDO be the lead federal agency for coordinating the and
implementing the domestic portion of the GNDA. We worked with federal
partners to define the GNDA and the necessary roles, responsibilities,
and objectives. Completion of this strategic plan was a priority when I
took the lead at DNDO.
The GNDA is an interagency product that represents the inputs of:
the departments of Defense, State, Energy, and Justice; the Office of
the Director of National Intelligence; Intelligence Community members;
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; and the National Security Staff. The
completion of the GNDA Strategic Plan represents a high degree of
cooperation and coordination among the interagency to create a document
that will guide multiple U.S. government efforts to fulfill the
objectives and goals set forth in the plan. I am proud to say that we
were able to deliver the GNDA Strategic Plan to Congress in December
2010, as promised.
Implementation of the GNDA is an ongoing process. Currently, there
are many existing programs and initiatives that fall under the GNDA and
many more programs that support these efforts. Using the Strategic Plan
as a framework, DNDO will continue to work with interagency partners on
GNDA implementation. DNDO's forthcoming domestic implementation plan
will outline programs, technologies, execution, and timelines in
greater detail.
DNDO will also complement the GNDA Strategic Plan with a revised
GNDA annual review report. The annual report, required by Congress
under the ``Implementing Recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Act of
2007'' (Pub. L. 110-53), will provide a means to evaluate, document and
track progress to assist in refining the GNDA. It will also link the
U.S. government's organizational roles and responsibilities to the
GNDA's goals, and identify the analyses and investments necessary to
achieve those objectives. Like the Strategic Plan, the GNDA annual
report will be jointly produced and approved by all relevant USG
stakeholders.
Within DNDO we will place much greater emphasis on defining the
GNDA, both as it exists now and as we determine it should exist in the
future. The responsibility to define the architecture is DNDO's
greatest challenge and its greatest opportunity. Over the next years,
our long-term architectural vision can be characterized by several
common themes that apply across all layers. In every layer and pathway
we will seek to increase detection coverage and capability and deter
terrorists from planning or attempting nuclear terrorism. The
architecture will also introduce uncertainty for adversaries with
regard to the risk of interdiction, and take maximum advantage of
existing activities that can contribute to the overall capability to
prevent nuclear terrorism.

Strategic Emphasis

Our future enhancements to the domestic architecture will focus on
situations where there is some intelligence information available, but
where information may not be precise. Future implementations of the
GNDA will emphasize mobile or agile detection components, which will
increase our capability to respond to escalated threat levels by
focusing detection assets to interdict these threats. These threats
will impact the way we move forward with deployments and systems
development, as well as how we provide support and training to build
effective operational concepts. We will use existing capabilities and
assets, on a federal, State, and local level, to surge our radiological
and nuclear detection abilities in a coordinated fashion to respond to
suspected threats or radiological/nuclear detection scenarios. This
will not be one specific program, rather a concept of operations that
will bring together multiple capabilities and rely on a breadth of
assets.
We need to utilize the integrated efforts of federal, state, and
local responders to perform radiological and nuclear detection in
concentrated regions or areas when information indicates there may be a
need for responsive search operations for preventive detection. We have
many programs, assets, and capabilities that contribute to radiological
and nuclear detection response activities, and we must work to enhance
coordination and implementation mechanisms to ensure that we make the
best use of all available personnel, equipment, and knowledge. A more
flexible architecture will strategically bring together the assets and
capabilities for detection and search operations into a unified effort
for the domestic prevention of radiological and nuclear terrorism. Some
current programs have begun to establish more randomized and mobile
capabilities with broad applications, including the radiological and
nuclear detection equipment and training DNDO has provided for all U.S.
Coast Guard boarding teams and Transportation Security Administration
Visible Intermodal Prevention and Response teams. We have recently
reached an important milestone for the development of advanced handheld
systems, which were developed through DNDO and approved for production
and deployment in September 2010. This system is the first of DNDO's
next generation human-portable systems and will be acquired for U.S.
Customs and Border Protection and other users in support of their
operations. Following the success of our advanced handheld, the small
area search handheld system, RadSeeker, will be ready for a production
and deployment system this year. Our work will continue to enhance our
federal capabilities and build on these efforts in a strategic way so
that the pieces are linked together and can respond as needed.
DNDO also has a number of separate state and local pilot programs
and training efforts that can contribute to distributed, agile
capabilities to develop an effective domestic architecture. My
objective for 2011 is to increase our focus on DNDO state and local
support programs and consolidate the efforts into an integrated
program. One element for doing that is the Securing the Cities (STC)
initiative. The current STC pilot was initiated in the New York City
region and has resulted in unprecedented regional cooperation among
federal, state, county, and city agencies in the Tri-state region. The
STC program provides assistance to state and local jurisdictions, which
enable these entities to build and sustain capabilities by: deploying
current technologies regionally in a coordinated manner; designing,
acquiring, and deploying a regional architecture for radiological/
nuclear detection focused on state and local jurisdictions; developing
and implementing a common, multi-agency concept of operations (CONOPS)
for sharing sensor data and resolving alarms; and instituting training
and exercising by the regional agencies to execute the CONOPS at a high
level of proficiency. STC partners in the New York region use
commercially available radiological and nuclear detection equipment and
work with DNDO to establish requirements and conduct operational
assessments of equipment in the development stages. The President's FY
2012 budget request outlines a transition from the STC pilot to a
three-phased program that will continue in NYC and commence in another
UASI Tier I region. DNDO will assist regional partners in implementing
self-supported sustainment of capabilities and real-time sharing of
data from fixed, mobile, maritime and human-portable radiation
detection systems.

New Approach for Technology Development, Test, and Evaluation

As we develop solutions that support flexible, coordinated
capabilities and a deeper understanding of an effective architecture,
we need to continue to improve our technological capability. DNDO is
mandated to serve as ``the primary entity in the U.S. Government to
further develop, acquire, and support the deployment of an enhanced
domestic system to detect and report on attempts to import, posses,
store, transport, develop . . . ''1A\1\ nuclear weapons or materials.
Historically, we have focused on developing technology and detection
systems to address identified needs. We are now transitioning to a new
approach, focusing on commercially developed devices, developing
government standards, and testing to those standards. Because industry
has repeatedly demonstrated the ability to rapidly improve detection
technologies, we have an opportunity to shift our approach to one that
is more flexible and adaptable and relies on the private sector--as
well as other DHS components--to enhance existing products and develop
new devices. This technical transition will also include a new approach
at the systems level, which defines strategic interfaces at various
points in the detector/system architecture, allowing improvements
without wholesale changes to the entire system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Security and Accountability For Every Port Act of 2006 (SAFE
Port Act, P.L. 109-347, Sec. 1802)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DNDO will place greater emphasis on developing standards for
radiological/nuclear detection equipment and testing to those
standards, while taking advantage of the technological advancements
made by the private sector and building upon those efforts. In
addition, we will enhance our approach to testing to reflect the
recommendations of the recent report from the National Academies of
Sciences, which encouraged us to more heavily integrate detector
modeling. Data collected in the field can then be used with the models
to understand system behavior instead of relying on new testing alone.
Testing and evaluating systems to achieve technical and operational
standards is crucial in developing and delivering the necessary
equipment to our stakeholders. DNDO is required by the SAFE Port Act
``to carry out a program to test and evaluate technology for detecting
a nuclear explosive device and fissile or radiological material, in
coordination with the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Energy,
as appropriate.'' In response, DNDO has conducted more than 50 separate
test and evaluation campaigns at more than 20 experimental and
operational venues. These test campaigns were planned and executed with
the interagency using rigorous, reproducible, peer-reviewed processes.
Tested detection systems include pagers, handhelds, portals, backpacks,
mobiles, boat- and spreader bar-mounted detectors, and next-generation
radiography technologies. The results from DNDO's test campaigns have
informed federal, state, local and tribal operational users on the
technical and operational performance of radiological and nuclear
detection systems to select the most suitable equipment and effective
CONOPs as we work to keep the nation safe from nuclear terrorist
threats.
DNDO is also required by the SAFE Port Act, in collaboration with
the National Institute of Standards and Technology, to publish
technical capability standards and recommended standard operating
procedures for the use of nonintrusive imaging and radiation detection
equipment in the United States. In executing its T&E and Standards
responsibilities, DNDO collaborates with the Test & Evaluation and
Standards Division of DHS S&T. This collaboration includes coordination
of American National Standards Institute (ANSI) N42 consensus
standards, major systems operational testing and evaluation, including
large programs like the Advanced Spectroscopic Portal (ASP) program,
the implementation of DHS T&E guidance in smaller systems development
efforts, and coordination of T&E facilities. The DNDO T&E lead
participates on the DHS T&E Council, and DNDO T&E staff has made good
use of T&E training and certification capabilities developed by S&T.
We also have supported the development, publication and adoption of
national consensus standards for radiation detection equipment. Several
such standards now exist for use in homeland security. The DNDO
Graduated RN Detector Evaluation and Reporting (GRaDER
SM
)
Program is using these standards to test and evaluate both commercially
developed systems. GRaDER is a conformity assessment program that
provides independent standards compliance information for selected
radiation detection equipment. The program has created the
infrastructure for vendor voluntary testing of commercial off-the-shelf
radiological/nuclear detection equipment by independent accredited
laboratories against national consensus standards and government-unique
Technical Capability Standards. Final test results for our initial
GRaDER testing are expected beginning this month. We anticipate that
the GRaDER Evaluated Equipment List--which is supported by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency's guidance for compliance in relation to
their grants program--will enable federal, state, local, tribal and
territorial agencies to make more informed radiological/nuclear
detector procurement decisions by ensuring they are buying equipment
that has demonstrated compliance with published standards.
Beyond our work with Component partners, DNDO's testing expertise
and experience is sought by interagency partners, such as the
departments of Energy and Defense, and international partners such as
the United Kingdom, Canada, Israel, the European Union, and the
International Atomic Energy Agency. DNDO has an active partnership with
the European Commission's Joint Research Center to conduct the Illicit
Trafficking Radioactive Assessment Program+10, an ambitious three-year
test program to evaluate nine classes of radiological/nuclear detection
systems in U.S. and European test facilities.

Research and Development: Programs and Coordination

The Transformational and Applied Research (TAR) programs at DNDO
support basic and applied research of systems with increased
capabilities. I will describe the TAR portfolio as it currently exists
within DNDO. Our research and development contributes to advances in
nuclear detection and technical nuclear forensics. TAR projects feed
into the DNDO Solutions Development process and shape our work on
systems development. Within DNDO, these programs address advanced
compact high-performance handheld systems; advanced passive standoff
detection technologies; improved detection through networked and
distributed detection systems; better detector materials; and improved
material characterization and radiochemistry. Additionally, DNDO is
pursuing targeted technologies for the detection of shielded special
nuclear material through passive, active, and radiographic
interrogation programs, and the development of key supporting systems
for varied deployment schemes. TAR divides projects between the
Exploratory Research Program (ERP) and the Near Term Research Program
(NTRP). Underlying these efforts is our work to ensure a continued
pipeline for human capital development and basic research, executed
through DNDO's partnership with the National Science Foundation for the
Academic Research Initiative. Currently, the Academic Research
Initiative has awards with 30 universities through 36 grants supporting
118 students.
The ERP explores innovative, high-risk, early-stage technologies,
concepts and ideas that can make transformational contributions to
support the GNDA and reduce the risk of nuclear terrorism.
Specifically, the ERP researches technology and techniques that: 1)
address capability gaps and weaknesses in the GNDA, with an emphasis on
radiological and nuclear detection; 2) provide substantial performance
improvement or cost reductions of radiological/nuclear detection
capabilities; and 3) improve nuclear forensics capabilities. Efforts
under the ERP are intended to transform the basic building blocks of
nuclear detection technology and supporting fields for dramatic
improvements in technical capabilities, with the research generally
culminating in a proof of concept or proof of feasibility demonstration
in a laboratory setting. Successful ERP technologies and concepts may
then transition to support a subsequent near-term research project or
spur commercial development. ERP also provides performance modeling,
improved algorithm development, and other support capabilities for the
broader DNDO mission.
Additionally, our ERP work began exploring options for alternative
neutron detection, years before the recent helium-3 shortage was
identified. Helium-3 is commonly used as a neutron detector material in
radiation detection equipment. Our exploratory research projects have
been developing near and long-term alternatives to helium-3 neutron
detectors for different applications, including portals, backpacks,
handhelds, and pagers. These technologies are aimed at achieving
efficiencies and discrimination capabilities that are equivalent to or
better than helium-3 detectors, as well as examining detector cost-
competitiveness. Approximately 15 different technology approaches are
being pursued, including those based on boron or lithium.
Some of these technologies have advanced to a point where they
could be tested with other alternative neutron detection technologies.
We have completed a test campaign for neutron detection at Los Alamos
National Laboratory that evaluated 11 units in three application
spaces, which helped us to identify and verify the performance of
several very promising technologies and effectively target funding.
The second program within TAR is the NTRP, which performs
accelerated development, characterization, and demonstration of
leading-edge technologies to address critical gaps in nuclear detection
capabilities. The NTRP was started in 2006 and was formerly called the
Advanced Technology Demonstration (ATD) Program.
Contracts awarded under the NTRP are typically executed in four
distinct phases: preliminary design review, critical design review,
characterization readiness review, and characterization assessment. The
NTRP characterization results form the basis for a subsequent initial
cost benefit analysis to determine if the technology should transition
to system development and eventual production and deployment.
Our basic and applied research efforts push the envelope by
identifying gaps in current technologies and architectural needs and
selecting R&D programs that can begin the early stage work necessary to
address these challenges. Our programs must be able to reach out to
operators for user requirements and to balance both ``technology push''
and ``technology pull'' efforts, as appropriate. For technology push
efforts, the developer of a technology is pushing a new concept out for
examination by the operator. These are often new or advanced concept
detectors that could improve threat detection or allow for altered or
simplified CONOPS. These technology push systems are often state-of-
the-art with enhanced or dramatically improved capabilities that might
be otherwise unknown to operators. Technology pull refers to equipment
and programs where operators have identified CONOPS and features that
they need in order to achieve their missions. The operators are pulling
the technologies in directions that guide development for industry and
the government.
Many of our important research and development successes highlight
the necessity of integrating architectural analyses with R&D efforts.
One example of DNDO's R&D work that is transitioning through technology
push efforts is our Long Range Radiation Detection (LRRD) program. The
LRRD program is the follow-on program to the Stand-Off Radiation
Detection Systems (SORDS) ATD program, completed in FY 2010. The
overarching goal of the LRRD program is to determine if a passive,
long-range, radiological/nuclear detection system with localization
capability should be developed and fielded. To achieve this goal, the
LRRD program will allow systems developers to determine if there is a
need, identify that need with a gap in the GNDA, and evaluate whether
that need can be met in a cost effective manner. Next, we must collect
user requirements and perform an analysis of alternatives, the result
of which helps us determine if we will field one or more systems.
The LRRD systems are undergoing a series of activities that engage
federal, state, and local partners in utilizing and assessing the
technology. Participating in these activities are two SORDS prototypes
and the Roadside Tracker (RST), which were developed through the ERP.
The SORDS technologies are designed to detect and identify sources from
100 meters away on a mobile platform, and the RST is designed to detect
and identify sources in vehicles over five lanes of traffic at speeds
of up to 70 mph. An operational demonstration will evaluate the
potential utility of these systems in a simulated urban environment,
and follows the technology demonstration that was conducted at Fort
Belvoir in November 2010. Next week, the operational demonstration will
include the cooperative efforts of DNDO, Fort Indiantown Gap Military
Reservation, the 3rd Civil Support Team, Nassau & Suffolk County Police
Departments, the Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security
Administration, and the Defense Threat Reduction Agency. Following the
completion of the operational demonstration, we will work with the
Nassau & Suffolk County Police Departments to provide a live
demonstration of the LRRD systems for radiological/nuclear scanning at
a real event. The live demonstration will allow operators to use the
systems and provide feedback for future technology and CONOPS
development. This project is illustrative of the important interplay
between R&D efforts, technical and operational evaluation activities,
and operators in the field, which all together lead to the best
solutions.
As Under Secretary O'Toole mentioned, the FY 2011 and FY 2012
President's Budget Requests transfer our TAR activities to DHS S&T,
pending Congressional approval of the budget. In order to maintain and
improve the current levels of integration for transformational research
and development activities and transitions of technologies for use by
operators, my office will work closely with S&T to ensure that the
pipeline for technological advancements remains coordinated to address
gaps in the GNDA and operational needs.

Nuclear Forensics

DNDO has an additional mandate, codified last year in the ``Nuclear
Forensics and Attribution Act'' (P.L. 111-140), to provide stewardship
and integration for U.S. government technical nuclear forensics
efforts. Nuclear forensics is a key supporting element to the GNDA and
must be closely linked in order to receive relevant information and
provide data and analyses that can impact detector development, tuning,
and deployment. Established in 2007, DNDO's National Technical Nuclear
Forensics Center (NTNFC) serves as a national-level ``system
integrator'' for joint planning, exercising and evaluating our national
capabilities, while also investing in technical capability advancement.
Last year, the NTNFC led the interagency effort to develop the
``National Strategic Five-Year Plan for Improving the Nuclear Forensics
and Attribution Capabilities of the United States,'' which was signed
by the President and submitted to Congress. NTNFC also has the
responsibility to develop the U.S. government's capability to rapidly,
accurately and credibly identify the origin and history of radiological
and nuclear materials intercepted before a detonation. We work with
laboratory experts to develop standard reference materials for the
validation of analytical methodologies; develop validated methodologies
to be employed in nuclear forensics activities; and develop and
validate predictive models and techniques to improve the understanding
of how material signatures.

Conclusion

My vision of DNDO is for us to continue to improve our work
developing a broad spectrum of capabilities, including nuclear
detection, reporting and analysis, and nuclear forensics. Our
responsibilities include coordinating the development of the GNDA and
implementing the domestic portion of that architecture. We also must
provide the analyses and integration mechanisms for detection and
reporting that will link technical elements like research, systems
development, testing and evaluation to operational solutions for
mitigating the threat of nuclear terrorism. Our research and
development work will consistently be matched with needs in the GNDA
and the operational requirements of our end users. My hope and
expectation is that, over time, we will develop a reputation that
allows us greater leverage in defining detection architecture
throughout the world.
Other U.S. government agencies and Congress make important
contributions in accomplishing the mission to prevent nuclear
terrorism, and I am committed to working in coordination with all
parties to develop effective strategies, capabilities, and
technologies.
Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Wu, I thank you for this
opportunity to discuss DNDO's strategic direction and my vision for its
future. I am happy to answer any questions the Subcommittee may have.

Biography for Mr. Warren M. Stern

Mr. Stern is the Director of the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office
(DNDO), a position he has held since August 2010. Prior to joining
DNDO, Mr. Stern served as the Head of the International Atomic Energy
Agency's (IAEA) Incident and Emergency Centre from August 2006 to March
2010-where he led international efforts to prepare for and respond to
nuclear and radiation emergencies and helped create the IAEA's Response
Assistance Network.
Mr. Stern began his career in 1985 at the Central Intelligence
Agency, then served as the Senior Technical Advisor in the U.S. Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency-where he advised senior U.S. officials
on nonproliferation and nuclear security issues-from July 1990 until
May 1999.
He later served as a Fellow in Senator Hillary Clinton's office in
2003-providing guidance on nuclear energy, waste, safety and security
issues and helping to write the Dirty Bomb Prevention Act-and went on
to serve as the Department of State's Senior Coordinator for Nuclear
Safety and Deputy Director of the Office of Nuclear Energy, Safety and
Security.
Mr. Stern received his M.S. in National Security Studies from the
National War College, his M.S. in Nuclear Engineering from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and his B.A. in Physics from
Brandeis University.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Stern. We are going to move
into the question portion. I want to remind Members that
committee rules limit questioning to five minutes, and at this
point I will open up the questions and recognize myself for
five minutes.
My first question is to you, Mr. Stern. Much of the DNDO
R&D has been proposed to be transferred from your office to the
S&T Directorate. What R&D will be housed at DNDO after that
transfer to the Directorate?
Mr. Stern. Sure. I appreciate the question. Within the
DNDO, we are structured in a way that goes from long-range
research, very basic research, to the actual production and
acquisition of equipment. What is proposed to be moved is the
transformational and applied research Directorate within TAR
that does what you might call more basic research. Even within
TAR, there are subdivisions but it is that part of the R&D that
is proposed to be moved to S&T.
Chairman Quayle. You are now focusing more along the lines
of commercially developed devices and establishing government
standards. Is that the appropriate role for DNDO given the
challenges of commercialization, and because of NIST's
involvement with establishing government standards?
Mr. Stern. An excellent question. I mean, the first point
is, we work extremely closely with NIST and ANSI in developing
standards, so together we develop standards. I believe it is
one of our statutory and explicit responsibilities, actually,
so we have clear roles and responsibilities and I don't think
there is really a conflict in the things that we do with NIST
to establish roles and standards.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you.
Dr. O'Toole, when they canceled SBInet recently, was there
some technological consideration in making that decision, and
what was your role in that decision-making process?
Ms. O'Toole. When Commissioner Bersinn and Secretary
Napolitano started considering whether to proceed with SBInet
as originally planned or altered that plan, S&T served on the
executive board for the analysis of alternatives, which looked
at various suites of technology that we could use to substitute
for what was then being developed by the Boeing Corporation,
and we also served on the executive board for the Southwest
Border Technology Initiative and CBP.
Chairman Quayle. Will S&T be involved in that process going
forward as DHS looks for a replacement for virtual fence or
whatever technological advances DHS puts down at the border?
Will S&T be involved in that process?
Ms. O'Toole. Yes. I continue to serve on the executive
board that the chairman has put together and S&T is, for
example, evaluating five different radars to understand the
state-of-the-art technologies that are available right now that
we might want to deploy to the border and we continue to do a
lot of research in border-applicable technologies for detecting
illicit use, crossing of people, movement of illicit cargo, et
cetera, but yes, we will remain involved in border technology
decisions.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. Great. I have another question; I
have noticed that you have been taking some steps to really
improve acquisition efforts and I think those are good steps to
make, but I have also heard from some stakeholders that end
users who do not incorporate technical or economic feasibility
are sometimes allowed to define the security needs. How do we
ensure that we get cost-effective and innovative solutions?
Ms. O'Toole. Well, Mr. Chairman, that is a good question. I
wish I had a succinct answer to that. It is very important to
identify the requirements very carefully, and that, any
technology developer will tell you, is not easy. We need to get
S&T's technical heft more engaged in that, and we are. We are
already engaged in doing the oversight of testing and
evaluation of new technologies in DHS. That is by statute. Bu
we need to get S&T more involved in the front end of deciding
what is the mission need we are trying to serve and how might
technology fill that gap and then how do we develop the
technology.
If you don't really understand the users' needs, and this
has to be an ongoing process in the course of the entire
development process because users' needs change over time,
everything is changing, then you are not going to come up with
the right answer. So the users themselves in addition to the
policymakers and the components need to be involved in
developing these technologies. At the same time, as was
mentioned earlier, you need to have a strategic view of where
are we going to be in five years in ten years and how do we
serve those far-off needs. So it is an ongoing set of parallel
processes that have to be kept in motion.
Chairman Quayle. So you keep the end users involved in the
process by setting R&D priorities as well?
Ms. O'Toole. The users are certainly part of how we set R&D
priorities but the priorities mostly have to do with what are
the top-level needs of the department. That comes since I have
been here first of all with conversations between me and the
component heads and an ongoing process that my predecessor
developed called the Integrated Project Team process, which
identifies needs that the operators have come up with and then
prioritizes them, and then we take those needs in S&T and try
and see what we can meet through either knowledge products or
technology assessment via technology foraging, original R&D, et
cetera, et cetera.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. Great. Thanks.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Wu for five minutes.
Mr. Wu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to get in two questions, if I may, and the
first is a question related to the horrendous earthquake and
then the subsequent tsunami that occurred in Japan last week,
and I want to ask about the Directorate's work in the area of
natural-disaster detection, and I understand that in the fiscal
year 2012 budget, some of the Directorate's natural-disaster
detection program funding will be used for the design and
development of models that will provide earlier prediction of
seismic activity and will help integrate these predictive
capabilities with emergency management alert and warning
systems, and can you tell me a little bit more about the work
that the Directorate is doing in this area, what it expects to
do in 2012, and also involving you, Mr. Stern, particularly
there a $19 million item in the Directorate's Natural Disaster
Resiliency program to help respond to and recover from large-
scale natural disasters, and some of this funding will be to
address the resiliency of critical infrastructure qua large and
expressly nuclear reactors? And we do have a situation with
nuclear reactors in Japan, and if both of you could address
that as my first set of questions, if you will.
Ms. O'Toole. Okay. We do have a project going on. It is a
very basic science fundamental research project to try and get
advanced prediction of the occurrence of earthquakes. It
involves studying the offgassing from the earth's crust to see
if we can detect that and improve the time in which we have to
get prepared for an earthquake. I emphasize, this is
fundamental science. There is a reason we call it discovery. It
may not work but it looks quite promising, certainly promising
enough for us to invest in it.
Secondly, we do a lot of work in S&T trying to improve the
resilience of critical infrastructures, so we have done a great
deal of work, for example, in material science. There is
something called ultra-high-performance concrete, which if used
would make our buildings much more earthquake-proof. Getting
that into commercial use is going to require a series of steps
that S&T may be able to help with involving certification and
so on and so forth. We also do a lot of different kinds of work
involving disaster response generally. For example, situational
awareness becomes extremely important as we are seeing played
out in Japan in these complex, chaotic times after a calamity
whether it is natural or manmade or a terrorist attack. We are
doing a great deal of work, particularly on the ground with
first responders, to bring together various communication
systems in ways of moving and visualizing data so everybody has
a common operating picture.
In terms of nuclear response, there is a budget line in TAR
which we expect to come to S&T for response to nuclear events.
This is work that is just beginning so we have a sketch or a
roadmap for how we would spend those monies but have not begun
that work yet.
Mr. Wu. Terrific. Thank you.
And my second question is an arena in which I have had a
long-term interest in which the Subcommittee over the last four
years has held a series of hearings and it is on 9/11
interoperability and interoperability of systems, not only
voice communications but all the different factors that make a
system fully interoperable in voice and data and other factors,
and I note that in the fiscal year 2012 budget request, there
is $23.7 million for the Directorate's information sharing
analysis and interoperability program, and according to the
budget, some of this funding will be used to fully incorporate
conformance testing into the P25 compliance assessment program,
and these compliance tests and the P25 interfaces have been the
subject of--it is very complex. We have had multiple hearings
on this topic and I look forward to an update if you can give
me a partial update at this hearing today.
Ms. O'Toole. Sure. We are doing a number of things and
actually making real progress in interoperability of voice,
data and visualization. I would be happy to come in and tell
you about those products, three in particular which are being
used on the ground in real time right now.
In terms of P25, this was a standard that was meant to and
would in fact make interoperable all different kinds of
handheld radios used by first responders who were using legacy
systems that did not talk to each other. The problem, frankly,
is that the two biggest manufacturers of these radios aren't
particularly interested in complying with the standard. So the
other manufacturers who do want to build a P25-standard radio
have told us--actually this happened just in January at a
meeting out in Arizona--that they cannot create the testing
necessary to certify compliance, so S&T is working with these
manufacturers to see if we can devise the tests that would
affirm compliance, but it has been a long and frustrating road.
I would also mention, Congressman, that new technologies
are basically overtaking the P25 standard and will be
increasingly interoperable so as first responders buy new
technologies, this problem will not be as germane but we still
have to deal with the legacy which are a majority of what is in
the field, and that will remain the case for some time because
of the cost of replacing old systems.
Mr. Wu. Well, I think it is terrific that S&T Directorate
is moving forward in this arena, and as you know, NIST, one of
the agencies under this Subcommittee's jurisdiction, has had a
long-term interest in this and has a lab, I believe, in
Boulder, Colorado, that is dedicated to this and I think that
this Subcommittee will appropriately take continuing interest.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Rohrabacher for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, and congratulations
to you, Mr. Chairman. When I came here, we didn't become
chairmen when we were freshmen, but you do have an old hand to
rely on there next to you as the ranking member so the old
hands sort of welcome you today.
This is a very significant issue at hand because it covers
things that are so important to our constituents.
I just want to get one bit of housekeeping out of the way.
Apparently the American Institute for Research was supposed to
conduct a validation of the TSA's Screening of Passengers by
Observation Techniques, the SPOT program. Supposedly that
report was due earlier this year. When is it going to happen?
When are we going to see it? Ms. O'Toole?
Ms. O'Toole. Well, there are several evaluations of SPOT
going on, Congressman Rohrabacher. I am not sure which is
which. S&T has been trying to validate and working with TSA to
validate the SPOT program and our preliminary results are
available or almost available. I think the report that you have
mentioned is going to be available in April.
Mr. Rohrabacher. In April? Okay. Thank you very much.
You know, we go through these detectors every week, and I
think frankly it is disgusting that we have seniors and people
in wheelchairs and families that are having to go through the
type of machinations that they have to go through to get onto
an airplane in this country. It seems to me that with our
technological capability, we could be doing something better
that wouldn't create this roadmap.
Let me ask you about fingerprints. I took my family to
Marine Land--not Marine Land, it was the Ocean World or
whatever down in San Diego, and we have season passes for that,
and have three little kids; God blessed us with triplets seven
years ago. Thank God and modern science, I might add. But as we
were going in, you actually just put your finger on the little
thing and they were able to oh, okay, go right on in, you are
obviously the person with this pass. How come we can't do that
at the airports?
Ms. O'Toole. Well, I flew out of Boston yesterday and left
a water bottle in my bag and had to go through again and also
went through the AIT.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Uh-oh. Oh, boy. You must have had to go
through a strip search after that.
Ms. O'Toole. I did experience a pat-down. We all share your
frustration. Here is the problem, and this might be worth a
classified threat briefing for you so we can talk in more
detail. But it is clear that al Qaeda, both al Qaeda core and
the spin-offs, are targeting aviation, and they are probing our
systems to find out how sensitive they are and where the seams
are that they might exploit. So I can't go into sensitive
intelligence but there is a reason that we are looking at
everybody including babies and people with casts and so forth.
It is not arbitrary. It is a real bother.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, couldn't there be a technological,
like I say, could you put your finger in something, could
that----
Ms. O'Toole. We are working on it.
Mr. Rohrabacher. --take the place of a pat-down?
Ms. O'Toole. Here is what we are working on. After the
Christmas bombing, the Christmas attempted bombing, I should
say, we started working with TSA to do a systems analysis of
the entire checkpoint to see what works, what doesn't, how we
could make that much more efficient either though combining
technologies or making technologies faster and less intrusive.
We are working on that. We are also working on upgrades, for
example, to the AIT machine. One would be a software package
that would automatically identify targets and lead to fewer
false alarms. My watch alarmed the AIT yesterday, okay? So I
had to go through the pat-down. If we had fewer false alarms,
there will be fewer pat-downs and that will be less intrusive.
That is just one of the things that we are working on to build
a less-intrusive checkpoint. I could go on forever. I won't
now. But yes, there is hope.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, thank you very much, and that is one
thing I think all of our constituents are very concerned about.
Ms. O'Toole. Yes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. But safety of our country and of our
families is important as well and that this what you are trying
to do.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, and the chair now recognizes
Mr. Lujan for five minutes.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Dr. O'Toole, I want to thank you for being here as well as
Mr. Stern and the other staff that you have with you.
Dr. O'Toole, just to follow up on that last line of
questioning, after we are looking at capabilities that other
agencies have come up with that could integrate into the system
to find our vulnerabilities, doesn't it make sense that if we
can identify molecular footprints of materials that are
attempting to be brought on so that when you have that bottle
of water, if it indeed is water, you could bring it on? Or we
have all these taste tests that sometimes we see competing
interests like Coke and Pepsi on television where they have
people taste one the other and see if you can tell the
difference or which one tastes better or new Coke versus old
Coke, if we had a technology that you could put that liquid in
a machine and they could tell you the difference between Coke
and Pepsi even though they look the same and may be in
different cans. What are your thoughts with being able to use
technologies that will be able to identify these areas as
opposed to having some of these false positives that we are
trying to prevent?
Ms. O'Toole. Congressman, I think you are referring to the
MagViz project.
Mr. Lujan. Dr. O'Toole, MagViz, Bottle Viz, probably what
can be sized up to if there is a client that can be brought in,
a People Viz as well.
Ms. O'Toole. We are working on a lot of technologies to try
to make detection of explosives and other illicit cargo on
passengers or even in passengers more available. We can do a
lot of things on the bench but making it portable, able to sit
in the footprints which are very limited in airports that we
have to use, keeping throughput fast--even a minute, as we have
all experienced, extra time in that line counts, and in cargo
screening, for example, seconds are actually measured at ports.
So the operational realities of making these very fascinating
and capable technologies useful in actual practice are very
difficult to comb through. We are going through a process of
evaluation and testing and development with MagViz and other
technologies now. That is a fairly lengthy process. You can
make it shorter but then you are faced with more surprises
usually in the end. It doesn't work, doesn't work the way you
hoped it worked, you have to diddle with it a little bit more,
so there are new technologies coming but nothing is going to be
simple or a one-size-fits-all solution to our many needs, I am
afraid. MagViz is promising.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that, Dr. O'Toole, but as we look
to technologies that we order up on large scale that failed
with the bomber attempt on Christmas Day, there are other
technologies that I have seen put to work and tested where we
have been able to see these put to use. There are other
technologies that appear to have received some tests that could
have prevented some of these efforts and I certainly hope that
going forward that with the new Directorate to be able to
create the testable requirements that there are some areas that
we can improve along those lines, and I hope we get a second
round of questioning because I would like to pursue that a
little bit.
One area that I would like to bring up as well, Dr.
O'Toole, what are the responsibilities with the Science and
Tech Directorate under DHS with drugs, with narcotics and
countertrafficking?
Ms. O'Toole. We have been working with both Customs and
Border Protection and with ICE to help them detect people
coming across the border with illicit materials, and we are
also doing a lot on air cargo security, mostly with TSA. We
have developed algorithms, for example, for use by CBP,
software that helps them better target cargo and people that
should be given a second look based upon manifests and so on
and so forth, and I can go into a whole list of technologies if
you wish, but we are doing a lot of things in that regard to
try and get a better look at vehicles passing border points,
for example.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you very much, O'Toole.
Mr. Chairman, I have some other questions but I will wait
until the second round.
Thank you, Dr. O'Toole.
Chairman Hall. [Presiding] At this time I would like to
recognize myself for about five minutes or four minutes.
Mr. Stern, in light of the damage that was sustained at
three separate reactors after the very powerful earthquake and
tsunami in Japan, and release of radioactive material, I guess
everybody who is stuck to the television today wants to ask the
same question. What kinds of technologies would be useful or
are already available to respond to, detect or mitigate the
effects of a radiological nuclear disaster here? They indicate
that Japan was ready for a disaster as much as you can be ready
for anything like that, and I wonder if we are.
Mr. Stern. Thank you for the question, Chairman.
You know, my background is actually in emergency response,
and one of the key lessons of any emergency but in particular a
nuclear emergency is that there is conflicting information
streaming from all over the place, and one of the most
important things that emergency responders can do is to use a
very disciplined approach to ensuring that a single message
goes out, and within the United States it is actually
Department of Energy, NRC and the EPA that have responsibility
for this, and given that DNDO doesn't, I am very reluctant to
make any comment on this. I apologize.
Chairman Hall. Would you like to make any comment on it Dr
O'Toole?
Dr. O'Toole. I think we can and should learn from every
disaster. I think one of the things that is very impressive
about Japan is their preparedness efforts involving all of the
community, not just the emergency responders, and I think that
is the kind of preparedness that we need to start thinking
about and taking seriously in the United States, not just for
nuclear reactors. That would be at the top of my list, given
what I know about those technologies, but certainly we are
going to have natural disasters like earthquakes and we need to
think in advance about how we would respond. I am a physician
by training, and I can tell you it is always very difficult to
get people to take preventive steps until after the heart
attack, and this is one of those periods after the heart
attack. Hopefully Japan will be fine and the worst nightmares
will not come to pass but this is a time when we should look to
our own preparedness efforts and make sure we are as resilient
as possible against the likely natural disasters we may face.
Chairman Hall. I thank you.
Now I recognize Mr. Wilson, the gentleman from Florida, if
he is still here. The lady from Florida. With that hat on, I
have been wondering what I was going to do when I saw you in
here with a hat on, and I tell you, I am not one that going to
complain about it. That is for the Speaker to do. I am glad to
recognize you.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Chairman Hall. Pardon me, all I saw was the hat.
Ms. Wilson. You weren't sure if it was a man or woman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
My question has to do with the technologies that have been
deployed in our system, and I am wondering about the testing
and making sure that they will work and what kind of challenges
do you face by making sure that these technologies are operable
before we put them into play. We see many times in the
newspaper where people have come through playing some sort of
joke where they can bring scissors on, they can bring all sorts
of things on, yet and still they have come through a screening.
So what do you propose that we do to make sure that before we
deploy any kind of system that it has been tested and vetted?
Ms. O'Toole. Well, thank you, Congresswoman. It is very
important that we do testing and evaluation of technologies,
not just at the end of development. That is a process that has
to go on throughout the development process of a new
technology. I think you are referring to the screening devices
in airports. Those were developed by commercial sector, and
S&T, for example, helped develop the testing process, what it
is that we need to test, and we did a lot of the testing
according to those criteria at the Transportation Security Lab
in New Jersey. We also have a responsibility by statute to
oversee operational testing and evaluation towards the end of
the process of R&D just before we are getting to put something
in the field. You test against requirements that get
established at the very beginning of the R&D process. So the
rigor and appropriateness of those requirements is very
important. If the requirements aren't right, the T&E, the
testing and evaluation, may not give you the full view that you
need to understand how that machinery will operate in practice.
So one of the things that we are doing in S&T with our
realignment and strategic plan is placing a lot more emphasis
on having our technical people advise the operating components
on what they might do to create rigorous requirements at the
beginning of the R&D process.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you very much. In light of what has
happened in Japan in the nuclear power plant, this is sort of
like a personal question. In Miami, Florida, we have a nuclear
power plant called Turkey Point, and we have hurricanes, huge
hurricanes, and near Turkey Point is a charter school and the
charter school was established for the people who work at
Turkey Point so that their children could be near them when
they are at school and they can have lunch with them. In light
of what has happened in Japan, I am going to ask, and I know
you probably can't answer this openly but I am going to ask
someone to take a look at Turkey Point and the relationship of
Turkey Point and that charter school and try to figure out if a
catastrophic hurricane comes--we haven't had one since the
school has been built--what kind of impact if that Turkey Point
explodes the way it exploded in Japan, what kind of impact
would that have on that charter school. Someone needs to
investigate that and do something about warnings or moving or
something because it is dangerous.
Mr. Stern. Thank you for the question. I think there are
important lessons to be learned from any event such as this.
The proper authority to answer the question of the potential
damage or likelihood of an event at that reactor is of course
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and they continuously look
at these issues, and I think it would be probably a good idea
to direct the question to NRC and in coordination with FEMA I
think will come up with a complete answer.
Ms. O'Toole. I would add, Congresswoman, that FEMA
regularly works with the NRC to devise disaster plans around
all of the domestic nuclear power plants and they work with the
plant management and with the local first responders. So there,
I am sure is a plan in place. There is a plan in place around
every U.S. power plant but FEMA would also be a source to
question.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you. But I am sure they questioned it, I
am sure they looked at it, I am sure they have a plan, but I am
sure no one expected what happened in Japan and so that just
adds a new height to my uneasiness, and thank you very much.
Chairman Hall. I thank the lady. Her time is expired.
Mr. Wu, did you want to be recognized for a unanimous
consent request?
Mr. Wu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, yes. Mr. Chairman, I ask
unanimous consent to include in the hearing record a written
statement from the Center for Excellence for Awareness and
Localization of Explosives and Related Threats.
Chairman Hall. And it has been read by our side, has it
not?
Mr. Wu. That is my understanding, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. Without objection, it will be admitted.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much. I yield back.
[The information appears in Apendix II]
Chairman Hall. Okay, yields back, so at this time I could
recognize Mr. Rohrabacher again if he wants to be recognized.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Chairman, as long as everyone on the
other side has gone first, I am----
Chairman Hall. Mr. Lujan expressed some indication that he
had further questions. I recognize you for another 5 minutes.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that very much, sir.
Dr. O'Toole, just picking up on that last line of
questioning regarding DHS's responsibility associated with
combating narcotics trafficking, and if I remember the
Directorate correctly, one of the elements is to be able to
take away resources from those that are engaging in
trafficking, especially when those drugs are targeting the
United States. Can you talk about the importance of the
screening and detection technologies that DHS currently has
access to or is looking to strengthen?
Ms. O'Toole. We are working right now on new technologies
that might be able to detect bulk cash, for example. One of the
real problems with these narcotics smugglers is that they bring
drugs in and then they have to get cash out of the country. The
estimates from ICE are--and this is thought to be a
conservative estimate--as much as $40 billion might be flooding
out of the country in bulk, and it is very difficult to see
using traditional techniques at the border, so we are
developing technologies, which I don't want to describe in
detail in open session, that might be able to detect those
efforts.
For example, we have a lot of work underway in biometrics
to better identify people coming through the points of
embarkation and entry to the United States who might need a
second look. Those include a number of technologies, and of
course, we are working with CBP at ports to make sure that
illicit cargo including drugs doesn't make it into the country,
again using a variety of technologies.
Mr. Lujan. And I have a question for Mr. Stern as well.
Thank you, Dr. O'Toole.
One concern that I have, and it may be the Science and Tech
Directorate, but it is in the reporting of what happens when
those drugs are coming in. There was a GAO study that was
conducted in 2009 that said when drugs are found between ports,
they go to the DEA, but when drugs are found at the ports, they
go to ICE, and there is a problem between those folks talking
to each other, and I look forward to visiting more on what we
could to talk about that.
Mr. Stern, just quickly, because time is limited and I
apologize and I would be happy to visit with you more about
this, if there was fissionable material identified in the
United States that was in the hands of some people that
shouldn't have it, are we able to identify where those folks
are and do our capabilities allow us to go back and identify
how those fissionable materials entered the country and how we
could stop it or who even brought them to that point?
Mr. Stern. Thank you for the question. It really depends on
the circumstances. There are real physical limitations in being
able to detect material, and I think you are referring to
forensics being able to identify where it ultimately came from.
We would need to sit down as an interagency using whatever
intelligence information was available as well as the technical
information we have from our detectors and our forensics to do
our best, but it is certainly not an easy task to achieve.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you.
And Mr. Chairman, my concern is this, is that in different
parts of the country we have narcotics problems where there is
heroin coming in from other parts of the world, there is drugs
coming in from all parts of the world. Granted, I know that we
have to stop use in the country, and if we can eliminate the
demand here, we certainly won't see the supply entering.
Nonetheless, those drugs are entering the country. How safe
should we feel if heroin can't be stopped and identified from
entering the United States that nuclear materials are going to
be stopped and identified as entering the United States? We
need to do a better job on both fronts, and especially looking
at how resources are being used within DHS outside of Science
and Tech Directorate where I think there is other tools that
are out there to be able to work with our scientists,
physicists and engineers at our national labs, maybe our NNSA
facilities, who are coming up with technologies and techniques
every day based on federal agencies that are working with them
to be able to stop problems that are identified. There is a lot
of tools and resources that are out there, and I appreciate
very much the fact that there is an attempt for an inventory
process to begin, if you will, of the tools and resources that
other clients have ordered so that way we can see how they can
be applied to homeland security safety. This is something that
worries me every day, and we have people dying in my district
every day from overdoses with heroin, and I know there are
other problems that we have to combat, but if we can't stop
one, how do we stop the other? And I think we need to make sure
that we support the necessary screening and detection
technologies to be able to combat that.
Thank you very much and I look forward to visiting more
with you, and Mr. Chairman, thank you for your indulgence.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. It is my understanding Mrs.
Wilson does not have other questions. If you do, I recognize
you.
I recognize Mr. Rohrabacher if you have further questions,
sir.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Let me
just note that earlier Dr. O'Toole mentioned some fundamental
research going into trying to detect whether or not there is a
means of determining if an earthquake was well on the way. I
want to suggest that that is a very good use of taxpayer money.
In California, we are very conscious of the fact that we could
suffer exactly what happened, if not even worse than what
happened in Japan, and we also know, I have read accounts of
the San Francisco earthquake that animals seemed to know that
there is going to be something happening, and if animals can
sense that, there is something in nature that could tip us off
and so as that progresses, I would like to make sure that we
are kept informed on that because that sounds like a very good
use of taxpayers' money to try to discover that type of thing.
In terms of discovering techniques of discovering large
amounts of cash, well, you don't necessarily have to come to
California for that because we don't have any more cash in
California. We are going out of business.
About nuclear detection, let me ask you, Mr. Stern, do we
now have the means technologically to detect what would be a
dirty bomb or even a nuclear weapon that was not a dirty bomb
in a container that is coming to the United States? Do we have
something in place overseas that would make sure that those
containers were screened for that type of threat and do we have
the technology to actually do that screening?
Mr. Stern. Yeah. I mean, essentially all of our C1 cargo is
scanned at U.S. ports. It is course an incredibly challenging
task technically to have high confidence if certain material
were very heavily shielded that we would find it, which again
is why I think the approach that we could take at DNDO is in
essence an intelligence informed approach. We will develop
scenarios so we can in essence conceptually----
Mr. Rohrabacher. So actually your tests find today that
overseas intelligence and a more proactive approach is much
better than a meet them at the door and pat them down approach?
Mr. Stern. In fact, the U.S. approach to nuclear terrorism
is a layered approach, and in each of those approaches we don't
want to assume that everything else fails because that is not a
reflection of reality. So it makes more sense to assume that
there will be some level of success in some of the other layers
including intelligence and then build our scenarios around
that, and that is the most efficient way to use taxpayers'
money.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Do you have technology that is currently
under--we just mentioned earthquake fundamental research that
is going on. Is there research going on that will directly
affect the safety of our country in terms of this type of
nuclear smuggling?
Mr. Stern. Yes, there is a broad range of technologies
being examined both in the early stages by our transformational
research Directorate and the more later stages by our
production and acquisition Directorate of technologies that
will improve our detection capabilities.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. For the record, I represent both the
ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach, where I believe 40 percent
of all foreign trade to our country goes through those ports.
We have tens of thousands of containers a day coming through
these ports. It is insane. I don't see how, unless with
technology, we do that per-person type of situation. We have to
have technology to help us achieve that goal. And I think that
if I had to guess, I am guessing that narcotics and I don't
know about cash going the other way but I know narcotics and
other types of things that threaten the well-being of the
American people are coming through that port every day and
anything we can do technologically to strengthen our ability to
cope with that will certainly be a benefit to our country. So
we will be grateful to hear about your efforts as time goes on,
and thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman yields back. The chair
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Neugebauer, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is kind of a
little bit different twist but I think a real relevant subject,
and I am sorry, I have been in two other hearings this morning,
but with the events that are going on in Japan right now,
obviously we are all very concerned as to what some of the
problems with these reactors are, and I think there are reports
today that one of the containment areas of one of the reactors
possibly could have some issues. I guess the question that I
have, from your perspective, do we have modeling capability
that would allow us then to once we get some data from Japan
and if in fact there is a discharge in the atmosphere of what
the potential impact would be down range from those spills, and
do we have a way to model and the levels that we might impact
and then how does that translate into what kind of--if we think
there are significant amounts, what kinds of actions that we
would take domestically down range from those areas based on
the levels of activity? I will let you both take a stab at
that.
Mr. Stern. Yeah, I want to try in the middle of this crisis
not to create any conflicting information, so I think it is
best to point out that yes, there are models that exist but the
appropriate agencies are the Department of Energy and the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, who are both looking very
carefully at this issue.
Ms. O'Toole. Yes, we have been modeling radiation for a
long time. Weather is difficult to model, as we know, but it
is--the situation is being monitored, not just modeled, and I
think Mr. Stern is right, we have to wait until we have some
actual data but it is a very big ocean. There is a long
distance between us and the besieged people of Japan. A lot of
people are very carefully watching the situation, Congressman.
Mr. Neugebauer. And you may have already outlined this but
what would be some of the mechanisms for measuring, for
example, if there is a plume or a movement in the atmosphere?
Do we have technology to monitor the levels in the atmosphere
by flying those areas? I mean, I don't know how you----
Ms. O'Toole. Yes.
Mr. Neugebauer. --do that but----
Ms. O'Toole. Yes.
Mr. Neugebauer. --what would be the procedure for that?
Ms. O'Toole. Do you want to take that?
Mr. Stern. Again, I have to apologize because in the middle
of this, I am very cautious about saying things that are
outside of my line of my responsibility, and this is primarily
an EPA, NRC, DOE responsibility and I think it is best to get
the answer from them, again to avoid any new confusion in the
middle of this crisis.
Chairman Hall. You are not under oath, and we do all the
time up here. We will give you a chance if you have some
suggestions or anything that you think might help Mr.
Neugebauer, or you can decline, whatever you want to do.
Mr. Stern. I mean, again, there are detectors but again,
they are under the authority, responsibility, operation of
other agencies and the best answer is to get it from those
agencies.
Mr. Neugebauer. Well, I guess with those answers, I will
yield back my time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, if the gentleman would just yield
quickly? One thing that I would be interested in doing maybe
jointly, Mr. Chairman, is if we could engage the NNSA national
laboratories under Mr. Tom D'Agostino, and I know that they do
have modeling capacity and capabilities not only with oceans
but with--that there may be some answers that we could you
directly from them. Maybe we could work together on that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. Thank you.
Ms. Biggert, we recognize you at this time for five
minutes.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am from Illinois and have one of the national labs in my
district, Argonne, and Dr. O'Toole, I have a question about how
you would characterize how the university Centers of Excellence
and the Department of Energy's labs support the research and
development of DHS and how their work is integral to the
development and demonstration and testing of technology. I know
that right after 9/11, Argonne had several, I don't want to
call them products but several things that were very helpful
for our national security and were developed before we ever
thought that they would be needed. How is that integrated to
work together and how does DHS internal laboratories work with
the national labs to avoid duplication of efforts?
Ms. O'Toole. We work very closely with the DOE national
labs. Forty percent of our R&D budget goes to the DOE national
labs. That may be a little high. It may be perfect. It may be a
little low. But they are obviously very close partners of ours,
and we have various mechanisms to maintain close relationships
so that they know what our needs are and we know what
capabilities that they are developing. There is a national
level effort going on at the level of the deputy and under
secretaries in which Mr. D'Agostino from NNSA is included to
make sure that critical capabilities in the national labs which
are needed by the country on a long-term strategic basis,
whether by the intelligence community or needed by DHS or
needed by other elements of the government get maintained, and
we have robust working relationships down at the project-
manager level as well.
The Centers of Excellence are also critical to our R&D
effort. They of course as is the case with most university
work, work on a more fundamental science basis than does the
commercial sector or some of the labs but they are both
critical partners in our R&D effort.
Mrs. Biggert. Well, the research activities at the
university Centers of Excellence are managed by administrative
staff at each of the centers and not directly by DHS, so how do
these activities align with the S&T enterprise?
Ms. O'Toole. Well, we have an ongoing dialog with them,
both the administrative staff and the faculty, about what is in
their charter. First of all, these Centers of Excellence are
focused on certain areas. STAR in Maryland, for example, is
looking at the sociological and criminological science behind
terrorism. Others are more statistics-oriented. Others are
focused on transportation and so forth. So they start with the
focus area and a set of objectives which we work out mutually
between the partners and the COEs and DHS.
Furthermore, we are making great strides in making the
resources of the universities directly available to the DHS
components, and I think the success of that is evidenced in the
fact that the DHS components have directed more than $22
million go the COEs outside of the money that comes from S&T in
order to do particular projects the components want done. So I
think we have an ongoing dialog, tight connections and I think
we are getting better and better over time as we get to know
each other.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, and if there is nobody else who
wants to be recognized, I thank the witnesses for their
valuable testimony and to the Members for their questions. The
Members of the Subcommittee may have additional questions for
the witnesses, and we will ask for you to respond to those in
writing. The record will remain open for two weeks for
additional comments and statements from Members and also,
because we are trying to keep this in a timely fashion and we
thank the patience of the second panel, if we could make the
transition into the second panel as quickly as possible, that
would be great. The witnesses are excused. Thank you very much.
We now move to our second panel, and as a reminder, spoken
testimony is limited to five minutes after which Members of the
Committee will have five minutes each to ask questions.
Our first witness is the Director of the Douglas and Sarah
Allison Center for Foreign Policy Studies at the Heritage
Foundation, Dr. James Carafano. Prior to joining the Heritage
Foundation, Dr. Carafano had been a Senior Fellow at the Center
for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments. Next we will hear from
Mr. Marc Pearl, the President and Chief Executive Officer of
the Homeland Security and Defense Business Council. Before
joining the Council, Mr. Pearl was the Principal and Chairman
of IT Policy Solutions. Our final witness is Mr. David Maurer,
the Director of the Homeland Security and Justice Team at the
U.S. Government Accountability Office. Mr. Maurer served in
many capacities at the GAO, previously as Acting Director in
GAO's Natural Resource Environment Team, where he managed the
work assessing U.S. global nuclear detection programs.
Dr. Carafano, we will begin with you, and I recognize you
for five minutes.

STATEMENTS OF JAMES CARAFANO, DIRECTOR, DOUGLAS

AND SARAH ALLISON CENTER FOR FOREIGN POLICY

STUDIES, HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Mr. Carafano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have three quick
comments: the good, the bad and the future.
You know, first I would say I think everybody on the panel
would agree that we have come a long way since a few years ago.
A center report characterized the S&T Directorate as a
rudderless ship. I think no matter how you look at it, you can
see that there has been a real progress but I would point to
two areas very quickly.
The first is the reorganization, which I think has had a
lot of positive benefits. I think particularly creating the
analysis and operational office is a tremendous step in the
right direction. The other thing I would really like to
compliment the Directorate on is their increasingly and more
efficient use of the Centers of Excellence and the federally
funded Research and Development Centers. One particular program
that I have worked with is called the Community Processions of
Technology program where they bring in stakeholders and they
evaluate technologies for policy implications. It is a model
program that really ought to be emulated by other parts of the
Federal Government.
There are long-term concerns, and I will just raise the
three that are raised most often. The first is that DHS still
lacks a fully integrated acquisition process, and I think that
is a real issue, and they need to learn not to repeat the
mistakes of the Department of Defense in that you need both the
formal acquisition, long-term acquisition process and you need
the rapid acquisition for crisis needs and new opportunities.
DOD often ad hocs the second, and I think that is a big
mistake. Both processes need to be formal and structured and
built so they are non-competitive, and acquisition is
integrated. It is not--it is everything from R&D to T&E and to
buying the equipment but it also includes the integration with
all the other elements which include training and human capital
and operational practices, and unless you have that full
spectrum of acquisition and it is integrated, you are not
really getting your bang for the buck.
The second issue is transition. I think we would all
acknowledge that there is still significant issues in terms of
transitioning technologies, I think particularly in the first-
responder area, and I really think that calls for a rethinking
of priorities.
The third one I will mention very quickly is the lack of a
really overall strategic plan. I mean, having a plan and
writing ``strategy'' on the front page is not strategic.
Strategic plans make hard decisions, and I don't honestly think
that the department really has a portfolio that makes hard
decisions, I think particularly if you look in the area of the
money we have invested in scanning and detection technologies.
The two areas that I would recommend to the Committee to
look into and for the Directorate to look at is I think
international partnerships, public-private partnerships are
vastly important, I would argue maybe the most important part
of the scenario or the portfolio. I think a key element of that
is the SAFETY Act. I think the SAFETY Act has been great at
fostering the development of new technologies. An idea that we
would suggest would be to internationalize the SAFETY Act,
which is the United States should go out and proactively seek
to engage other global partner countries to develop similar
regimes that are comparable to the SAFETY Act and then we could
have reciprocity where something could be developed in Israel,
for example, and if they got the Israeli SAFETY Act
qualification and it was comparable to U.S. SAFETY Act
qualification that we would grant them reciprocal status here
and vice versa. I would think this would really help the
proliferation of homeland security technologies and I think it
would be great in terms of encouraging the development of new
technologies that all the allies could use.
The other area I will just mention very, very briefly and
then conclude is nanotechnology. I think nanotechnology is one
of the breakthrough technologies that is going to have wide
application across the Federal Government. There is almost no
area of technology that you can't see where it could have
dramatic applications. In homeland security, for example, in
the target delivery of drugs, which can be very important for
therapeutics, for bio response, materials, I mean, it just goes
on, and power generation. It just goes on and on and on. And I
think DHS should partner with other federal agencies in
creating something similar to what we did with fostering the
semiconductor industry to create the public-private partnership
that would really begin to set up the prototype industrial base
so we could really leverage this going forward. I mean, right
now we basically have a lot of individual nanotechnology
research programs proliferated throughout the Federal
Government and we need to start thinking corporately on how the
Federal Government is going to be a good customer for these
nanotechnologies as they evolve. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. James Carafano follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. James Carafano
My name is James Jay Carafano. I am the Deputy Director of the
Kathryn and Shelby Cullom Davis Institute for International Studies and
the Director of the Douglas and Sarah Allison Center for Foreign Policy
Studies at The Heritage Foundation. The views I express in this
testimony are my own, and should not be construed as representing any
official position of The Heritage Foundation.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the committee today
and address this vital subject. In my testimony I will address: (1) the
progress the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has made in
improving the organization and processes for homeland security
research; (2) remaining concerns; (3) vital steps to improving the
organization of these activities; and (4) priorities for future
research.
My responsibilities at The Heritage Foundation comprise supervising
all the foundation's research on public policy concerning foreign
policy and national security. Homeland security has been a particular
Heritage research priority. The foundation produced the first major
assessment of domestic security after 9/11. \1\ Over the past nine
years we have assembled a robust, talented, and dedicated research
team. I have had the honor and privilege of leading this team for many
years. Heritage analysts have studied and written authoritatively on
virtually every aspect of homeland security and homeland defense. The
results of all our research are publicly available on the Heritage Web
site at www.heritage.org. We collaborate frequently with the homeland
security research community, including the Center for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS), the Aspen Institute, the Center for
National Policy, the Hudson Institute, the George Washington University
Homeland Security Policy Institute, and the Strategic Studies Institute
and Center for Strategic Leadership at the Army War College. Heritage
analysts also serve on a variety of government advisory efforts,
including task forces under the Homeland Security Advisory Council and
Advisory Panel on Department of Defense Capabilities for Support of
Civil Authorities. I also am a member of the National Academies Board
on Army Science and Technology and served on the DHS advisory board for
the Quadrennial Homeland Security Review (QHSR). \2\ Heritage's
research programs are strictly non-partisan, dedicated to developing
policy proposals that will keep the nation safe, free, and prosperous.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ L. Paul Bremer III and Edwin Meese III, Defending the American
Homeland: A Report of the Heritage Foundation Homeland Security Task
Force (Washington, D.C.: The Heritage Foundation, 2002).
\2\ I testified on the results of the QHSR before the House
Homeland Security Committee. See James Jay Carafano, ?What Comes After
Quadrennial Homeland Security Review?? Testimony before the Committee
on Homeland Security, Subcommittee on Management, Investigations, and
Oversight, United States House of Representatives, April 29, 2010, at
http://www.heritage.org/Research/Testimony/What-Comes-After-
Quadrennial-Homeland-Security-Review#--ftn2.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Call to Action

From the outset our research has focused on ensuring that the
organization and activities of the Department of Homeland Security are
as efficient and effective as possible. In 2004 David Heyman, who
headed the Homeland Security program at CSIS (and who now is Assistant
Secretary for Policy at the U.S. Department of Homeland Security), and
I led a research project that produced ``DHS 2.0: Rethinking the
Department of Homeland Security,'' the first comprehensive review of
the newly established Department of Homeland Security. \3\ When we
wrote this initial report, the Science and Technology Directorate (S&T)
did not have enough of a ``track record'' for the task force to make a
detailed assessment. In 2007, however, my colleague at the Hudson
Institute, Dr. Richard Weitz, and I published ``Rethinking Research,
Development, and Acquisition for Homeland Security,'' the results of a
follow-on research project that specifically focused on the activities
of the S&T Directorate. \4\ The major concerns we identified were:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ James Jay Carafano and David Heyman, ``DHS 2.0: Rethinking the
Department of Homeland Security,'' Heritage Foundation Special Report
No. SR-02, December 13, 2004, at http://www.heritage.org/Research/
Reports/2004/12/DHS-20-Rethinking-the-Department-of-Homeland-Security.
\4\ James Jay Carafano and Richard Weitz, ``Rethinking Research,
Development, and Acquisition for Homeland Security,'' Heritage
Foundation Backgrounder No. 2000, January 22, 2007, at http://
www.policyarchive.org/handle/10207/bitstreams/11911.pdf .

Lack of response to customer needs. From the
beginning, agencies within the DHS have complained that the
Directorate's portfolios do not adequately reflect their
requirements and are not sufficiently responsive to operational
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
needs.

Inability to manage complex programs. The
Directorate's most prominent accelerated R&D effort-the attempt
to rapidly deploy new technologies to defend against smuggled
nuclear and radiological weapons-failed so badly that in April
2005 the Administration established the separate Domestic
Nuclear Detection Office (DNDO) to manage these programs.

Limited success in partnering with other federal
agencies and international partners. The S&T Directorate faced
significant challenges in sharing homeland security
responsibilities and resources with other federal departments
and agencies that are not incorporated within the DHS. These
entities retain key roles in researching and developing
scientific, engineering, and medical technologies relevant to
homeland security.

Failure to convert technologies for use by non-
federal customers. Of particular note, the S&T Directorate had
yet to develop a clear strategy for acquiring and converting
technologies for use by the state and local governments and the
private sector.

In response to these challenges among our key recommendations were:

Putting First Things First. The Directorate needed to
tighten its focus on its primary customer base-the agencies
within the department. We recommended that DHS should get out
of the business of brokering and developing technologies and
supporting research for state and local responders and the
private sector. Rather, government should limit its support to
these other users to setting national standards in coordination
with established government agencies such as the National
Institute of Standards and Technology and non-governmental
organizations such as the American National Standards
Institute.

Getting a Bigger Bang for the Buck. Rather than
treating collaborative research with other federal agencies and
international partners as an afterthought, we concluded the
Directorate should give first priority to establishing
effective partnerships and leveraging the capabilities of these
other efforts.

Reorganizing and Reprioritizing. We recommended
restructuring R&D programs to best serve the operating agencies
within the DHS, and concluded the S&T Directorate should
provide the DHS with overall acquisition guidance as well as
basic science and technology.

Rethinking Acquisition. In many cases, R&D was not
linked to acquisition or there was a failure to recognize that
a new technology was not the best answer to the department's
needs. Furthermore, the department lacked an integrated program
that matches acquisition with training, human capital
development, and improving operational practices.

Present Assessment

I would like to credit the current leadership of the DHS and the
S&T Directorate for making a sincere effort to address these
shortfalls. In particular:

The current organization of the S&T Directorate
represents a significant improvement in aligning research
portfolios; establishing effective representation of
stakeholder interests; and improving the capacity of S&T to
contribute to acquisition and operational analysis.
Furthermore, the department has announced plans to expand S&T's
role in test and evaluation, as well as involving S&T in ``life
cycle'' assessment of acquisition programs. The role of the
director of the office of Acquisition and Operational Analysis
should probably be expanded.

S&T has made a more concerted effort to leverage the
Centers of Excellence and its Federally Funded Research and
Development Centers (FFRDC). Developing homeland security
technologies and expertise requires years of intense effort by
an integrated team of scientists, engineers, and managers.
Repeated reorganizations only disrupt this challenging effort
and should be avoided. Specifically, not curtailing or further
limiting the terms of the Centers of Excellence is important.
Likewise, the FFRDCs and their expanding capacity to provide
operational research, systems engineering, and complex systems
analysis have demonstrated real value added. They should be
sustained and further exploited.

The Directorate has also made a sincere and
significant effort to establish federal research partnerships
and to improve the oversight process for interagency
agreements. \5\ Likewise, DNDO was cited by the department's
Inspector General in 2007 for improving coordination between
federal and state agencies on domestic protocols for detection
and response. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See, Office of the Inspector General, ``The Science and
Technology Directorate's Process for Funding Research and Development
Programs, Department of Homeland Security,'' OIG-09-88, July 2009, pp.
24-25.
\6\ Office Inspector General, DHS' Domestic Nuclear Detection
Office Progress in Integrating Detection Capabilities and Response
Protocols, OIG-08-19, December 2007, p. 1.

What has been accomplished is noteworthy, especially for a
Directorate that in 2006 was criticized in Congress for being a
``rudderless ship without a clear way to get back on course.'' \7\ In
contrast, a 2009 report by the National Academy of Public
Administration concluded, ``S&T has made strides towards becoming a
mature and productive research and development organization,
particularly during the last three years.'' \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Senate Report. 109-273, p. 88.
\8\ National Academy for Public Administration, ``Department of
Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate: Developing
Technology to Protect America,'' June 2009, p. ix.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yet, despite this leadership team's hard work, significant concerns
remain.

DHS still lacks an integrated requirements and
acquisition process and a means for integrated development of
human capital, operational, training, education, and
sustainment programs. DHS needs an integrated end-to-end
process. This system needs to be formal and robust and include
both a ``deliberate'' process for developing long-term needs as
well as a ``crisis-action'' process for meeting unanticipated
requirements and ensuring rapid acquisition to meet challenges
such as those faced during the 2010 Gulf oil spill.

The DNDO model remains a concern. In 2007, we
expressed concern about establishing organizational activities
that tried to do too much-overseeing everything from concept
development to testing and evaluation, acquisition and
deployment. We were also concerned that creating a
``stovepipe'' activity to manage the nuclear detection
portfolio, as a separate activity made sense. Those concerns
still remain. \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See, for example, U.S. Government Accountability Office,
``Nuclear Detection: Domestic Nuclear Detection Office Should Improve
Planning to Better Address Gaps and Vulnerabilities,'' GAO-09-257,
January 2009.

S&T still lacks a solid track record for
transitioning technologies, particularly for partners outside
the department. S&T has improved stakeholder input primarily
through its Integrated Product Teams. \10\ Particularly
noteworthy is the Directorate's Community Perceptions of
Technology Program managed by the Homeland Security Studies and
Analysis Institute, which provides early stakeholder input on
the policy implications of fielding new technologies. I have
participated in several of the roundtables organized under this
program. It is an exceptional initiative, one that should serve
as a model for other government R&D efforts. Nevertheless,
transitioning technology is still a significant challenge.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Ibid., pp. 42-53.

The department still lacks a truly strategic approach
to research and innovation that would allow appropriately
prioritizing and focusing its efforts. HSARPA (the Homeland
Security Advanced Research Projects Agency) has been a
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
disappointment.

Moving Forward-The Organization

Organizational and process restructuring bring costs and as well as
benefits. That reality is often forgotten when attention is turned to
improving the efficiency and effectiveness of an organization.
Opportunity costs matter. This truism is nowhere more important to
remember than when considering the DHS and S&T, which have seen a
tsunami of reorganization and restructuring over the department's short
tenure of existence.
That said, while tinkering ought to be kept to a minimum, there are
some critical changes that might to be considered.

The time has probably come to give S&T a more defined
statutory mission that clearly outlines its role in
acquisition, life-cycle management, and the integration with
other enablers for the department, such as training, human
capital management, and sustainment. This step should be taken
through a reauthorization bill.

It might be time to rethink the mission, structure,
and purpose of the DNDO and whether these activities would not
be better managed under major department activities rather than
as a stand-alone activity. \11\ It might make sense, for
example, to transfer the office's transformational and applied
R&D portfolios to S&T.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ For the challenges faced by the DNDO, see, for example, Gene
Aloise and Stephen L. Caldwell, ``Combating Nuclear Smuggling,'' U.S.
Government Accountability Office, GAO-10-1041T, September 15, 2010.

Congress and the department need to decide-whither
the Homeland Security Advanced Research Projects Agency? The
act establishing the DHS created HSARPA. At the time,
legislators assumed its mission would parallel the function
that DARPA serves for the Department of Defense. That vision
has never been fully realized and it is an open question
whether a DARPA-like activity is truly essential for DHS or
whether DHS would not be better off putting the overwhelming
majority of its resources on its present operational needs and
leveraging existing organizations, like DARPA, for the rare
occasion it needs to look at truly futuristic or ``out of the
box'' solutions.
Today, HSARPA primarily provides an additional layer of management
for a broad portfolio of programs and projects. While it is important
to reduce the overwhelming number of direct reports to the
undersecretary, it is an open question whether HSARPA best fills this
role. \12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ See, National Academy for Public Administration, ``Department
of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate,'' pp. 11-13.

Moving Forward-The Mission

It is time for a serious strategic debate on the direction of the
department's homeland security research. We know an awful lot about the
competitive environment of ensuring our nation's Transitioning
technology outside the department is extremely difficult. Given that
reality and all the serious competing priorities for resources (with a
very few ``strategic'' exceptions) it is time for the department to
make the tough call and dramatically scale back its efforts in this
area.

S&T should

Focus laser-like on getting close to its ``internal''
department customers.

Limit itself to a coordinating and standards-setting
role on technologies for state and local governments, first
responders, and the private sector.

Acknowledge there may be exceptions to the general
rule of doing less, particularly in the areas of cybersecurity,
\13\ exceptionally vital infrastructure (such as the national
electrical grid) \14\ and technologies that might impact on the
resiliency of small and medium business. These areas are the
true Achilles' heel of the U.S. economy. Small and medium
businesses, for example, make up over half of the American work
force. The workers and the companies they serve are the
backbone of the U.S. economy. On average, they create about
two-thirds of all new jobs each year. Yet, they are most
susceptible to interruptions from attacks and disruptions-and
there is dearth of research supporting their particular needs.
\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ As a 2007 Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
research report concluded, however, the national research and
development program is wholly inadequate. Homeland Security is a vital
component of this program. See, James Jay Carafano and Eric Sayers,
``Building Cyber Security Leadership for the 21st Century,'' Heritage
Foundation Backgrounder No. 2281, December 16, 2008, at http://
www.carlisle.army.mil/DIME/documents/bg--2218%5B1%5D.pdf,.
\14\ The resilience of the U.S.-Canadian electrical grid and
telecommunications systems, including developing limited redundancy and
identifying means for the timely replacement of essential damaged parts
or their rapid substitution is vital to ensure national resiliency in
the face of catastrophic disasters. See, James Jay Carafano and Richard
Weitz, ``EMP Attacks-What the U.S. Must Do Now,'' Heritage Foundation
Backgrounder No. 2491, November 17, 2010, at http://www.heritage.org/
research/reports/2010/11/emp-attacks-what-the-us-must-do-now.
\15\ James Carafano, ``Homeland Security's blind spot'' The
Examiner, September 14, 2009, at http://washingtonexaminer.com/op-eds/
2009/09/james-carafano-homeland-securitys-blind-spot.

The department continues to have difficulty putting dollars where
they can make a difference. The S&T agenda is still driven too much by
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
stakeholders rather than real strategy. S&T should:

Dramatically scale back on screening and detection
technologies. The needs for these technologies should be driven
real assessments of the most efficacious means to achieve risk
reduction; the costs and benefits of measures, and limits of
current technology rather than legislative fiats of Congress
and whims of government officials.

Step-up cyber-research. Cyber-research must be a high
priority for the whole of government and DHS must play an
important part. There is no area of homeland security threats,
including our knowledge of the dangers of weapons of mass
destruction, where government's basic knowledge of the
challenge is more deficient. A 2007 Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board research report concluded:

[B]oth traditional and unorthodox approaches will be
necessary. Traditional research is problem-specific, and there
are many cybersecurity problems for which good solutions are
not known.. Research is and will be needed to address these
problems. But problem-by-problem solutions, or even problem-
class by problem-class solutions, are highly unlikely to be
sufficient to close the gap by themselves. Unorthodox, clean-
slate approaches will also be needed to deal with what might be
called a structural problem in cybersecurity research now, and
these approaches will entail the development of new ideas and
new points of view that revisit the basic foundations and
implicit assumptions of security research. Addressing both of
these reasons for the lack of security in cyberspace is
important, but it is the second-closing the knowledge gap-that
is the primary goal of cybersecurity research...'' \16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, Toward A Safer
and More Secure Cyberspace (Washington, DC: National Academies Press,
2007), p. 61.

Today, that goal (though admittedly the S&T agenda in this
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
area is much improved) is still not being met.

Finally, while much has been to done to improve ``partnerships,''
these activities must be further stressed as the highest priority. Some
specific initiatives that S&T might consider include:

Become a full partner in the federal nanotechnology
effort. DHS, as do many federal agencies, has some nano-related
programs, but these disparate research efforts are inadequate
for what could be the greatest ``game-changing'' technology of
the next decade. Today, the United States leads the world in
nano-science, but that lead is narrowing fast. Our private
sector can't plunge much further into nano-industries, given
the current economic climate. But that could change rapidly,
with a little help from Washington. In high-tech manufacturing,
the main cost issue is tech investment-something quite
sensitive to tax and regulatory policy. If federal policymakers
lowered the cost of capital-by reducing taxes on capital gains
and dividends, as well as corporate income taxes-it would
stimulate capital investment in a variety of promising
technologies. And few, if any, are more promising than
nanotechnology. DHS, along with the rest of the government,
should rethink its nanotechnology investment strategy. They
should pivot right now to help foster the development of
nanotechnology manufacturing infrastructure. That way, DHS and
other federal agencies can incorporate innovations into its
equipment-quickly and cheaply-as soon as the innovations
emerge. The Pentagon has done this before. In the 1980s, the
Defense Research Projects Agency helped set up Sematech, a
consortium of U.S. semiconductor companies called to resolve
common manufacturing challenges. DHS and other partner agencies
should do the same for nanotechnology manufacturing. \17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Adapted from James Carafano, ``U.S. must gird for war in very
small places,'' The Examiner, December 12, 2010, at http://
washingtonexaminer.com/opinion/columnists/2010/12/james-jay-carafano-
us-must-gird-war-very-small-places#ixzz1GViM4F10.

Internationalize the SAFETY Act. \18\ After 9/11, the
U.S. Congress established one potential instrument: The Support
Anti-Terrorism by Fostering Effective Technologies (SAFETY)
Act. The SAFETY Act lowered the liability risks of
manufacturers that provide products and services used in
combating terrorism. The act, passed in 2002, protects the
incentive to produce products that the Secretary of Homeland
Security designates as ``Qualified Anti-Terrorism
Technologies.'' The Department of Homeland Security has made a
concerted effort to implement the program, and, as of 2009,
about 200 companies have obtained SAFETY Act certification.
This program should be used to accelerate the fielding of
commercial products and services for cybersecurity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Recommendations are adopted from James Jay Carafano,
``Fighting Terrorism, Addressing Liability: A Global Proposal,''
Heritage Foundation Backgrounder No. 2138, May 21, 2008, at http://
www.heritage.org/Research/Reports/2008/05/Fighting-Terrorism-
Addressing-Liability-A-Global-Proposal.

If other nations adopted similar liability protection
regimes they could form a network to promote innovation. One
potential source of outreach might be the Technical Cooperation
Program (TTCP), an international organization that collaborates
in defense-related scientific and technical information
exchange and shared research activities with Australia, Canada,
New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States. TTCP is
one of the world's largest collaborative science and technology
forums. Outreach might focus initially on U.S. partners in Asia
including Japan, Australia, New Zealand, Taiwan, South Korea,
India, Hong Kong, and Singapore. Singapore is the United
States' 15th-largest trading partner and ninth-largest export
market. Foreign direct investment in Singapore is concentrated
largely in technical service sectors; manufacturing;
information; and professional scientific knowledge, skills, and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
processes.

As national liability protection proliferates, new opportunities
for international cooperation will emerge. Countries that adopt
verifiably similar liability protections should extend reciprocal
privileges to one another. An expanding global web of liability
protection will facilitate the proliferation of homeland security
technologies..
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.

Biography for Dr. James Carafano
James Jay Carafano, Ph.D. Deputy Director, Kathryn and Shelby
Cullom Davis Institute for International Studies and Director, Douglas
and Sarah Allison Center for Foreign Policy Studies

Areas of Expertise:

Homeland Security, Defense, Military Affairs, Interagency (whole-
of-government) Operations, Counterterrorism
Summary:

James Carafano, one of the nation's leading experts in defense and
homeland security, directs Heritage's Douglas and Sarah Allison Center
for Foreign Policy Studies.
Carafano is an accomplished historian and teacher as well as a
prolific writer and researcher on a fundamental constitutional duty of
the federal government: to provide for the common defense.
His research focuses on developing the national security required
to secure the long-term interests of the United States--protecting the
public, providing for economic growth and preserving civil liberties.
In this capacity, Carafano is one of the principal policy experts
who appear in Heritage's gripping documentary on the case for missile
defense, "33 Minutes: Protecting America in the New Missile Age.''
In August 2009, Carafano was promoted to director of the Allison
Center for Foreign Policy Studies as well as to deputy director of the
Kathryn and Shelby Cullom Davis Institute for International Studies.
Carafano, a 25-year veteran of the Army, manages day-to-day
research and program activities of the Allison Center. He also serves
as deputy to Kim R. Holmes, vice president for defense and foreign
policy studies, in overseeing the centers and projects of Davis
Institute, where Carafano had been assistant director since 2006.
He is a weekly columnist on national security affairs for the
Washington Examiner newspapers.
Carafano's most recent book is Private Sector/Public Wars:
Contracting in Combat-Iraq, Afghanistan and Future Conflicts (Praeger,
2008), a rigorous study of contractors' role on the battlefield and
their impact on military effectiveness and civil society.
Carafano's current book project is a history of the modern
military. He is editing a new book series, ``The Changing Face of
War,'' which examines how emerging political, social, economic and
cultural trends will affect the nature of armed conflict.
Carafano joined Heritage as a senior research fellow in 2003. He
had been a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and Budgetary
Assessments, a Washington policy institute dedicated to defense issues.
In his Army career, Carafano rose to the rank of lieutenant
colonel. He served in Europe, Korea and the United States. His
assignments included head speechwriter for the Army Chief of Staff, the
service's highest-ranking officer. Before retiring, Carafano was
executive editor of Joint Force Quarterly, the Defense Department's
premiere professional military journal.
A graduate of West Point, Carafano holds a master's degree and a
doctorate from Georgetown University as well as a master's degree in
strategy from the U.S. Army War College.
He is a visiting professor at National Defense University and
Georgetown University. He previously served as an assistant professor
at the U.S. Military Academy in West Point, N.Y., and as director of
military studies at the Army's Center of Military History. He taught at
Mount Saint Mary College in New York and was a fleet professor at the
U.S. Naval War College.
Carafano is the co-author with Paul Rosenzweig of Winning the Long
War: Lessons from the Cold War for Defeating Terrorism and Preserving
Freedom (2005). The authors, first to coin the term ``the long war,''
argued that a successful strategy requires a balance of prudent
military and security measures, continued economic growth, zealous
protection of civil liberties and prevailing in the ``war of ideas''
against terrorist ideologies.
Carafano also co-authored a textbook, Homeland Security (McGraw-
Hill), designed as a practical introduction to everyday life in the era
of terrorism. The textbook addresses such key details as the roles of
first responders and volunteers, family preparedness techniques and in-
depth looks at weapons of mass destruction.
His other works include G.I. Ingenuity: Improvisation, Technology
and Winning World War II (2006); Waltzing Into the Cold War (2002); and
After D-Day (2000), a Military Book Club main selection.
As an expert on defense, intelligence and homeland security issues,
Carafano has testified many times before Congress.
He is a regular guest analyst for all the major U.S. network and
cable television news organizations, from ABC to FOX to MSNBC to PBS,
as well as such outlets as National Public Radio, Pajamas TV, Voice of
America and the History Channel. From SkyNews to Al Jazeera, he also
has appeared on TV news programs originating in Australia, Austria,
Canada, France, Great Britain, Greece, Hong Kong, Ireland, Iran, Japan,
Portugal, Spain and Sweden.
Carafano's op-ed columns and commentary are published widely,
including the Baltimore Sun, Boston Globe, New York Post, Philadelphia
Inquirer, USA Today and Washington Times in addition to the Washington
Examiner.
He is a member of the National Academy's Board on Army Science and
Technology and the Department of the Army Historical Advisory
Committee. He is a senior fellow at George Washington University's
Homeland Security Policy Institute.
In 2005, Carafano received Heritage's prestigious W. Glenn and Rita
Ricardo Campbell Award. The honor goes to the staff member determined
to have made ``an outstanding contribution to the analysis and
promotion of the free society.''

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Dr. Carafano.
Mr. Pearl, you are now recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARC PEARL, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF

EXECUTIVE OFFICER, HOMELAND SECURITY

AND DEFENSE BUSINESS COUNCIL

Mr. Pearl. Thank you, Chairman Quayle, and welcome to you
first hearing of the Subcommittee. There is going to be many
more, and I hope that they are just as substantive at this
first one is. I want to thank you and the Members of the
Committee for giving the Homeland Security and Defense Business
Council an opportunity to testify before you today.
The Council, just for background, is a not-for-profit, non-
partisan organization of the leading companies that deliver
homeland security solutions to the marketplace. Our
organization works to ensure that the perspective, the
innovations, the expertise and the capabilities of the private
sector are fully utilized in our Nation's security as well
recognized and integrated with the public sector at the same
time. We appreciate, I want to say at the outset, the
leadership of this Subcommittee and the Full Committee on the
critical issues associated with improving R&D within government
as well as your continued support for successful partnerships
between government and the private sector in order to fulfill
our collective mission, which is to keep our Nation safer and
more secure. These partnerships, as has been talked about
today, are key to the government's ability to deliver high-
quality solutions to citizens effectively, efficiently and
fiscally responsibly.
The Committee asked us to discuss any observable changes
that have occurred following the QHSR and the reorganization of
the Directorate and to provide as well the industry's
collective perspective on the relationship between and
interaction between DHS S&T programs, and my written testimony
also goes into some suggestions that the private sector has on
recommendations for success. I ask that my full written
testimony be included in the hearing record.
With respect to the QHSR, let me briefly comment that we
applaud the department's efforts to collect and input and all
of the things that came out of it last year. It is the hope of
the Council and all of our members that the policy compilation
leads to a successful strategic plan that all of the members
discussed in their questions this morning that includes
priorities, budgets and operational requirements as well as
program alignments that will help achieve cost efficiencies and
mission success. This process should serve to inform the
business sector of the department's long-range priorities and
long-term needs in a timely manner as well as giving industry
solution providers and opportunity to engage the government, to
help identify any gaps that may exist in technology,
capabilities and reasonable expectations about timeliness and
the cost of delivery.
While the Council fully supports the continued efforts to
improve the S&T Directorate, reorganization as such is not as
important as establishing an operational philosophy that
includes more effective engagement across entire department
components to better solicit and understand its requirements as
well as with the private sector to solicit the most effective
and efficient solutions to those requirements.
My written testimony outlines some of the examples of
reorganization that might assist in improving mission success
including the creation of an acquisition and operational
analysis division to improve the writing of the necessary
requirements and the overall strengthening of the individual
components acquisition programs as well as we discuss the
enhancement of the Homeland Security Advanced Research Projects
Agency by combining all of the S&T divisions, thereby
strengthening and gaining better alignment across the
disciplines and needs.
The Council members, in reiterating what Dr. Carafano was
saying, also believe that the acquisition process itself is a
critical part of a lifecycle that must begin much earlier than
contracting activities. Long before a blueprint is drawn up or
before RFIs and RFPs are proffered, there must be a collective
cooperation with and in substantive engagement between experts
on the ground and practitioners in the field. The Council's
continuing efforts to identify and develop successful
interactions with the S&T Directorate we believe have paid
dividends both for government and industry. We have
historically worked closely with the Directorate since its
inception and have developed and nurtured substantive
engagements. We need to continue those discussions.
But even amidst the establishment of that effective
relationship, the business sector as a whole is currently
struggling to comprehend long-term strategic needs and goals of
the department, especially within the Directorate. This has
made our long-term investments towards innovative technologies
that could become effective solutions challenging at best.
Broad and interactive communications to inform strategic
planning and developing a national technology framework are
absolutely necessary in order to achieve a level playing field
and spur innovative efforts. As I said, greater long-term
strategic planning and more opportunities to engage the
department earlier in the planning process will also result in
our fulfilling the needs of the Directorate and delivering
innovative and successful solutions our Nation needs.
Lastly, my written testimony outlines a number of
recommendations for consideration by the Subcommittee in
addition to what I previously mentioned. Allow me to briefly
highlight a couple of those. The S&T Directorate must have
greater access across government and greater authority over
Homeland Security R&D efforts. The S&T Directorate with
Congressional support and encouragement to in essence couple on
to what Dr. Carafano said must actively demonstrate a continued
commitment to the SAFETY Act forgetting about international
also within the country itself. This is one of the
Directorate's best and most tangible methods for working with
the private sector. And continued and adequate Congressional
funding of technological R&D homeland security solutions is a
worthy and a necessary investment. Without it, the department's
ability to deliver solutions to protect our Nation and
potentially extinguish technology advantages over an ever-
evolving adversary will be compromised.
In conclusion, the Council once again expresses our
appreciation for the opportunity to testify before you this
morning. We pledge, the Council and its members, an opportunity
to provide this committee and the department with appropriate
support, expertise and input needed to achieve mission success,
and we look forward to meeting with you and working with you as
deliberations continue. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Marc Pearl follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Marc Pearl

Introduction

Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Wu and Members of the Committee, I
thank you for giving the Homeland Security & Defense Business Council
an opportunity to appear before you today. At the outset, we want to
express our appreciation to this Subcommittee and to the full Science,
Space and Technology Committee for its continued leadership on the full
range of critical issues associated with improving research and
development (R&D) within government and encouraging even greater
involvement of industry. We also want to recognize, in particular, your
guidance on initiatives to enhance the partnership and recognition of
the importance of substantive engagement between the government and the
private sector when it comes to fulfilling our collective mission--to
keep our nation safer and more secure. That partnership is essential to
our government's ability to deliver high quality solutions to citizens
effectively, efficiently, and fiscally responsibly.
I am Marc Pearl, President and CEO of the Homeland Security &
Defense Business Council, a not-for-profit, non-partisan organization
of the leading companies that deliver homeland security solutions to
the marketplace. The Council works to ensure that the perspective,
innovation, expertise and capabilities of the private sector are fully
utilized in our nation's security, as well as recognized and integrated
with the public sector.
The Council and its members, first and foremost, support fairness
and openness in the Federal contracting process; inclusion of the
private sectors' perspective in major legislative and administrative
initiatives; and the effective use of resources and adoption of the
most advanced security solutions to protect our citizens, economy and
critical assets. Council members employ over 3 million Americans in all
50 states. We are honored and proud to work alongside leaders from
civilian, defense and Intel agencies in support of their strategic
initiatives, through our individual and collective expertise in
technology, facility and networks design and construction, human
capital, financial management, technology integration, and program
management.
This focus of the Council's testimony is to provide the
subcommittee with industry's collective perspective on the relationship
and interaction between DHS science and technology programs and the
private sector's recommendations for success. It will also address any
observable changes that have occurred following the Quadrennial
Homeland Security Review and reorganization of the Science and
Technology Directorate.

Quadrennial Homeland Security Review (QHSR)

The Council applauds the Department's effort in collecting input
and developing the Quadrennial Homeland Security Review published last
year. The Council and all of our members hope the QHSR will lead to a
strategic plan that would include priorities, budgets, operational
requirements, and programmatic alignments that will help to achieve
cost efficiencies and mission success. This process could serve to
inform the business sector of the Department's long-range priorities
and long-term needs in a timely manner. In addition, this process could
give industry solution providers an opportunity to engage the
government and help identify any gaps in technology, capabilities, and
reasonable expectations about timeliness and cost of delivery.
The QHSR--in and of itself--has been an important policy guidance
document, but it and the entire process need practical, identifiable
and operational linkages to budget and a long-term strategic needs
assessment with corresponding goals, priorities and budget.
Any strategic planning review and `head-of-curve' discussions
should focus on answering three basic, but crucial questions with
respect to the specific linkage between the policy and the
implementation:

1.  Is the plan economically reasonable?

2.  Is it technologically feasible?

3.  Does it take into account any significant unintended
consequences?

These fundamental questions should guide all future development,
deployment, and implementation. When addressed--whether by program
managers, senior officials and/or, even Members of Congress--we all
will be able to successfully move forward to ensure industry's ability
to align its business lines and strategies to meet the Directorate's
and our nation's needs.

Science & Technology Directorate Reorganization

The Council supports the continued efforts to improve the Science
and Technology Directorate. However, reorganization, as such, is not as
important as establishing an operating philosophy that includes more
effective engagement with Department's components to better solicit and
understand its requirements; and with the private sector to better
solicit the most effective and efficient solutions to those
requirements. The Council's believes that the following examples of
reorganization might assist it in improving mission success.

The creation of an ``Acquisition and Operational
Analysis Division'' to improve the writing of the necessary
requirements and the overall strengthening of the individual
components' acquisition programs can be of great benefit.
Existing efforts to link R&D to operational requirements are a
positive step forward, but there remains ambiguity over the
requirements.

Enhance the Homeland Security Advanced Research
Projects Agency (HSARPA) by combining all the S&T divisions,
thereby strengthening and gaining better alignment across the
disciplines and needs. This process also has potential to
improve consistency with the way DoD & DoE use DARPA and ARPA-E
to leverage science. We recognize, of course, that there are
still a lot of cultural changes required to ensure cooperation,
but working towards such a goal will promote greater science,
provide more effective and efficient solutions, and lead to
practical applications that serve our nation's security needs.
Real mission success in R&D can be achieved through the
establishment of policies and procedures that advance the movement of
critical technologies from the laboratory, and early research and
development to the field in a manner that supports successfully
transition of these technologies for homeland security application.

Acquisition Process

The Council believes that the acquisition process is part of a
lifecycle that must begin much earlier than contracting activity
itself. Long before the `blueprint' is drawn up, and before the RFIs or
RFPs are proffered, there must be collective cooperation with and
substantive engagement between experts on the ground and practitioners
in the field. A successful process should also require equipping the
entire team with an understanding of the challenges and risks in place
during the entire lifecycle of the project to ensure success. This
process could successfully address a project's economic reasonability,
technological feasibility, and unintended consequences.
A GAO Report that has been cited by the House and Senate leadership
on countless occasions found that ``contracts with well-defined
requirements linked to measurable performance standards delivered
results within budget and provided quality service.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO report GAO-08-263 entitled 'Department of Homeland
Security: Better Planning and Assessment Needed to Improve Outcomes for
Complex Service Acquisitions'--released on May 8, 2008.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This process must be properly managed and communicated to ensure
the necessary solutions are developed with ``man on the ground''
requirements development, including input from the private sector to
meet the goals of the ``final customer.'' We would very much like to
see a functioning process that identifies and tracks requirements
generated at any level through validation, budgeting, acquisition, and
success or effect. The development of a clear DHS-wide process would
not only serve to enhance efficiency, but would provide needed
transparency so that end-users--acquisition and operations officials--
and industry can work in concert, rather than exist in a seemingly
disconnected and stove-piped environment.

The Relationship And Interaction Between DHS Science And Technology

Programs and the Private Sector

We are very grateful that the subcommittee has also asked us to
address this issue. The work and mission of the Council is primarily
focused on how industry can be more successful in building trusting,
cooperative, and substantive engagements with our counterparts in the
public sector. There is no question that our continuing efforts in
striving to identify and develop successful interaction with the
Directorate have paid dividends for both government and industry. The
Council and its members have successfully worked closely and nurtured a
substantive relationship with the Directorate since its inception to
discuss and develop innovative solutions to protect our country. But
even amidst the establishment of an effective relationship, the
business sector, as a whole, has struggled to comprehend the long-term
strategic needs and goals of the Department, especially within the
Directorate. This has made our long-term investments toward innovative
technologies that might become effective solutions, challenging at
best.
Similar to the Federal sector, industry has limited resources to
devote to developing homeland security solutions. They cannot devote
these resources to building speculative technologies. We want to
deliver the solutions that the Department and our nation needs.
The Council's overarching mission is to work with DHS officials to
improve its engagement with the private sector long before a crisis or
even the development of a program. Ultimately, the private sector will
provide the innovation needed to develop the appropriate solutions as
demonstrated time over time in our nation's history. In order to pursue
a level playing field across industry and to spur innovation efforts,
broad and interactive communications to inform strategic planning and a
national technology framework are needed. The business sector is
willing to devote resources and take risks in order to help provide
homeland security solutions, but we are looking to DHS to further
improve its requirements development and definition.
Large amounts of guidelines, forms, databases and other documents
must be reviewed and produced to initiate dialogue in some parts of the
agency. Focusing less on documentation and process and more on
interaction and partnership could substantially free up bottlenecks. In
addition, identifying private sector SMEs in relevant scientific
disciplines could enable partnerships more quickly and effectively.
The Council is hopeful that the future will include greater long-
term strategic planning and more opportunities to engage the Department
earlier in the planning process. Through early engagement in the
process we can better understand and deliver the innovative solutions
that will protect our country and its people.

Recommendations

The Council submits the following recommendations for consideration
by the subcommittee:

Increased Cooperation and Visibility: The private
sector brings more than a `vendor' mentality to the table. We
have our own R&D projects ready to respond to stated needs of
our nation, but we cannot develop them in a vacuum. We want to
continue meeting the needs of the Department, the Directorate,
and the nation as a whole. Government and its industry partners
share the same goals. Projects completed on time and on target
are a win-win. Programs that meet their objectives are a win-
win. We understand the needs are complex and challenging, but
our common goal is to find the most appropriate, effective, and
efficient routes to mission success. The public and private
sectors--working from previous recommendations and developing
new ones if necessary--must be able to work from the same
strategy.

Greater Authority and Planning for Science and
Technology Directorate: The Council supports greater authority
for the Science and Technology Directorate. Currently homeland
security R&D efforts are spread among many governmental
organizations. The Directorate is highly dependent on other
federal agencies to achieve its mission. However, there does
not appear to be a clear strategy for how to do that
effectively, and collaboration with DoD, DoE, NIST and other
scientific organizations is not clearly organized, resulting in
duplicate and potentially unleveraged efforts. It must be
recognized that there are significant cultural challenges
within the Department, and it remains a challenge to
effectively bring new technologies to maturity, and
concurrently, to gain broad acceptance in the operational
communities. In order to succeed, the S&T Directorate must be
able to direct the government-wide homeland security R&D
agenda, not compete against numerous organizations inside and
outside the Department.

Innovative Solutions vs. ``Gadgets'': The Council
believes there is a need to improve the way the Directorate
thinks about and pursues innovation. ``Needs'' are typically
defined by end-user practitioners and frequently fail to
incorporate scientific perspectives and commercially available
technologies effectively. As a result, requirements frequently
end up defining a point source technology, product or service
(``gadget'') that may or may not successfully address the true
need. Additionally, ineffective requirements processes result
in increased or lost cost of development, commercialization
delays across the board, and potential duplication of effort.
Industry expertise in commercial technology development is also
not leveraged to the extent it could be.

SAFETY Act Commitment: The Council supports continued
commitment to the SAFETY Act--one the Directorate's best and
most tangible methods for working with the private sector. The
SAFETY Act is the most reliable way DHS can learn about and
encourage the deployment of critical security tools and
services. The Council hopes for continued commitment from S&T
leadership, starting with the Under Secretary and her personal
staff, to implement the SAFETY Act in a full and complete
fashion. Ideally, complete implementation would create a clear
application process and establish standards that promote the
full utilization of the law.

Continued Congressional Funding: The Council also
believes continued congressional funding of the research and
development of technological homeland security solutions is a
worthy and necessary investment. Without adequate funding, the
Department will have a diminished ability to deliver solutions
to protect our nation, have a devastating effect on the overall
homeland security R&D enterprise, and potentially extinguish
technology advantages over an ever-evolving adversary. HR-1
proposes to eliminate more than $500 million from the
Department of Homeland Security's Science and Technology
budget--effectively cutting it by half. The Council hopes that
the legitimate desire on the part of Congress to curtail
unnecessary spending will not result in the reduction of our
nation's ability to develop tools to counter the threats it
faces and spur its global competitiveness.

Conclusion

On behalf of the Homeland Security & Defense Business Council, I
once again express our appreciation for the opportunity to provide our
comments on the important issues before the Subcommittee. The Council
and its members pledge to provide this Committee and the Department
with the appropriate support, expertise and input needed to achieve
mission success. We are prepared to work with the subcommittee not just
as a neutral conduit between the public and private sectors, as a very
interested actor and trusted advisor to mutually achieve the following
goals:

Identify and find real world solutions to our
homeland security challenges;

Work towards a strategic plan with visibility and
cooperation in the research and development of homeland
security solutions; and

Ensure a sound, fair and responsible acquisition
process.
We believe the achievement of these goals will help get our nation
where it needs to be--where this Committee, the administration, the
Department, and the private sector want us to go--and ensuring that we
get there together.
We look forward to working with the Subcommittee as it continues
its deliberations.

Biography for Mr. Marc Pearl
Marc Pearl has served as President and CEO of the Homeland Security
& Defense Business Council since March 2008. The seven-year old
Council's membership consists of the leading companies that provide
homeland security solutions for our nation, and actively involves their
senior executives in developing substantive high-level thought
leadership peer-to-peer interaction with their government counterparts.
The Council's programs and initiatives focus on ensuring that the
perspective, innovation, expertise and capabilities of the private
sector are fully utilized in our nation's security.
Prior to joining the Council, Marc was the principal and chairman
of IT Policy Solutions, which he founded to counsel private sector
organizations in meeting their public policy challenges. He
concurrently served as executive director of the Consumer Electronics
Retailers Coalition. Pearl had previously been a partner at the
international law firm, Shaw Pittman and led their e-commerce policy
practice; served as general counsel and senior vice president at ITAA
(now TechAmerica); and was chief of staff and legislative counsel to
U.S. Representative Dan Glickman, when the former congressman chaired
the House Intelligence Committee.
Marc has lived and worked in DC for more than three decades,
focusing his work on technology and cyber security policy issues since
the mid-1990s. Pearl's grasp of the federal, state/local and global
policy issues important to industry, together with his non-partisan,
substantive approach to policymaking have made him an invaluable
resource to clients and a trusted advisor to numerous decision makers.
He helped form and led broad-based coalitions on Y2K liability
legislation, e-commerce transaction jurisdiction laws, digital
authentication and the DTV ``transition.'' Marc was also privileged to
represent the private sector on U.S. government delegations at the
Hague Conference on Private International Law, the World Trade
Organization (WTO) and the World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO).
Born and raised in Detroit, Marc graduated with honors from Case
Western Reserve University and received his law degree from Emory
University's School of Law.
For more information on the programs, initiatives and mission of
the Homeland Security & Defense Business Council visit: http://
www.homelandcouncil.org.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Pearl.
Mr. Maurer, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID MAURER, DIRECTOR OF THE

HOMELAND SECURITY AND JUSTICE TEAM AT THE

U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Maurer. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Quayle and
Members of the Committee. I am pleased to be here today to
discuss the recent findings from past work looking at research
and development at the Department of Homeland Security.
Two weeks ago, GAO issued its first mandated review of
potential duplication, overlap and cost savings within federal
programs. In that review, we identified research and
development at DHS as a potential area for cost savings.
Drawing on years of work at DHS, we found that the department
has the potential to reap important cost savings by taking two
commonsense actions. First, test systems to make sure they meet
requirements before deciding to buy them. Second, conduct cost-
benefit analysis to ensure that taxpayer dollars are buying
systems that improve Homeland Security capabilities.
In recent years, we found that DHS has not always taken
these actions. As a result, DHS ends up taking risks that
multi-billion-dollar programs may not deliver their expected
results. In some cases, DHS spent millions on systems that did
not work and that did not enhance security.
For example, in 2006, the Transportation Security
Administration began deploying explosive trace portals, or ETP,
in airports. These so-called puffer machines blow air on
passengers and check for residue of explosives. Unfortunately,
TSA deployed ETPs knowing that operational testing had not been
completed, that the system's functional requirements had not
been fully tested and that ETPs had not performed well on the
tests that had been completed. TSA ended up spending millions
on a system that had a lower capability, broke down more
frequently, and cost more to install than initially planned. As
a result, TSA stopped buying new systems and pulled what they
had deployed out of service.
We have also previously reported significant problems with
DHS's efforts to deploy and develop the advanced spectroscopic
portal monitor, or ASP. Within DHS, the Domestic Nuclear
Detection Office, or DNDO, wanted to develop and deploy
improved radiation detection equipment. DNDO believed ASPs
would better perform than the equipment currently being used on
the Nation's borders. However, DNDO did not conduct a
meaningful cost-benefit analysis comparing ASPs to existing
systems. Our work found that DNDO overestimated the
capabilities of the ASPs, underestimated the capabilities of
the current systems, and underestimated the costs to develop
and deploy ASPs. In short, it was not clear that spending
taxpayer dollars on this program would deliver improvements in
primary radiation screening capabilities. As a result, in
February of last year, the Secretary of Homeland Security
scaled back plans for the number of ASPs DHS would purchase and
how they would be used.
Now, when you hear examples like this, it is important to
remember why DHS presses the envelope. The department faces a
constant balancing act between immediate mission needs and the
need to make sound, informed choices, following processes that
are not always designed for speed. Within this context, DHS
needs to make difficult decisions on when and how to develop,
deploy and purchase new technologies. However, as our work has
found, there have been too many cases of DHS rushing to
failure. Failure to adequately test or conduct meaningful cost-
benefit analysis can end up wasting taxpayer dollars and not
enhancing our security.
The good news is that DHS has taken actions to address
these problems. In the past several months, DHS has issued new
policies for acquisition and testing and evaluation. It has
implemented a reorganization of the Science and Technology
Directorate and has developed plans to revamp how DHS
approaches overall investment decision-making. Taken together,
these changes indicate an important commitment from department
leadership to take these problems head on. That is encouraging.
But it is still too early to tell the impact of these actions.
The hope is that DHS will leverage these relatively new changes
and turn plans into actions to ensure that, among other things,
it adequately tests new systems and conducts cost-benefit
analysis before making multi-million or multi-billion-dollar
decisions. By doing so, DHS makes it more likely that systems
will be delivered on time, within budget and capable of meeting
critical mission needs.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Maurer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. David C. Maurer

Biography for Mr. David C. Maurer
David Maurer is a Director in the U.S. Government Accountability
Office's (GAO) Homeland Security and Justice team, where he leads GAO's
work reviewing DHS and DOJ management issues. His recent work in these
areas includes DHS management integration, the Quadrennial Homeland
Security Review, Secret Service financial management, DOJ grant
management, the federal prison system, and an assessment of
technologies for detecting explosives in the passenger rail
environment.
From 2008-9, Mr. Maurer worked as an Acting Director in GAO's
Natural Resource and Environment team, where he managed work assessing
U.S. global nuclear detection programs, and enforcement of federal
environmental law. Mr. Maurer was also detailed to the House Committee
on Appropriations, Surveys and Investigations staff. From 1993-2007,
Mr. Maurer managed and led work in GAO's International Affairs and
Trade team, where he reviewed U.S. efforts to combat international
terrorism and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, U.S.
assistance to the former Soviet Union, peacekeeping in the Balkans, and
several other international issues. He also served as the team's
manager for staffing and human capital issues. In recognition of his
contributions to audit work, training, and operational
responsibilities, Mr. Maurer has received several GAO awards during his
career.
From August 2005 through June 2006, Mr. Maurer was a student at the
National Defense University where he was recognized as a Distinguished
Graduate of the Industrial College of the Armed Forces and received an
M.S. in national resource strategy. Mr. Maurer also has an M.P.P in
international public policy from the University of Michigan and a B.A.
in international relations from Michigan State University.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you very much, Mr. Maurer, and
thanks to the whole panel for your testimony. We are going to
start the questioning, and I want to remind members that
committee rules limit questioning to five minutes. I will now
recognize myself for the first five minutes.
Mr. Maurer, I was just listening to your testimony. You
expressed a lot of concerns with the Directorate and DNDO
including the need to improve R&D efforts by ensuring that
testing and the cost-benefit analysis happens prior to making
any acquisition decisions. Now, does the creation of the
acquisition support and operations analysis group fully address
this issue or is it just another layer of bureaucracy within
the agency?
Mr. Maurer. I really think that remains to be seen. If you
look at it on paper, it definitely shows promise, and our hope
is that it is implemented in a way to address the deficiencies
we found in the past, and one thing I would caution everyone on
that there has never been a shortage of plans coming out of the
Department of Homeland Security, so we really want to see the
transition from plans into reality and implementation in the
real world.
Chairman Quayle. So this is a wait-and-see approach to see
if it actually has some benefit with actually making sure that
it is on time, on budget and is actually making the
acquisitions based on looking at efficiencies and cost-benefit
analysis?
Mr. Maurer. Absolutely. We have work underway for the
Homeland Security Committee currently looking at S&T's role in
testing and evaluation within the department so we will be able
to report on that later this year. We are also taking a careful
look at how DHS is revamping its acquisition approach as part
of our high-risk update.
Chairman Quayle. Dr. Carafano, do you have any thoughts
about that new portion of the agency that is going to be
developed?
Mr. Carafano. Yes. It can't solve the problem. It is going
to help--if it is done right, it will help with the
requirements process. That is for sure. It may help in terms of
the guidance, the testing and evaluation, but it doesn't manage
the entire acquisition process so there is still lots of places
where things can run off the rails. So I think fundamentally
what has to be addressed is DHS has to create an established
acquisition process that does the end-the-end management from
requirements to testing and evaluation to fielding to
integrating with the other department needs. The question I
think is what is the role of S&T in that, how much of that does
it bite, and I think for a starter, I mean, we ought to revisit
the legislative language of S&T's mission and that ought to be
part of that, and I really do look to--we have never had an
authorization bill, reauthorization bill for the Department of
Homeland Security. This would be the perfect thing for the
Congress to address, is to at least establish its formal
expectations across the department for how it is going to do
that. And again, I am not saying S&T should be in charge of
everything to do with acquisition but it is going to definitely
be a big player in that, and all the other pieces have to be
established.
Chairman Quayle. On that, if we are looking at it to
address the immediate needs and also take into account the
long-term R&D goals, you have been critical about the lack of a
strategic approach for that. Could you just give some
suggestions on how to develop that strategic approach and what
would you actually put into place, just off the top of your
head?
Mr. Carafano. Well that is two different--there is a lot of
questions. Let me just address the question of acquisition. So
one is the formal acquisition process. The other one is rapid
acquisition, and the rapid acquisition one is actually the one
that is more difficult and problematic, and this is--I mean, we
have seen this in DOD over and over again. They get into a war.
They see something they never thought of before. They scramble
around and figure out how to fix it. They eventually figure out
how to fix it. Sometimes it costs a lot. Sometimes they get
lucky. But the point is, is it is an--the rapid acquisition is
an ad hoc process and then as soon as the war is done, they
dissemble that process and reinvent it the next time. Because
people don't like rapid acquisition because it is a competitor
with long-term acquisition, right? Because somebody comes up
with a great idea, I have been working on this for ten years
you are not going to kill my program because you just found a
better idea, right? So for those things not in a sense to be in
competition, the lanes have to be designed and they have to be
specified in a formal way ahead of time.
So I was just making a note that if you want to have a
rapid acquisition process, you have to have a couple of things.
First of all, you have to have a feedback loop that identifies
a need. Second, you have to have an operational research
capability so you can evaluate that need and determine if you
need a technology fix or if you should do something else. If it
is a technology fix, you have to have a horizon scanning, the
kind of thing Tara talked about, the ability to go out and look
and see what is out there, to grab the technology. Then you
have to have a way to test and evaluate it and safety-certify
it. And then most importantly, and this is where DOD fails
again and again, you have to have a way to field it, train
people in how to use it, and then sustain it. So all those
pieces have to be part of a rapid acquisition process.
Otherwise it doesn't work. And for DHS, the penultimate example
was the response to the oil spill when they had a dramatic need
for new technologies to deal with the oil spill and they had
absolutely no system in place to acquire those technologies and
everything was done ad hoc, and I would go back now and say it
would be a great question for the next time the Secretary comes
to testify before you is, tell me what you have done to
formalize the lessons that you learned in the Gulf oil spill to
rapidly acquire technology.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you. The chair now recognizes Mr.
Lujan for five minutes.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Carafano, in your prepared testimony, you stated that--
you called on the S&T Directorate to dramatically scale back on
screening and detection technologies and to put those efforts
straight into cybertechnology development. What is the
rationale behind that?
Mr. Carafano. Well, cybertechnology among others would be
my priority, and the reason why I think screening and detection
technologies are a bit of a sinkhole is that we live in a
country with almost infinite vulnerabilities. You know, if you
spend infinity minus one, you have infinity vulnerabilities,
right? I mean, this would be as if we approached the
Prohibition with let us be able to detect alcohol. I mean at
the end of the day, even lifting Prohibition didn't stop the
Mafia. What stopped the Mafia was you went in and you
identified the network and you attacked the network.
So the question really is, where do you get the best bang
for the buck. Screening and detection technologies, I mean, we
all know the problems with false positives and false negatives,
and sure, everybody can find a technology, but then you go to
operationalizing the technology and this is the essence of what
I would hope that this operational analysis would get to is,
for all the money we are going to invest in technology, are we
getting the best bang for the buck. Do I get more money from
finding another technology to find a fistful of money in a
Buick at the border or would I be better off investing in
something that is going to enable the integrated border
enforcement team to go and find the network that is moving that
money and take that network down.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that very much.
Mr. Maurer, that would lead to a natural question, I
believe, to yourself. In 2009, I believe it was the Justice
Department that said that drug cartels are now the largest
organized threat to the United States. We talked about drug
trafficking, human trafficking. Based on the response from Dr.
Carafano, what more can we be doing or how can we improve what
we are doing with DHS and working with other entities to be
able to better protect our homeland?
Mr. Maurer. Well, GAO has done a lot of work looking at
U.S. efforts to combat drug smuggling and securing the border.
I think as a general proposition, one of the key things that we
found over the years is the importance of finding ways to have
the different federal agencies work more closely together. We
have ongoing work, for example, looking at the extent to which
DEA and ICE are trying to operate under a new memorandum of
understanding and are trying to do a better job of crafting a
more integrated approach to the problem.
I think the bottom line is, there are a lot of different
federal, state and local agencies that sort of play in this
broader sandbox of addressing the problem of drugs being
smuggled into this country, and if we can figure out ways to
leverage the different capabilities of all these different
agencies and apply them to the problem, we would be better off
in the long run.
Mr. Lujan. I appreciate that. And just going back to Dr.
Carafano's response, Mr. Chairman, I think that what we see
here is that we need to identify that common purpose, and if
MOUs are trying to be worked out, they need to be required to
be worked out and that we have to find those networks to be
able to combat them, and I appreciate that very much.
Mr. Pearl and Mr. Carafano, in your testimony and your
responses to us here and not just your prepared testimony but
in what you shared with us as a committee, I very much
appreciate the fact that you are calling for clear projections
or outlines or requests that are going to be coming from
federal partners to give more certainty associated with the R&D
efforts on the private side. My question is, we have an area
when we have tech transfer sometimes is not making its way into
the private arm and into the private sector because there is a
need for maturation or seed support. What role do you see where
there can be access to the engineers, physicists, scientists to
be able to work closer with our private sector or to be able to
develop that sector of the Federal Government where there is an
emphasis on pushing that technology over the top so it makes
its way into the private sector so that private sector then
takes it over and takes it full steam ahead?
Mr. Carafano. Well, I think that trying to transition
technology for users outside the department is really a very,
very difficult process, and I would just question with
everything the department has to go on and all of its
priorities, is that the gorilla you really want to take on
right now? I would really recommend that the DHS focus on
technologies that it needs and push that other challenge later
off down the road. There are some areas where I think
partnerships are supremely important, and I raised the issue of
nanotechnology and I would be pleased to talk about the
Semitech model and how I think that model really is a model
that we need in nanotechnology. Semitech is doing some work in
nanotechnology but it is a very, very different field, and you
almost need--you really need a new organization to deal with
that.
And I will just point to four advantages of doing this. The
first is in efficiencies. What these groups do is, they do
basically non-competitive research R&D, so it is the things
that everybody is going to get in common so nobody gets a
competitive advantage and it benefits everybody, and what that
does is, it helps lay the baseline for the industrial base to
then support and make products that are affordable and
workable. And what that does is, it creates an--not necessarily
more R&D spending but it creates an efficiency in R&D spending
that allows people to spend the rest of their R&D money on
other things. The most important thing is really does is it
strengths the partnership between potential customers and
potential suppliers. The success of these largely depends on
the quality of the research agenda, and I would not--there is
no magic bullet in a sense. This is, I think, the kind of
complementary activity that government could do in public-
private partnership but it doesn't necessarily replace all the
other kind of research and R&D. But again, I think there are
some niche areas like nanotechnology where the payoffs are so
enormously unbelievable across not just for DHS but across the
Federal Government, that these are the kinds of things that are
worth our effort.
What we actually did to create Sematech is we actually took
money out of DARPA and made DARPA do it. You know, I would
actually vote for that day. I would defund something else and I
would make the Federal Government do this because I think in
the long end, the federal consumer is going to really benefit.
But I mean, I think it will have an enormous benefit across our
economy.
Mr. Lujan. Thank you very much.
And Mr. Pearl, maybe we will get a chance to follow up. I
know the time we have gone over a little bit there.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you.
Mr. Lujan. And Mr. Chairman, with that, I was looking down
there, I thought Mr. Neugebauer was still with us. I would like
to ask unanimous consent for some additional time to ask a
question for our colleague, Congresswoman Giffords.
Chairman Quayle. Without objection.
Mr. Lujan. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for that, and
we know that Congresswoman Giffords is a leader on border
security, and if she were here today, I know that she would be
very engaged in this hearing.
Dr. Carafano, as you know, Congresswoman Giffords is deeply
concerned about border security, which is why she is proud of
the BORDERS Department of Homeland Security Center of
Excellence at the University of Arizona. BORDERS singular focus
is to provide government agencies and stakeholders with
scientifically informed knowledge to expedite the development
of innovative, practical and cost-effective solutions to meet
the ever-changing operational demands at the northern and
southern borders. This sounds like exactly the sort of thing
that we need now. BORDERS is currently working with Customs and
Border Patrol on a number of innovative projects to protect the
Arizona border by, for example, developing new tunnel detection
and container security technology. In your written testimony,
you wrote that not curtailing or further limiting the terms of
the Centers of Excellence is important. Can you comment further
on the importance of funding these centers?
Mr. Carafano. Yeah, absolutely. So the centers do more what
we talk of as really science and technology in the DOD world
which is more of the six-one type which is a basic research,
and if you want to build an effective basic research team, it
takes time and facilities, and so if you are moving these
things every couple of years, I mean, you might as well not
even bother to do it. It really does take a long-term
commitment and ten years or some time of renewable term that is
much, much--is really, really important. And I think the
borders center is a good example. I think they do some
excellent work and you would want to keep them doing that.
And just in terms of border technology, I just would
mention very quickly, one area where I do think there should be
a lot more emphasis is small UAVs and there is a couple of
reasons for that. First of all, the bag guys have a lot of eyes
on the border and they track everything we do, and so anything
that has kind of a big operational picture gets picked up. So
small UAVs are important because you don't really need the
infrastructure to set them up. It is not like the helicopter
taking off. The other reason is, is that you can put a variety
of sensor payloads on there very cost-effectively. You can look
for tunnels. You can look for all kinds of things. And they are
very cheap to operate, which is very good for state and locals
because they can't support an expensive thing or long training.
It is a really, I think, a very, very dynamic and important
field, and I think the limiting thing right now is actually
getting FAA to authorize people to fly small UAVs at the
border. But I think the small UAV at the border, it could be an
enormous force multiplier for federal, state and local, and
that would be a primary to look into.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Lujan.
Is there anybody else to be recognized? No? With that, I
will just recognize myself for one additional question, and I
am going to address this to Mr. Pearl, but if either of the
other witnesses wants to address this as well and answer this
question. The Homeland Security Science and Technology Advisory
committee, also known as Haystack, has not been active for an
extended period of time. With the Directorate's increased focus
on stakeholder participation, do you feel that an independent
advisory body on science and technology is an important
component of S&T at DHS?
Mr. Pearl. I think it is an interesting way of going about
it. I think it is absolutely necessary. What we have seen over
the last few years in terms of the advisory committees is that
it has made up in a very vertical way on government officials
public sector. The private sector has not necessarily--and not
to take anything away from think tanks and others or academics
but the reality of the foot soldiers on the ground in terms of
what the private sector brings and industry brings to the
discussion in terms of people who have either been in these
capacities before and they are now in the private sector or who
are in researchers and developers and engineers onto themselves
and the private sector have not been as involved for fear that
there would be a best picking of winners with respect to
identifying individual private sector organizations. That is
something that we have tried to with the department on industry
days that were very strong two, three, four years ago and have
been in fact in touch with Dr. O'Toole and her team to try to
encourage greater concentration of communication and
cooperation between the private sector. Whether it is done
formally or informally, Mr. Chairman, I think there has to be
greater coordination of communication between those, the
innovations and capabilities that exist in the private sector
and that which exists and the desire in the long term.
We are fighting the last war in every single way, and
whether that is a rapid acquisition process that Dr. Carafano
is talking about or a long term, we have to think beyond the
corner. We have to think beyond the curve. We have to start
thinking ahead of what is going on, and that is before, I said,
the RFP is offered up or before the acquisition process even
starts, whether that is through a formal advisory process or
whether that is through an informal process, we need to move
forward on that and certainly the Council and the members that
are providing homeland security solutions that are members of
the Council want to take part in those discussions as quickly
as possible.
Chairman Quayle. Dr. Carafano?
Mr. Carafano. I would--I serve on the Board of Army Science
and Technology, which is sponsored by the National Academies,
which I think is a terrific model that S&T and DHS should look
at so the board includes technical experts, scientists,
operational experts and people with business experience, people
with bench experience. I think the BAST is a really, really
good model for that kind of support that S&T might need.
Mr. Maurer. I think going forward, and given where the
country is right now and this overall fiscal condition is going
to be important set of mechanisms like this to leverage
expertise and knowledge and insight outside the department. I
mean, for the past several years we have been able to throw a
lot of money at the Department of Homeland Security and I just
don't see that continuing in the near term, so having some kind
of mechanism to build better bridges between private sector and
public sector is going to become increasingly important.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you very much. I want to thank all
of you for your valuable testimony today and for being very
patient and the members for their questions. The members of the
subcommittee may have additional questions for the witnesses,
and we will ask you to respond to those in writing. The record
will remain open for two weeks for additional comments and
statements from members. The witnesses are excused.
Thank you all for coming. This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:04 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix I:

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Tara O'Toole, Under Secretary, Science and Technology,
Department of Homeland Security

Questions submitted by Chairman Ben Quayle

Q1.  DHS manages laboratories in multiple states, as well as FFRDCs and
University Centers across the nation. Could you characterize how the
University Centers of Excellence and the Department of Energy's
National Laboratories support the research and development of DHS, and
how their work is integrated into development, demonstration, and
testing of technologies?

A1. The Science and Technology Directorate's (S&T) Office of National
Laboratories (ONL) provides the Nation with a coordinated, enduring
core of productive science, technology and engineering laboratories,
organizations and institutions, which can provide the knowledge and
technology required to secure our homeland. The Homeland Security Act
of 2002 assigns ONL ``the coordination and utilization of the
Department of Energy (DOE) national laboratories and other sites under
Section 309 in a manner to create a networked laboratory system for the
purpose of supporting the missions of the Homeland Security
Department.'' In addition to oversight of the S&T laboratory
operations, ONL coordinates homeland security-related activities and
laboratory-directed research conducted within the DOE's national
laboratories.
The National Laboratories support of S&T focuses on development,
demonstration, and testing of technologies in critical mission areas
such as first responder technology needs, advanced passenger screening,
explosive detection technologies, human factors and biometrics, and
chemical and biological forensics. Examples of capabilities produced by
S&T and National Laboratory cooperation include an early warning system
for biological attacks; a chemical agent detection system for mass
transit; a wireless communications system and data network to connect
responders in the field; and a next generation liquid and gel-scanning
system for airline passenger screening that distinguishes potential
threat liquids from harmless ones.
S&T's Office of University Programs (OUP) conducts multi-
disciplinary research and development in priority DHS mission areas at
approximately 200 colleges and universities through 12 Centers of
Excellence (COEs). The COEs align to S&T divisions and offices, to the
DHS components, and to state and local first responders. For example,
the National Center for Border Security and Immigration (NCBSI) aligns
with the S&T Borders and Maritime Security Division whose partners
include Customs and Border Protection (CBP), Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE), U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (CIS), and
the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG). COEs improve understanding of the causes,
elements, and consequences of a range of threats from terrorists and
natural disasters. They also support countermeasure, mitigation,
prevention, and resilience approaches based on both technologies and
human behavior. The COEs work with and through the S&T divisions and
complement other DHS research and development programs including those
of federal laboratories and federally funded research and development
centers (FFRDCs). They take advantage of other relevant Federal agency-
sponsored research and provide outcomes useful to federal, state, and
local government, private sector, and international partners. The
selection process for the COEs is highly competitive, rigorously peer-
reviewed, and merit-based.

Q2.  Given the geographic distribution of these units, how do various
S&T units work together?

A2. The Science and Technology Directorate's Office of National
Laboratories coordinates the work of S&T's laboratories and organizes
annual laboratory directors meetings and regular conference calls.
Frequent site visits by S&T leadership and staff all assure the S&T
laboratories are properly coordinated and integrated into S&T and DHS.
S&T's Office of University Programs (OUP) manages the COEs as a
network. The COEs share resources, jointly fund projects and take
advantage of each others' strengths. For example, there are
approximately 35 projects that involve the participation of two or more
COEs. This approach has led to a robust network of academic
capabilities, including laboratories, experts, models and data that DHS
and its partners can access at any time to address a wide array of
difficult issues.S&T also leverages communication tools such as
teleconferencing and online collaboration to minimize the effects of
geographic distribution.

Q3.  How do the DHS internal laboratories work with the National
Laboratories to avoid duplication of efforts?

A3. The Department of Energy's (DOE) National Laboratories have very
different missions than the Science and Technology Directorate's (S&T)
laboratories which inherently limits duplication of efforts. DHS
internal laboratories are single-focused research, development, testing
and evaluation (RDT&E) facilities in the fields of aviation security,
biodefense analysis, chemical security analysis and technologies to
detect nuclear and radiological threats. The DOE National Laboratories
provide distinctive, powerful research facilities across a multitude of
disciplines that include neutron scattering facilities, accelerators
for nuclear and high energy physics research, large-scale field sites
for investigating the effects of atmospherics and structures on
radiation, chemical plumes, and other airborne hazards, and highest-end
computing facilities.
S&T collaborates closely with the DOE National Laboratories in
pursuit of technologies supporting the operational needs of DHS. DHS's
Office of National Laboratories (ONL) coordinates the efforts of both
the DHS and DOE National Laboratories to maximize how DHS leverages
their respective capabilities and minimizes potential duplication of
effort. DHS also encourages partnerships among the laboratories to
complement each other's core competencies while leveraging R&D
investments made by others. For example, in December 2009, DHS and DOE
agreed to create the Aviation Security Enhancement Partnership (ASEP)
to extend and leverage this relationship with a focus on improving
aviation security. The role of the National Laboratories is more
research oriented and includes introduction of the basic science behind
explosives, including Homemade Explosives (HME). S&T's Transportation
Security Laboratory (TSL) also works collaboratively with the National
Laboratories and will incorporate the HME research into its explosives
detection testing program, specifically certification testing.

Q4.  Question: You have identified international cooperation as a
priority, yet some have criticized the Directorate as having limited
success working with our international partners. What do you see as the
challenges in working with our international partners?

A4. The Science and Technology Directorate (S&T) conducts international
joint research projects, technical demonstrations, scientific
workshops, and exchanges of scientific and technological information
and personnel. S&T has several established, formal international
partnerships with Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, Singapore,
Sweden, Mexico, Israel, France, Germany, New Zealand, and the European
Commission. Although S&T's international outreach has met with some
success, challenges remain.
The initial challenge has been in identifying international
counterparts with complementary science and technology programs. Not
all governments have an equivalent or single counterpart to S&T.
Science and technology programs for some governments can span more than
one ministry or government agency, requiring DHS S&T to rely heavily on
briefings to the new and potential partners, fact-finding visits and
program planning at both the leadership and programmatic levels. Once
contacts have been established with the appropriate counterparts, S&T
must undertake a series of steps in order to begin joint collaboration.
These include work-planning sessions; negotiations of the terms and
conditions to implement arrangements of mutual benefit, and
establishing a model of practice for bilateral project monitoring.
Furthermore, maintaining continuity with foreign governments that
undergo significant changes in staff, re-organization, or policy more
frequently than the U.S. can also slow down the process of engagement
and implementation. A key factor in the strategic development of joint
collaborations is conducting periodic reviews of each country's
portfolio's interests/priorities and gaps to determine leveraging
opportunities that can be addressed in the current or upcoming S&T
fiscal year. Finally, another challenge to building international
collaborations can stem from differences between the domestic laws and
practices, restrictions, or standards of foreign countries and the
U.S., such as in the case of procurement, intellectual property rights,
export controls, government fiscal cycles, and currency fluctuations.

Q5.  Question: How can this cooperation be improved?

A5. International cooperation requires regular outreach for new
collaborations, partnership engagement, and leveraging programs and
investment. The Science and Technology Directorate has successfully
advanced its relationships with its international partners through its
bilateral agreements and international research program. Ongoing
efforts by the Administration to reform export controls are anticipated
to facilitate new and ongoing international cooperation. Further,
improvements will be made as relationships grow with both our
longstanding and newer partners, not simply in terms of numbers of
collaborations, but in moving towards increased returns on investment
and in advancing science and technology innovations that meet global
security needs.

Q6.  What are other countries doing with homeland security research and
development funding?

A6. Some of the Science and Technology Directorate's international
partnerships have resulted in foreign investment in science and
technology innovations to expand or accelerate programs that are
serving DHS mission needs. Such foreign investment has included test
and evaluation of x-ray systems for aviation checked baggage,
development of a hybrid composite container for maritime cargo
security, and an assessment of violent extremist incidents. S&T plans
to invest internationally in the test and evaluation of x-ray systems
for aviation checked baggage; research to develop a technological
capability for standoff detection of explosives in a mass transit
environment; and sequencing and characterization of unique strains of
select agents which are high-priority biological threats and are
otherwise unavailable to U.S. researchers. S&T also plans to invest
internationally in the test and evaluation of x-ray systems for
aviation checked baggage; research to develop a technological
capability for standoff detection of explosives in a mass transit
environment; and sequencing and characterization of unique strains of
select agents which are high-priority biological threats and are
otherwise unavailable to U.S. researchers.

Q7.  Are investments in other countries seen as a priority?

A7. Cooperative activity of mutual benefit with other countries is a
priority if it meets DHS mission needs, S&Tprogram requirements, and
augments or enhances S&T's ability to serve the Department. Such
cooperative activities may or may not involve direct investments in
other countries.
``International partners are critical to the effort to secure the
homeland against threats that transcend jurisdictional and geographic
boundaries,'' according to the first Quadrennial Homeland Security
Review, published in February 2010. ``International engagement enhances
the transparency of threat trajectories and increases our capacity to
understand, investigate, and interdict threats at the earliest possible
point, ideally before they become manifest, reach our shores, or
disrupt the critical networks on which we depend. The United States
must work with its international partners to increase global security
against terrorism and violent extremism, the spread of infectious
diseases, and the consequences of natural disasters.'' By acting
together with a shared vision, collaborations that lead to improved or
major security accomplishments in each country are a collective
achievement of mutual interest towards global security.

Q8.  What is your view on the state U.S.-Israel Homeland Security
cooperation?

A8. Since signing the Memorandum of Agreement between the U.S. and the
Government of the State of Israel on Cooperation in Science and
Technology for Homeland Security Matters on May 29, 2008, the Science
and Technology Directorate has worked with the Israeli government on a
variety of programs and projects. DHS S&T is actively engaged with
Israeli science and technology offices within a multitude of Israeli
government ministries and agencies including the Ministry of Public
Security, Bureau of the Chief Scientist (MOPS/BCS), the Israeli
National Security Council, the Israeli Security Agency (ISA), the
Israeli National Police (INP), and the Israeli Home Front Command
(HFC), a regional command with homeland security responsibilities
within the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF). DHS S&T has also engaged
several top researchers in Israel and has awarded grants and invited
them to speak at DHS S&T sponsored events. During our last University
Summit (March 30--April 1, 2011), Israel was one of two countries
invited to speak. Dr. Boaz Ganor, founder and Executive Director of the
International Institute for Counter-Terrorism (ICT), and the Head of
the Homeland Security Studies Programs at the Interdisciplinary Center
(IDC), Herzliya, Israel, presented his work on the threat of suicide
bombers on mass transportation.
DHS S&T is also actively engaged with the DOD's Combating Terrorism
Technology Support Office (CTTSO) and Technical Support Working Group
(TSWG) bilateral cooperation activities with Israel. DHS S&T and CTTSO/
TSWG work closely to ensure synergy and prevent duplication of effort
and resources by participating in each other's regularly scheduled
meetings and bilateral conferences.
DHS S&T and MOPS/BCS held the second U.S.-Israel Homeland Security
Science and Technology Bilateral Conference on November 9-11, 2010 in
Jerusalem to discuss and report on bilateral cooperative activities.
This meeting included working level meetings and presentations on
planned and proposed activities within common areas of interests,
including the Explosives, Human Factors and Behavioral Sciences, Cyber
Security, and the Infrastructure Protection and Disaster Management
domains. It also included site visits to several locations with the
following themes: Aviation Security; Community Resilience; Explosive
Device Testing; and Command, Control, and Interoperability.
DHS S&T finds the collaboration with Israel extremely beneficial
and is encouraged by the progress that has already been made. We look
forward to continuing and expanding upon thechannels of cooperation and
engagement under our Agreement that have been successfully built over
the past three years.

Questions submitted by Representative David Wu

Q1.  The Science and Technology Directorate last published a strategic
plan in June of 2007. In October of 2009, in testimony before the
Technology and Innovation Subcommittee, the Acting Under Secretary for
Science and Technology noted that the Science and Technology
Directorate was updating its strategic plan to support the strategic
goals and objectives determined by the Quadrennial Homeland Security
Review. In your written testimony, you state that the Directorate has
instituted an inclusive and comprehensive strategic planning process.
When can we expect to see an updated strategic plan that reflects the
goals and objectives of the Quadrennial Homeland Security Review?

A1. The Science and Technology Directorate (S&T) plans to issue its
strategic plan in May 2011. As soon as it is issued, S&T will provide
copies to the Subcommittee.

Q2.  Can you please describe the strategic planning process that the
Directorate undertook after you were confirmed as Under Secretary?

A2. In February of 2010, the Science and Technology Directorate (S&T)
began the process of developing its new five-year strategic plan. The
process involved careful analysis of the Quadrennial Homeland Security
Review (QHSR) and DHS priorities; review of past and current S&T
planning documents and external evaluations; and extensive input from
internal and external stakeholders. In addition, S&T leadership set
forth four principles--inclusivity, transparency, open-mindedness to
change, and responsiveness--to guide the process.
S&T established an internal steering committee to manage an
extensive outreach effort that included external stakeholder
interviews, a staff questionnaire, and two retreats comprised of
differing S&T staff groups.
S&T sought input from the DHS components and their federal, state,
and local partners regarding how S&T could improve its effectiveness
over the next five years. On behalf of S&T, the Homeland Security
Studies and Analysis Institute (HSSAI) conducted 20 interviews with
external stakeholders. In addition, S&T senior staff conducted a series
of external interviews with key stakeholders including congressional
staff. Interviews captured information on stakeholder perceptions of
S&T service and performance; effectiveness of S&T outreach and
communication; and how well S&T priorities aligned with its customers.
S&T conducted an online employee questionnaire to provide
leadership with an understanding of employee priorities and concerns.
Questionnaire results helped leadership identify areas of both strong
and variable performance as well as gain insight about future S&T
priorities and employee reaction to proposed S&T goals. HSSAI supported
the effort by conducting and analyzing the results of the employee
questionnaire.
S&T conducted two offsite retreats (referred to as Forum One and
Forum Two) to further harness the breadth of perspectives and expertise
at S&T. Forum One convened managers from across S&T divisions and
office units. Over the course of two days, participants engaged in
lively plenary discussions and worked within small breakout groups to
generate input on potential S&T mission, vision, goals and strategies.
The group also provided a baseline understanding of organizational
strengths and weaknesses, as well as internal and external forces
likely to shape the current and future homeland security environment.
Forum Two gathered senior management and leadership in a two-day
engagement. To open this discussion, representatives from Forum One
debriefed senior management on Forum One findings and recommendations
for action. Taking into account Forum One input, the Forum Two
participants further refined S&T's mission, goals, and key strategies.
S&T leadership reviewed Forum Two findings for final agreement and a
detailed final report summarized and assessed both Forum results.
The collective contribution of staff, external stakeholders and DHS
guidance, taken together has resulted in a five-year strategy that
frames the priorities for achieving the S&T mission and ensures that
S&T resources are aligned to efficiently attain plan goals.

Q3.  The FY 2012 budget includes $19 million for the Science and
Technology Directorate's natural disaster resiliency program to help
respond to and recover from large-scale natural disasters. To what
extent are these natural disaster-related efforts being coordinated
with other agencies working in this area, including agencies such as
the National Institute of Standards and Technology, the National
Science Foundation, the U.S. Geological Survey, and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency which make up the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program?

A3. The Science and Technology Directorate's (S&&) FY 2012 budget
request for natural disaster resilience includes projects such as the
National Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) Research and
Development (R&D) Plan, Standard Unified Modeling Mapping Integrated
Toolkit (SUMMIT), Resilient Electric Grid (REG), and Recovery
Transformer. S&T works closely with the appropriate agencies to assure
a coordinated approach to natural disaster resiliency. For example, the
National CIP R&D Plan is coordinated primarily with DHS Office of
Infrastructure Protection (OIP) National Protection and Programs
Directorate (NPPD). To prepare the Plan, S&T annually invites the
National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST), Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and National Science Foundation
(NSF) to participate in its development through the National Science
and Technology Council (NSTC) Infrastructure Subcommittee.
As a second example, the Integrated Modeling Mapping Simulation
(IMMS) Standard Unified Modeling Mapping Integrated Toolkit (SUMMIT) is
an integrated modeling and simulation based exercise and analysis
system in direct response to FEMA's requirements for an efficient,
economic, repeatable, and science based capability to conduct National
Level Exercises (NLE). IMMS/SUMMIT also supports state, local, and
regional preparedness exercises and provides interoperability with the
federal agencies. S&T works closely with FEMA as the source of
requirements and the users of the IMMS system. FEMA participates in all
program reviews and provides guidance on the direction of the program.
Additionally, the IMMS/SUMMIT team works with the Department of Energy
(DOE) National Laboratories and other agencies such as the Technical
Support Working Group, National Interagency Research and Development
Program for Combating Terrorism Requirements at Home and Abroad, to
share and leverage technologies to stay up to date on the state of new
technologies. For the NLE 2011 activities, the IMMS/SUMMIT Team has
worked very closely with USGS to integrate earthquake models into
SUMMIT.
S&T coordinates additional efforts, such as the Resilient Electric
Grid and Recovery Programs, DOE, Electric Research Institute (EPRI),
Edison Electric Institute (EEI), North American Electric Reliability
Corporation (NERC) and Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC).
These efforts also participate with FEMA via meetings/conferences such
as at the NERC Table Top Exercises and Space Weather Enterprise Forum.

Questions submitted by Representative Lamar Smith

Q1.  Given the concerns raised about border security during the
hearing, if one were to look at the entire $1.176 DHS S&T budget
request approximately, how much is directed toward those efforts?

A1. Approximately $43 million of the Science and Technology
Directorate's (S&T) FY 2012 Budget Request is directed to developing
border security technologies. S&T is also developing technologies with
multiple applications, which include use in border security. An example
is S&T's work to improve biometric technology, an approximately $12.2
million planned investment in FY 2012.

Q2.  In the strategic planning and goal setting discussions you
described in your testimony, how did you set funding priorities for the
seven HSARPA technical divisions?

A2. The Science and Technology Directorate (S&T) has implemented a
process of portfolio assessment and balancing. S&T has unified the
project evaluation and selection process so that it takes into account
project characteristics, strengths, weaknesses and performance
including measuring impact, transition, technical positioning, clarity
of purpose, customer involvement, and innovation. S&T will use the
portfolio assessment and balancing process each year to confirm
priorities and make necessary adjustments.

Q3.  Can you rank-order the seven technical areas for funding
priorities through established criteria for cost-benefit/bang-for-the-
buck? For example, if you had additional dollar to spend in only one of
the seven HSARPA technical divisions, where would you spend it? If you
had one less dollar, where would you propose to cut spending?

A3. The Science and Technology Directorate (S&T) has implemented a
portfolio assessment and balancing process. The process allows the
application of objective, repeatable evaluation criteria across all S&T
projects. S&T will use this process to identify projects with the
greatest likelihood of success that meet DHS priorities and component
mission requirements.
S&T is currently using its portfolio assessment process to assess
S&T projects and identify projects with the most likelihood of success.
Any increase in funding would first be applied those projects.
Conversely, any project with a low likelihood of success would be the
most likely to experience reduced funding.
Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Mr. Warren Stern, Director, Domestic Nuclear Detection
Office, Department of Homeland Security

Questions submitted by Chairman Ben Quayle

Q1.  How does DNDO prioritize and administer basic R&D activities? How
is the balance between conducting basic and applied research,
development, demonstration, testing, and evaluation decided?

A1. DNDO's research and development (R&D) activities for detection
systems focuses on addressing gaps in the Global Nuclear Detection
Architecture (GNDA); improving performance, cost, and operational ease
of use of detectors and systems; and transitioning successful
technologies to system development, acquisition, and deployment, or
commercialization. Our approach includes working with industry,
national laboratories, and academia, while encouraging teaming and
coordination with intra/interagency organizations (e.g., DHS/S&T, DOE,
DOD, DNI).
The GNDA gaps are identified in the GNDA Annual Report. These gaps
are then integrated with strategic needs as part of the DNDO Solution
Development Process (SDP) to develop a prioritized list of GNDA gaps
that DNDO will address. Through the SDP, DNDO determines which gaps
have technical or operational solutions and which gaps have no
immediate solutions. For prioritized gaps with immediate (
The Council recommends that passage of a
comprehensive DHS Authorization bill led through the U.S. House
Committee on Homeland Security with consultation from other
overlapping Committees, including this subcommittee. Once such
legislation is passed, the Department and the private sector
will have the information (and business certainty) they need to
better approach appropriate and necessary research and
development to effectively and efficiently meet the homeland
security needs and goals of the Department and the nation.

Second, the Congress should increase and provide necessary
enforcement tools to the Department's authority, specifically the
Science and Technology Directorate, to direct and coordinate homeland
security research and development efforts within the component parts of
DHS and across the Federal government. Currently the funding and
authority is spread across multiple operating components within DHS and
other Federal agencies. This results in dilution and duplication, and
equates to inefficiencies and waste that the government can ill afford.
There must be a concerted effort to insure that there is an
institutional system is in place--unaffected by whomever is currently
occupying a given leadership or implementation position--to assist the
private sector's need to know who to talk to at S&T in order to develop
the needed solutions.

The Council recommends the formation of a homeland
security research and development advisory council across the
government that could coordinate the consolidation of goals and
requirements development, and encourage greater communication
and identification of needs. This advisory council must include
expert representation from relevant Federal agencies, state/
local/tribal leaders and the private sector--led by the Under
Secretary of the Science and Technology Directorate. The Under
Secretary would be able to request homeland security research
and development funding from Congress, allocate funding
according to a long-term strategy and report to Congress and
the advisory council on progress. This process would ensure the
necessary linkage between the policy requirements and the
funding. This level of planning and visibility would
significantly improve the private sector's ability to forecast
the technology goals and needs of the Department.

Third, the Department should be encouraged by Congress to take the
steps to improve the direct relationship with the private sector. The
current level of engagement can best be described as ``hands off.''
Homeland security solutions providers are generally viewed as merely
`contractors' and `vendors' though a wealth of thought leadership and a
desire to invest huge amounts of time and dollars in developing and
having those solutions deployed and implemented is critical. Either
because of ethical concerns (that can be easily taken care of with
appropriate oversight) or a lack of appreciation for the thought
leadership the private sector can contribute, not including this level
of substantive engagement works against the Department's ability to
have its needs and goals be met by the private sector in a timely,
efficient and/or effective way.

The Council recommends clear pronouncements of the
long term technology goals linked to funding streams and points
of contact, as mentioned above. In addition, ``mission area
conferences/forums'' coordinated by the Department would allow
experts and decision makers to discuss long term strategy and
assist everyone in providing an effective strategic platform
allowing the best and the brightest to focus on key mission
areas such as aviation security, weapons of mass destruction,
pandemics, etc., and allow the engagement of all the critical
players in an iterative process to define, identify, develop
and implement a process that meets the goals and needs of
specific mission areas.

The Council additionally recommends an innovative
approach in research such as a public private partnership that
brings together the universities, national laboratories,
industry partners, and the Department.

We applaud your leadership in this area that will assist our nation
become safer and more secure while ensuring the innovative thought
leadership the Department needs to meet its goals are communicated.
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide you and the members
of Committee our views. Please contact me if the Council can provide
more information.
Appendix II:

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Testimony from Dr. Michael B. Silevitch, Robert D. Professor,
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering and Co-Director
Awareness and Localization of Explosives Related Threats (ALERT), A
Dept. of Homeland Security Center of Excellence, Northeastern
University



