- AN OVERVIEW OF THE NASA AERONAUTICS RESEARCH MISSION DIRECTORATE BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN OVERVIEW OF THE NASA

AERONAUTICS RESEARCH MISSION DIRECTORATE

BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, APRIL 26, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-80

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-060                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              PAUL D. TONKO, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Tennessee                        VACANCY
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics

HON. STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER JR.,          JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
Wisconsin                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia
MO BROOKS, Alabama
RALPH M. HALL, Texas
C O N T E N T S

Thursday, April 26, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Steven M. Palazzo, Chair,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Jerry F. Costello, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    11
Written Statement............................................    12

Witnesses:

Dr. Jaiwon Shin, Associate Administrator, Aeronautics Research
Mission Directorate, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    16

Marion Blakey, Chair, Aeronautics Committee, NASA Advisory
Council, and President, Aerospace Industries Association
Oral Statement...............................................    28
Written Statement............................................    30

Dr. Wesley Harris, Chair, Committee to Assess NASA's Aeronautics
Flight Research Capabilities, National Research Council, and
Charles Stark Draper Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    38
Written Statement............................................    41

Dr. John Tracy, Chair, National Research Council's Aeronautics
Research and Technology Roundtable, and Chief Technology
Officer and Senior Vice President of Engineering, Operations
and Technology, The Boeing Company
Oral Statement...............................................    48
Written Statement............................................    51

Discussion                                                           57

Appendix 1: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Jaiwon Shin, Associate Administrator, Aeronautics Research
Mission Directorate, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration.................................................    72

Ms. Marion Blakey, Chair, Aeronautics Committee, NASA Advisory
Council, and President, Aerospace Industries Association.......    81

Dr. Wesley Harris, Chair, Committee to Assess NASA's Aeronautics
Flight Research Capabilities, National Research Council, and
Charles Stark Draper Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology..........................    87

Dr. John Tracy, Chair, National Research Council's Aeronautics
Research and Technology Roundtable, and Chief Technology
Officer and Senior Vice President of Engineering, Operations
and Technology, The Boeing Company.............................    92

AN OVERVIEW OF THE NASA

AERONAUTICS RESEARCH MISSION DIRECTORATE

BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 26, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steven
Palazzo [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.007

Chairman Palazzo. The Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics
will come to order.
Good morning, and welcome to today's hearing entitled ``An
Overview of NASA's Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate
Budget for Fiscal Year 2013.'' In front of you are packets
containing the written testimony, biographies and Truth in
Testimony disclosures for today's witness panel. I recognize
myself for five minutes for an opening statement.
Today's hearing will examine NASA's fiscal year 2013
Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate budget request. I
first want to thank our witnesses for taking their time from
their busy schedules to appear before the Space and Aeronautics
Subcommittee. I realize you and your staff devoted considerable
effort preparing for your appearance, and I want to assure you
that your wisdom and expertise will be of immense help to our
Committee today and in the months and years ahead.
Aeronautics research and development, and the technologies
they spin off, are critical to our national security and to the
ongoing success of our Nation's aerospace industrial base,
which is our country's greatest source of exports. No other
enterprise has played a greater role producing innovative
aeronautics technologies than NASA.
Since its founding nearly 100 years ago as the National
Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, NASA technologies have made
possible today's domestic civil and military aerospace
industries. Across the spectrum, from fundamental research in
airfoil designs, materials research, and high-speed flight to
highly integrated systems research activities such as turbine
engines and innovations in air traffic management technologies,
NASA's cadre of scientists and engineers have helped sustain
the preeminence of American aerospace products, providing an
enormous source of high-paying jobs.
Our position, though, is being challenged by the emergence
of aerospace industries abroad. If our domestic industry is to
maintain leadership in the years ahead, it is essential that
research and development continue to produce more efficient,
cleaner and robust aircraft, not only to distinguish our
products from competitors, but to preserve the role of aviation
as the safest, fastest, most convenient and most
environmentally benign source of transport.
The growth of overseas competition occurs at a time when
NASA's aeronautics research and development funding is on the
decline and continues to shrink, chiefly for reasons related to
agency budgets. The fiscal year 2013 request of $551 million is
$18 million below current levels. Today's aeronautics spending
accounts for about three percent of NASA's overall budget,
compared to about seven percent of the budget in fiscal year
2000.
During the middle of the last decade, in an effort to
address declining budgets, NASA aeronautics research and
development was restructured to focus most of ARMD's portfolio
on foundational research. In the years since, the agency has
been able to leverage industry investment in a number of
research areas, but a report recently issued by the National
Research Council concludes that continuing down the path of
emphasizing foundational research no longer makes good sense,
and instead recommends that NASA reinstitute a cadence of
relatively inexpensive flight research programs that are of a
higher order of scale and sophistication than being currently
flown.
To offset the costs of flight research, the NRC proposes
that NASA phase out the majority of its lower-priority
aeronautics activities. The report also stresses the intrinsic
value of flight research, suggesting that the agency will be
able to mature technologies to a higher level, thus ensuring
their adoption by industry.
I look forward to discussing ARMD's research strategy and
the NRC report, and gaining our witnesses' insights on the best
path forward.
I want to again thank our witnesses for appearing here
today. We have an excellent group of experts, and I look
forward to hearing your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Palazzo follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Chairman Steven M. Palazzo

Good morning and welcome to today's hearing on NASA's FY 2013
Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate budget request. I want to
thank our witnesses for taking time from their busy schedules to appear
before the Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee. I realize you and your
staff devoted considerable effort preparing for your appearance, and I
want to assure you that your wisdom and expertise will be of immense
help to our Committee today and in the months and years ahead.
Aeronautics research and development, and the technologies they
spin off, are critical to our national security, and to the ongoing
success of our Nation's aerospace industrial base, which is our
country's greatest source of exports. No other enterprise has played a
greater role producing innovative aeronautics technologies than NASA.
Since its founding nearly 100 years ago as the National Advisory
Committee for Aeronautics, NASA technologies have made possible today's
domestic civil aviation industry. Across the spectrum from fundamental
research in airfoil designs, materials research, and high-speed flight
to highly integrated systems research activities such as turbine
engines and innovations in air traffic management technologies, NASA's
workforce of scientists and engineers have helped sustain the
preeminence of American aerospace products, providing an enormous
source of high-paying jobs.
Our position, though, is being challenged by the emergence of
aerospace industries abroad. If our domestic industry is to maintain
leadership in the years ahead, it's essential that research and
development continue to produce more efficient, cleaner, and robust
aircraft, not only to distinguish our products from competitors, but
also to preserve the role of aviation as the safest, fastest, most
convenient, and most environmentally benign source of transport.
The growth of overseas competition occurs at a time when NASA's
aeronautics R&D funding is on the decline and continues to shrink,
chiefly for reasons related to agency budgets. The FY 2013 request of
$551 million is $18 million below current levels. Today aeronautics
spending accounts for about three percent of NASA's overall budget,
compared to about seven percent of the budget in FY 2000.
During the middle of the last decade, in an effort address
declining budgets, NASA aeronautics research and development was
restructured to focus most of ARMD's portfolio on foundational
research. In the years since, the agency has been able to leverage
industry investment in a number of research areas, but a report
recently issued by the National Research Council concludes that
continuing down the path of emphasizing foundational research no longer
makes good sense, and instead recommends that NASA reinstitute a
cadence of relatively inexpensive flight research programs that are of
a higher order of scale and sophistication than being currently flown.
To offset the costs of flight research, the NRC proposes that NASA
phase out the majority of its lower-priority aeronautics activities.
The report also stresses the intrinsic value of flight research,
suggesting that the agency will be able to mature technologies to a
higher level, thus ensuring their adoption by industry.
I look forward to discussing ARMD's research strategy and the NRC
report and gaining our witnesses' insights on the best path forward.
I want to again thank our witnesses for appearing. We have an
excellent group of experts, and I look forward to hearing your
testimony.

Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize Mr. Costello for his
opening statement.
Mr. Costello. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I welcome our
witnesses here today and look forward to hearing their
testimony.
As Ranking Member of the House Transportation and
Infrastructure Aviation Subcommittee, I am very much aware of
NASA's importance to the U.S. aerospace and aviation,
particularly with the development of NextGen, the next
generation air traffic control system. Both Marion Blakey and I
worked very closely together on NextGen, and I am looking
forward to talking to her and asking her some questions about
NextGen.
NASA's contributions have will make possible significant
reduction in controller workload, and an estimated $300 million
per year in fuel savings with fleet-wide deployment at the
busiest airports. These contributions will save fuel and reduce
noise by enabling more efficient arrivals and are evidence of
how investments in research today will produce significant
dividends tomorrow.
Through the 2010 NASA Authorization Act, Congress tasked
NASA with maintaining a strong aeronautics research portfolio
that focused on fundamental research through systems research.
However, for the past several years, NASA has not received the
necessary funding to fulfill those objectives. This is
unfortunate, given NASA's integral role in enabling the
strength of the U.S. aerospace industry and, in partnership
with FAA, the safety of the flying public. Yet the industry
faces continued challenges such as increasing congestion of the
Nation's airspace system, maintaining safety in the face of
increasing travel demand, and mitigating the negative impacts
of aviation on the environment, whether noise, increasing
energy consumption, or harmful emissions.
NASA's aeronautics research programs are addressing these
challenges and have made significant progress. It is important
to learn more about this progress because these challenges are
at the crux of our transition to NextGen, and we must focus on
NextGen research that will meet these challenges.
Our witnesses today will probably agree with me that
carrying research to the level of maturity that allows the
results to be transitioned to the users, whether private or
public sector, is critical and requires a greater level of
investment than is currently being made. If promising
technologies and operational concepts aren't matured to the
point that they can be transitioned to the users for further
development or implementation, the Nation will never receive
the full benefit of the investment that it has made in
research. I understand that we are in tough economic times, but
I hope that this hearing will illustrate how NASA's aeronautics
research provides a sizable return on the taxpayer's
investment. So I am eager to hear from our witnesses today on
how we can ensure that NASA's aeronautics research remains
vibrant, relevant to the Nation's needs, and contributes to
maintaining U.S. leadership in the aviation world.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this hearing and I
look forward to hearing the testimony of our witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Costello follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ranking Minority Member Jerry F. Costello

Good morning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this important
hearing on the FY 2013 budget request, challenges, and priorities for
Aeronautics, and I welcome our witnesses.
Congress has asked NASA to maintain, and I quote from the 2010 NASA
Authorization Act, ``a strong aeronautics research portfolio ranging
from fundamental research through systems research.'' More importantly,
the Act stresses NASA's need to perform research in airspace capacity,
environmental sustainability, and aviation safety.
For the past several years, however, NASA has not received the
necessary funding to fulfill those objectives. This is unfortunate,
because NASA has an integral role in enabling the strength of the U.S.
aerospace industry and, in partnership with FAA, the safety of the
flying public.
As Ranking Member of the House Transportation and Infrastructure's
Aviation Subcommittee, I am keenly aware of NASA's importance to U.S.
aerospace and aviation. A strong aerospace industry enables the United
States to defend itself, compete in the global marketplace, maintain a
highly skilled workforce, and provide safe and secure travel to all
Americans. According to the latest figures available, aviation
manufacturing and services accounted for $445 billion in direct and
indirect economic activity in 2006. Aviation provided the Nation with a
trade surplus of $57.4 billion in 2008
The explosive growth of aviation over the last several decades has
also brought its own set of challenges. These include dealing with the
increasing congestion of the Nation's airspace system, the need to
maintain safety in the face of increasing travel demand, and the need
to mitigate the negative impacts of aviation on the environment--
whether noise, increasing energy comsumption, or harmful emissions.
NASA's aeronautics research programs are addressing these
challenges, and I hope to learn more about their progress, because
these challenges are at the crux of the major transition underway in
modernizing the Nation's air transportation system--NextGen. We must
focus on NextGen research that will ensure that the Nation's air
traffic management system will be able to meet anticiapted demand while
preserving safety and making the whole experience a lot more pleasant
than it is now for the average traveler. We also need to focus on
developing technologies that can make aircraft much more energy
efficient and produce lower levels of harmful emissions. And we need to
focus on research that will ensure that we maintain the high level of
safety that we have enjoyed in our aviation sector.
However, the continued decline in NASA's aeronautics funding is
making it difficult to maintain an aeronautics research program that
will be capable of stepping up to the challenges the Nation's aviation
sector is facing.
Our witnesses today will probably agree with me that carrying
research to a level of maturity that allows the results to be
transitioned to the users--whether private or public sector--is
critical and requires a greater level of investment than is currently
made. If promising technologies and operational concepts aren't matured
to the point that they can be transitioned to the users for further
development or implementation, the Nation will never receive the full
benefit of the investment that it has made in that research.
I understand that we are in tough economic times. But I hope that
this hearing will illustrate how NASA's aeronautics research provides a
sizeable return on the taxpayer's investment.
So I am eager to hear from our witnesses on how we can ensure that
NASA's aeronautics reseach remains vibrant, relevant to the Nation's
needs, and contributes to maintaining U.S. leadership in aviation.
Mr. Chairman, we must keep aeronautics a priority.
I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Costello.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time I would like to introduce our panel of
witnesses, and then we will proceed to hear from each of them
in order.
Our first witness is Dr. Jaiwon Shin, Associate
Administrator for NASA's Aeronautics Research Mission
Directorate, a position he has held for four years. Previously,
he served as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics for
four years, and he served in research and executive positions
at the Glenn Research Center in Ohio. Dr. Shin received a
doctorate in mechanical engineering from Virginia Tech.
Our second witness is Ms. Marion Blakey, Chair of the NASA
Advisory Council Aeronautics Committee. Ms. Blakey is currently
President and Chief Executive Officer of the Aerospace
Industries Association. Previously, she served as Administrator
of the Federal Aviation Administration as Chairman of the
National Transportation Safety Board and has held a number of
other senior positions in the executive branch. Ms. Blakey is a
graduate of Mary Washington College.
Our third witness is Dr. Wesley Harris, who chaired the
National Research Council's Committee to Assess NASA's
Aeronautics Flight Research Capabilities. Dr. Harris is the
Charles Stark Draper Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He served as head
of the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics at MIT from
2003 to 2008 and prior to that served as NASA Associate
Administrator for Aeronautics from 1993 to 1995. He earned his
bachelor's degree in aeronautics engineering from the
University of Virginia and his master's and doctorate degrees
in aerospace from Princeton.
Our final witness will be Dr. John Tracy, who serves as
Chair of the National Research Council's Aeronautics Research
and Technology Roundtable. Dr. Tracy is Chief Technology
Officer and Senior Vice President for Engineering, Operations
and Technology for The Boeing Company. Dr. Tracy has spent most
of his career at Boeing in a variety of senior management
positions. He received his Ph.D. in engineering from the
University of California-Irvine, and he is a Fellow of the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, the American
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and the Royal
Aeronautical Society.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each. After all witnesses have spoken, Members
of the Committee will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Shin, to present his
testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. JAIWON SHIN,

ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR, AERONAUTICS

RESEARCH MISSION DIRECTORATE,

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Shin. Chairman Palazzo and Ranking Member Costello and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
testify on NASA's aeronautics research program and the R&D
challenges in aeronautics.
Aviation is an integral part of our daily lives, a critical
part of the foundation of our economy, and a source of strength
in the global market. You are watching the visualization of
actual airline flights around the globe and in the United
States. This self-tour is called Future ATM Concepts Evaluation
Tool, or FACET, developed by NASA, which won NASA'S 2010
Government Invention of the Year. This is a very important
research tool that benefits both NASA and FAA for understanding
and designing a more efficient National Airspace System. In
addition, it provides all of us a true appreciation for the
complexity of today's air transportation system and challenges
we are facing.
Although the Nation's air transportation system is safe and
efficient, it faces several national-level challenges.
Improving mobility is a challenge because it requires
increasing capacity while saving fuel. Our Nation spent over
$70 billion in 2010 on aviation fuels. A related challenge is
to limit the environmental footprint of aviation. We must
reduce the emissions and minimize aircraft noise. Today's air
transportation system is the safest mode of transportation. It
is essential to ensure that the current safety level is
maintained and even improved as the system is becoming more
complex and automated.
This short video shows how flights are placed in holding
patterns as a storm system is moving into the very busy New
York airspace. Some of the holds start as far away as the
Pennsylvania and Ohio state line. Many of the incoming
international flights with very low fuel left on board zigzag
to delay their arrival into New York. Flight delays and
cancellations are costing the country an estimated $31 billion
each year.
To address these national-level challenges, the pressure
for technological improvement is mounting. The U.S. aviation
industry currently enjoys a strong position in the global
market. Technological superiority has been a key enabler,
bringing a positive trade balance of over $40 billion per year.
The aviation industry provides high-tech and high-paying jobs
that Americans are proud to have, accounting for nearly one
million jobs. The critical challenge and opportunity facing the
U.S. aviation industry is to retain this leadership in this
growing and increasingly complex market through infusion of new
technology.
NASA-developed technologies are in the DNA of almost all of
the modern civilian and military aircraft. NASA continues to
lay the foundation for the future of flight by exploring new
ways to manage air traffic, build more fuel-efficient and
environmentally friendly airplanes, and ensure aviation's
outstanding record. Investment in aeronautics technology
stimulates the economy and contributes to the Nation's global
competitiveness through the creation of new products and
services.
To accomplish this comprehensive research agenda, NASA's
budget provides $551 million to the Aeronautics Research
Mission Directorate in fiscal year 2013. Our research agenda
has been created in partnership with the broader aerospace
community. NASA, the FAA and five other federal agencies
together are defining the vision to the Next Generation Air
Transportation System, or NextGen, and establishing the roadmap
to get there. NASA aeronautics seeks to enhance implementation
and the capabilities of NextGen, innovating both air traffic
management and vehicles to achieve the full potential of
NextGen and lead the country with a vision and revolutionary
capabilities for the Nation's future aviation system.
To enhance implementation and the capabilities of NextGen,
NASA and the FAA have established research transition teams, or
RTTs, to develop joint research plans, fund our respective
portions, and facilitate handoff from NASA to FAA of the
research results. A recent GAO report identified RTTs as a
federal best practice for interagency collaboration.
One such RTT example is NASA's Efficient Descent Advisor
technology. By enabling airplanes to descend on the optimal
continuous path, this technology will save fuel and reduce
noise for neighboring communities. NASA estimates $300 million
in fuel savings per year if EDA is implemented fleet-wide at
the Nation's busiest airports. This type of capability not only
will help more efficient operations but also will show the
airlines the return on investment they can achieve by equipping
the aircraft with NextGen avionics.
NASA's innovative technologies such as lighter and more
durable composite materials and structures; low-emissions
combustor technologies; lightweight, durable, high-temperature
alloys for turbine sections of engines; and chevron nozzles to
reduce engine noise can be seen in new products entering the
market today. These new vehicles hold the promise of reducing
fuel consumption to 20 percent, longer operational life, and
lower maintenance costs, all due to infusion of advanced
technology.
Today, we are continuing our tradition of being the
innovative engine in aeronautics R&D to help achieve the full
potential of NextGen. For example, we are exploring new
aircraft configurations like the hybrid wing body shown in this
video, as seen from the chase-plane camera. Studies show that
this kind of new configuration, combined with lightweight
composite materials and advanced engines, can reduce fuel
consumption by 50 percent and reduce the noise footprint to
one-sixth of what it is today. We have successfully completed
over 90 flights with this X-48 test bed.
We are also leading the country today with a fundamental
understanding and new concepts to meet new emerging challenges
20 and 30 years from now. For example, NASA has funded
industry-academia teams to develop new vehicle concepts that
could achieve our aggressive efficiency and environmental goals
in the future. Those teams also created technology development
roadmaps to help NASA and industry to prioritize research
investments in the coming years.
NASA does not build aircraft engines or air traffic
management systems. Through our cutting-edge research, we
develop the concepts, tools, and technologies that enable
continuous innovation in aviation. We focus on priority
research challenges of greatest relevance to the community
where NASA has a unique contributing role and can have the
greatest impact. We invest in a balanced portfolio of
analytical research, research through high-fidelity
stimulation, ground testing and flight demonstration and
validation. We challenge the aeronautics community to think big
and to reach far by developing new concepts for flights such as
those represented on the table in front of me. U.S. companies
are well positioned to build on discoveries and knowledge
resulting from NASA research, turning them into commercial
products benefiting the quality of life for our citizens,
providing high-quality jobs, and enabling the United States to
remain competitive in the global economy.
Thanks so much for allowing me to represent NASA
aeronautics today. I will be glad to answer any questions you
may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shin follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.023

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Dr. Shin.
I now recognize Ms. Blakey for five minutes to present her
testimony.

STATEMENT OF MS. MARION BLAKEY,

CHAIR, AERONAUTICS COMMITTEE,

NASA ADVISORY COUNCIL, AND PRESIDENT,

AEROSPACE INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION

Ms. Blakey. Thank you, Chairman Palazzo and Ranking Member
Costello. I am delighted to be here with you and other Members
of the Committee. I also want to say how grateful I am to be
able to discuss NASA's aeronautics budget and programs for the
coming year because they are tremendously important.
I am Marion Blakey, President and Chief Executive Officer
of the Aerospace Industries Association, the Nation's premier
trade association for aerospace and defense manufacturers.
However, today I am not here representing AIA but representing
instead the chairmanship and committee of the NASA Advisory
Council's Aeronautics Committee.
The Aeronautics Committee reports to NASA's Advisory
Council and meets approximately three times a year. Our job is
to review NASA's aeronautics research and testing programs and
provide independent advice to the council and NASA leadership,
including Dr. Shin. Although we review NASA's programs with an
independent critical eye, we do have an excellent working
relationship with Dr. Shin and his staff, and we appreciate
their ongoing support.
Mr. Chairman, overall, ARMD provides important support to
the Nation's aeronautics research efforts. NASA takes the lead
in fundamental research into revolutionary aircraft concepts.
They take a comprehensive, integrated look at systems-level
solutions and they have unique testing facilities that really
exist nowhere else. They push the boundaries of our
aeronautical knowledge and transition new hardware and software
to the marketplace.
You ask whether ARMD research matches up with the needs of
industry. On balance, I do believe Dr. Shin's office is
pursuing the right research with the right priorities. Let me
touch on three examples, if I might: environmental research,
UAS integration, and NextGen programs.
NASA is heavily involved in research to make our aviation
system more environmentally friendly. U.S. manufacturers lead
the world in developing quieter, more fuel-efficient aircraft.
The industry has agreed to a cap on carbon dioxide emissions
from aircraft, which is called carbon-neutral growth, by the
year 2020. This is very aggressive and, believe me, is well
beyond what any other global industry has agreed to, and NASA
is helping us achieve those goals. For example, the
Environmentally Responsible Aviation, ERA, project is
developing advanced air vehicle concepts that could reduce fuel
burn by 40 percent, cut aircraft noise to stage IV levels and
below, and cut nitrous oxide emissions by 75 percent.
NASA aeronautics is also an important player in our efforts
to develop and certify alternative jet fuels. NASA is also
involved in unmanned aerial systems, UAS, and their integration
into the national airspace. As you know, recent legislation
requires that UAS systems be integrated into the NAS by the
year 2015--very aggressive. NASA is working with the FAA to
develop an interagency roadmap for UAS integration. Because
this work is evolving so rapidly, the aeronautics committee
that I chair established a special UAS subcommittee this past
December, and we are going to have more to say on this as the
committee works, but it wholeheartedly supports NASA's UAS
activities.
The third and final area that I would like to highlight is
NextGen. We see that there is real potential for NASA-developed
technologies to contribute to NextGen and tools like NASA's
Efficient Descent Advisor that Dr. Shin just mentioned, and the
Airborne Merging and Spacing tool are very important parts of
this effort. These technologies demonstrate NextGen's value in
our terminal airspace and they are mature enough to transfer to
operational use. In fact, EDA transitioned to FAA for
operational use just last November.
Mr. Chairman, for a final moment, let me address NASA's
fiscal year 2013 budget request. The request is $17.9 million
below the current year, including a reduction of $20 million.
This is in hypersonics research. In 2006, only six years ago,
hypersonics programs were funded at $70 million. Under the
President's budget for next year, it would be cut to $4.5
million. Maintaining an effective hypersonics program will be a
challenge if additional funding is not provided. Therefore, we
are very pleased to see that the House Appropriations
Subcommittee has just recommended that these cuts be rejected
because we believe hypersonics research is very important in
today's world.
Mr. Chairman, that completes my summary, and I look forward
to answering your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Blakey follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.031

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Ms. Blakey.
I now recognize Dr. Harris for five minutes to present his
testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. WESLEY HARRIS, CHAIR,

COMMITTEE TO ASSESS NASA'S AERONAUTICS

FLIGHT RESEARCH CAPABILITIES,

NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL,

AND CHARLES STARK DRAPER PROFESSOR

OF AERONAUTICS AND ASTRONAUTICS,

MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Harris. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Costello, Members
of the Committee, colleagues, I am Wesley Harris, Chair of the
National Research Council's Committee to Assess NASA's
Aeronautics Flight Research Capabilities. It is a pleasure to
come before you to speak to you about the work of the
committee. In 2011, NASA asked the National Research Council to
undertake a study of NASA's flight research capabilities. I am
here to report the results of that study.
Our committee consists of members of industry and academia,
former NASA aerospace officials, aircraft designers, test
pilots, and even an Apollo moon walker. We met several times
throughout 2011. We visited NASA centers involved in flight
research. We heard from numerous NASA and industry
representatives. We received extensive cooperation from the
agency for which we, the committee, are very grateful.
Many people may not be aware that unmanned aerial vehicles
are a vital part of America's national security and a highly
dynamic part of our aerospace industry, something and somewhere
that the United States remains the world leader. What few
people realize, however, is that during the 1990s, NASA played
a major role in making this happen by supporting the
development of multiple advanced UAV designs with efficient and
effective aeronautical flight research, thereby spawning
industry that is still active today. This was an industry where
the United States was behind. It now leads. NASA played a major
role in that, and we believe that NASA should receive
recognition for this achievement.
Flight research is only one part of a healthy aeronautics
research enterprise. It is absolutely vital. Flight research is
vital. It stands in value equal to that of wind tunnel testing,
to theory and simulation. A common-held misconception is that
flight research is something that comes at the end of a
research program. However, in many cases, it is necessary for
that research to occur, that is, flight research to occur in
the middle of the program. For instance, it is very common in
the aeronautics R&D world to update sophisticated computer
simulations based upon data collected by actually flying a
vehicle.
Since the middle of the past decade, NASA has dramatically
reduced its flight research to focus more on ground-based
investigations and activities in what NASA describes as its
fundamental research program. In the committee's opinion, most
flight research today can be characterized as limited in scope,
such as putting a new structure on or under the wing of an
existing airplane, for example, an F-15, or flying a small-
scale UAV. There are limited flight vehicles currently flying,
that is, aircraft specifically designed for research such as
the famed X planes. NASA has tremendous potential and capital
resources. However, the committee concluded that those
resources could be better used to conduct the kind of flight
research that would expect and inspire more future generations
of aeronautical engineers and that is required to make advances
on the frontiers of knowledge and functionality.
Our committee recommended that NASA should start from two
to five focused, integrated, high-risk, high-payoff programs
with total budgets of $30 million to $50 million per vehicle
per program over three years. In order to achieve progress of
fundamental aeronautics as well as other relevant related
military requirements, we recommend that these priority-focused
programs should be drawn from the high-priority research areas
identified in the 2006 NASA Research Council Decadal Survey of
Civil Aeronautics.
The committee concluded that additional funding for
aeronautics was not a prerequisite for NASA to be able to begin
to implement these recommendations. This can be done if the
agency begins to phase out its lower-priority aeronautics
activities, a process that we believe would facilitate
implementing two to three new vehicles. If aeronautics receives
additional funding, NASA could implement three to five
vehicles. Naturally, there is a tradeoff between size of
individual projects and the number that the agency could
pursue. An ambitious UAV project, for example, could be built
at the lower end of the range, while a more ambitious pilot
vehicle could be built at the higher end. We encourage the
agency to aim high in its ambitions.
The committee also recommended NASA aeronautics research
projects have a defined path to flight, essentially a roadmap
that indicates how they intend to conduct actual flight
research. The like of such roadmaps leads to many current
projects being canceled before they can be pursued to the
flight phase and their progress is subsequently lost.
Our committee notably did not recommend more money for
NASA's aeronautics program. However, we do believe that it
could benefit from additional funding. If NASA's budgets shift
only one percent from its total funding to aeronautics
research, it would enable substantial new research in several
vital areas of prime national interest. But in the current
fiscal environment, we also believe the aeronautics program
could benefit from reordering its priorities, establishing
focused goals and eliminating several lower-priority research
programs if flight research is to be a priority activity.
During the course of the study, the committee received
inputs from industry including Boeing, Lockheed Martin Skunk
Works, Aurora Flight Sciences and other companies. Despite what
I believe is a common perception that aeronautics is so mature
that NASA's research role should be limited, it is not an
attitude that we encountered when we receive input from
industry. Quite to the contrary, the attitude that industry
presented to us is one in which NASA can play a vital role in
helping to develop technologies that industry is too risk-
averse to address. They want NASA to be involved doing what
NASA does best and what they believe industry cannot do.
When asked the question of why should NASA be involved in
aeronautics research, particularly conducting flight research,
the committee concluded that industry in these economic and
political times cannot and will not take on full-cost risk of
moving technologies from laboratory to operations. NASA's
founding charter tasked the agency to help within this process.
NASA's role is to develop requirements and asset capabilities
for the next research vehicles and then work with industry to
build and test those aircraft. NASA is a highly capable
organization with many excellent people in the area of
aeronautics research. The contributions the agency has made and
continues to make in aeronautical research are significant and,
in my personal opinion, quite important. NASA's aeronautics
research directorate should be more broadly recognized for
these contributions. We were asked, the committee, to look at
the area of flight research, and having conducted our study, we
believe that we as a Nation have an opportunity to accomplish
much more in this research area of prime importance if given
the opportunity. If we give NASA the tools to take flight, we
believe, they will soar.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy
to answer any questions the Subcommittee might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harris follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.038

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Dr. Harris.
I now recognize our final witness, Dr. Tracy, for five
minutes to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN TRACY, CHAIR,

NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL'S AERONAUTICS

RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY ROUNDTABLE, AND CHIEF TECHNOLOGY
OFFICER

AND SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF ENGINEERING,

OPERATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY, THE BOEING COMPANY

Mr. Tracy. Good morning, Chairman Palazzo, Ranking Member
Costello, and Members of the Committee. On behalf of The Boeing
Company, I thank you for your continued support of NASA. You
have enabled NASA to create a balanced aeronautics portfolio
that continues to enhance the safety, reliability, and
efficiency of the world's aviation community. It is an honor to
participate on this distinguished panel and provide Boeing's
view on aeronautics research and the efforts of NASA's
Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate.
In my role as Chief Technology Officer for Boeing, I have
the great challenge to help our company identify how to invest
in our future. The topic is central to Boeing's existence as we
work to build on a 96-year legacy of technical achievement.
These investments enable our role as a global leader in
technology and innovation and ensure that our 172,000 employees
design and create cutting-edge products sought by customers
worldwide. We agree with the current NASA aeronautics policy,
which states that the agency should focus on safer, more
secure, efficient and environmentally progressive air
transportation system. We also support the strategy of NASA's
investments in the fundamental basic questions of how to
improve the technology of our process to more complex systems-
level questions of how best to integrate those new technologies
in operational concepts.
My written testimony fully addresses the three questions
that were asked by the Committee. For this hearing, I would
like to summarize these responses. I will begin by discussing
what I believe are the three biggest challenges in aerospace
and how well ARMD's research portfolio and resources address
them.
The first challenge is the wholesale change to the Air
Traffic Management System. We are working with partners
worldwide to improve today's global air traffic management
system in order to enhance aviation safety, improve operational
environmental efficiency, and enable continued growth in global
air travel. Our view of a transformational system is based on
satellite navigation that takes advantage of sophisticated
airplane flight management systems and other advanced
technologies. NASA is a critical member of the FAA NextGen
team, which is implementing a plan for the ongoing
transformation of the National Airspace System from ground-
based to satellite-based.
The second challenge is aviation systems and solutions that
are environmentally responsible. We at Boeing are committed to
improving the environmental performance of our operations, our
products and service and our factories. Our new 787 Dreamliner
airplane burns 20 percent less fuel and has a noise footprint
that is as much as 60 percent smaller than today's comparable
airplanes. The technology areas in which we are engaged include
fuel efficiency and noise reduction, sustainable aviation
biofuels, more efficient flight operations, and airplane
production and recycling. These areas align with the aims of
NASA's environmentally responsible aviation program, whose
goals include noise reductions of 42 decibels below current
levels, a 75 percent reduction in emissions, and a 50 percent
reduction in fuel burn below today's standards.
The third challenge is advanced testing and evaluation by
analysis and simulation for integrating complex aviation
systems and accelerating their verification and validation. A
future NASA focus on fundamental technologies and
multidisciplinary processes for faster and more efficient
design and certification through high-fidelity virtual testing
would increase opportunities to develop and field new vehicle
systems. Software development and certification is a large and
growing cost to civil aviation. This complex systems
engineering including verification and validation and
fundamental software engineering needs to be addressed through
long-term research.
Now I would like to address ARMD's strategy of supporting a
broad portfolio of research and the question as to whether ARMD
at its current funding levels would be more effective by
focusing its resources on high-priority activities such as
flights that Dr. Harris mentioned. In our view, NASA has done
an excellent job of addressing the critical subset of aviation
issues in its broad portfolio. The agency continues to work
with aeronautics stakeholders to prioritize current initiatives
within budget constraints. This fundamental research is the
seed corn that forms the basis for next-generation
capabilities. But in light of current funding levels, NASA has
been limited in its ability to do flight research, which is key
to the next step in maturing its fundamental research into a
dynamic flight regime. Based on historical costs associated
with flight demonstration, further emphasis in this activity
would need to be above and beyond the budget level that NASA
ARMD receives for this critical research.
Lastly, I would like to offer my perspective on whether
ARMD advances technologies to a state of maturity that enables
their adoption by industry. The commercialization of
aeronautics knowledge into products and services for the market
is the responsibility of private industry. NASA has played an
invaluable role in creating a foundation of knowledge that can
be deployed by industry to serve the public. For instance,
NASA, like its European counterpart, has been funding research
into improving the Air Traffic Management System. It is
critical, of course, that the collaborative NASA and industry
research activity be consistent with the obligations of our
trade treaties but there is much valuable work for NASA to
promote within these bounds.
In closing, funding NASA's aeronautics activity in a
balanced portfolio is, in our opinion, the right approach.
NASA's work supports efforts to advance the safety,
reliability, and efficiency of the Nation's aviation system and
the work NASA is doing for improving the environmental
footprint for aviation is absolutely critical for our country's
future. The balanced portfolio will help America strengthen its
global stature as a leader in technology.
I appreciate very much the opportunity to testify in front
of this Committee today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tracy follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.044

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Dr. Tracy, and I thank the
panel for their testimony. I will remind members that Committee
rules limit questioning to five minutes. The Chair will at this
point open the round of questions. The Chair recognizes himself
for five minutes.
Dr. Shin, I am going to have three related questions.
First, how does NASA ensure that its portfolio of fundamental
research projects remains relevant and that research projects
don't become stale? Second, what mechanism does NASA have in
place to determine when fundamental research should be advanced
to a higher level or, alternatively, to cease further
investment in research results if they are disappointing? And
third, as you look across your portfolio, what is an
appropriate balance between fundamental and higher integrated
levels of research?
Dr. Shin. Thank you, Chairman. I think, on the first
question, we have now several national-level guidance documents
starting from national aeronautics R&D policy and plan, which
we as a Nation never had for almost 100 years since the Wright
brothers powered flight was accomplished. So that policy and
plan was developed by all the departments and agencies that
have any stake in aeronautics R&D and certainly NASA, DOD, FAA
and Commerce and Homeland Security are pretty major players
there. So out of those goals and objectives identified in the
national-level document, we have constructed our research
portfolio aligned with that and also we have Joint Planning and
Development Office, the JPDO, which is consisted of seven
Federal Government agencies. So I think, in terms of
identifying the national challenges, many of the witnesses
spoke about the same kind of areas for national needs--safety,
NextGen, environmental impact and energy-efficient aircraft. I
would be happy to report to you, Chairman, the NASA programs
are well aligned with those national-level challenges. To
further the relevance, we have reorganized aviation safety
program and airspace systems program in the last three years
and we are also reorganizing, in the process of reorganizing
fundamental aeronautics program this year. So we are far more
focused and streamlined and much more relevant to users' needs,
and there are ample evidence that we are transferring
technologies to the users. So a longwinded answer but that
would be my response to the first question.
And higher-level activities, if we don't produce intended
results from sort of low-technology readiness-level research,
how do you phase that out or cancel that activity? I think that
was your second question. I would like to describe our research
portfolio and endeavor as organic. Certainly, the research
needs to be nimble because we don't know how the research will
pan out. That is the major high risk of high-payout research.
So we do have a rigorous review process both at the research
centers and headquarters periodically, and as I am speaking, we
are actually conducting a six-month review at headquarters of
all our projects. So going through these reviews, we make sure
that progress is being made, and if we don't make the intended
progress, we certainly take the lessons out of it and then we
phase the activities. We have done many of those to date.
In terms of balance between fundamental research and a
little higher level of research, I believe within the given
budget that Congress graciously allowed us to have $570 million
this year. Within that budget, I believe the proportion between
fundamental research and integrated system-level research is
about right from all the community inputs and discussions we
had, and given my experience, having been in aeronautics for
20-some-odd years, I think it is very important to note that
maintaining fundamental research is crucial for the future of
our aviation industry as Dr. Tracy pointed out, that you don't
want to eat your seed corn to beef up higher-level research if
the funding is such that you have to make a balance. Sorry for
the long answer.
Chairman Palazzo. No, thank you, Dr. Shin.
I now recognize Mr. Costello for five minutes.
Mr. Costello. Mr. Chairman, thank you. We all recognize
that we are facing many challenges with the federal budget
because of deficits, but I think we also recognize, at least
most people in the industry, that the historical decline of
NASA's aeronautics budget has had a negative impact on the
industry. And I am wondering if the aeronautics program at NASA
was given sustained funding over a period of time as opposed to
just an infusion of funds in one fiscal year, what would be the
most productive use of the additional funding? And I would ask
Dr. Shin, what would you do with the additional funding if you
knew that you were going to see an increased funding level over
the next five years as opposed to the infusion of funds one
year and then a reduction the following year? What would the
number one priority be?
Dr. Shin. Thank you, Ranking Member Costello. I think the
number one priority would be in my view, again, doing more
flight research and bringing X plane into our research mix. We
do have a few test paths, but I think we can certainly do more.
So that would be my most priority, sir.
Mr. Costello. Ms. Blakey, I would ask the same question of
you. One, first, would you agree with most in the industry that
the historical decline of aeronautical funding has had a
negative impact, number one, and number two, if, over the next
five years or so, if we saw an increased level of funding to
NASA, what do you think the number one priority should be for
the agency to do with the additional funding?
Ms. Blakey. Certainly there is no doubt about the fact that
our technological advances, which is what this country is known
for, would have gone much faster, and it is hard to know what
we don't know, what we didn't do because of the rather
precipitous decline in NASA's budget. As we all understand,
they were well above $1 billion for many years and over $2
billion, and now we are in the $500 million range. You cannot
have that kind of reduction without having a major impact in
terms of our innovation and technologies across the aviation
and aeronautics industry. Flight research is critical. There is
nothing that substitutes for building it and flying it.
And in the area that I highlighted, hypersonics, there is
tremendous potential. I will show you something because I saved
this. This is a brochure from 1986, and it shows our plans for
the national aerospace plane. It is a beautiful thing, and this
is what our country had in mind and President Reagan called
for, but we simply were not able to engage in this at the time,
and hypersonics still offers a potential for continent-to-
continent rapid flight, propulsion into space and really
inspiring young people in a way that we haven't seen since the
Apollo program. So I would suggest, let us not leave this
behind; it is a part of fundamental research and it should be a
part of flight test.
Mr. Costello. Let me ask another question of you, Ms.
Blakey. You and I have worked together on NextGen through the
Aviation Subcommittee. One of the problems that the FAA has
had, and it has been cited as to why NextGen has fallen behind
on the schedule, on the proposed schedule, by both the FAA and
the JPDO, is that the FAA underestimated the complexities of
the software development to implement NextGen. With NASA's vast
knowledge in developing automated systems, I wonder if there is
anything in your opinion that NASA could be doing to help the
FAA with this problem?
Ms. Blakey. Well, I will be honest about this, because I
was there at the early stages of NextGen when we were looking
for more research capability out of NASA, and because NASA at
that point had a very strong emphasis on fundamental basic
research and not taking it to the higher TRL levels, we found a
gap, and I talked to Mike Griffin about it and others at the
time because I think that would have helped FAA advance itself
much more quickly.
I will say this. As you know, in my current position, I
have reason to work with a lot of very fine minds in the
defense arena, and I have heard more and more their comments
about NextGen, saying it is the most complex development
program they have run across, and you know what the military in
this country has done. So it is not easy. I do want to caution
on that, and I think there are inevitably, therefore, schedule
slips that occur.
But that said, NASA's current approach to transferring
software that works in terms of a lot of the capabilities of
NextGen, it really is a vital asset. So I hope we will be able
to keep it up.
Mr. Costello. Dr. Harris, you mentioned in your testimony
that the Committee didn't recommend additional funding. I
wonder, going back to my first question, if the agency knew
that over the next five years that they were going to receive
sustained funding and increase, what would be the number one
priority in your opinion? Where should they direct that money?
Dr. Harris. Thank you for the question. The Committee was,
I thought, very firm in its position in terms of a focus on
flight research that would lead to substantial advancement of
aeronautics for the less. We examined three cases in depth. We
also looked across all of the programs within ARMD. We firmly
believe that resources should be directed toward those highly
focused, highly integrated projects that require flight
research that would lead to a spawning of an industry.
For example, business jets. How do we move NASA to flight
research to ensure that we can fly within limits of the sonic
boom that it is not a nuance or a noise inhibitor? That, we
believe, is a major breakthrough that we are on the edge of,
and if we move forward with that and similar kinds of research,
we will enable the development of more high-skilled, high-wage
jobs, more market share for our industry, a positive return to
our taxpayers' investment.
If NASA were to obtain sustained funding, it should
continue to focus or should focus on high-payoff flight
research that leads to an advancement of our industry.
Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am a
bit perplexed by this; we all are. We have half the budget for
the federal budget is being borrowed now. We are spending that
much more than we are taking in. It is over $1 trillion a year.
So I imagine everybody in this room knows that something has to
be done, and it seems that every time you are a member of a
committee that focuses on one aspect of the budget, it is
always the other guys who need to be cut.
I think $500 million is a lot of money, and I know it is
less than what we had before. It was less than the $1 billion
that we had before. First of all, let me ask Dr. Shin. How many
people will be laid off as a result of this?
Dr. Shin. No one would be laid off, sir, because the
current budget has been stable for the past three or four
years. So we have budgeted or constructed our work and the work
force to the budget. So no one will be laid off. This budget
reduction that some of the witnesses mentioned happened years
ago.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. So actually the reduction from $1
billion to $551 million will not result in a layoff of federal
employees?
Dr. Shin. No, sir.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, I think that is important. I mean, I
don't understand why it is when the private sector has to cut
back that people are let go, realizing that they can no longer
afford their work, but we can't seem to let go of any federal
employees.
Let me ask about the private sector here, especially Boeing
company. First of all, if Boeing was going to have this
reduction in the amount of money available to Boeing, I would
imagine there might be a few layoffs, is that correct?
Dr. Tracy. Mr. Rohrabacher, in a commercial setting, I
think that is true. If there are reductions in budget, then you
have to find ways to balance the books.
Mr. Rohrabacher. You might even reduce the number of
projects that you were working on.
Dr. Tracy. Yes, sir, that is true. I am an engineer, not an
economist, sir, so forgive me. My feeling is that the NASA
budget that we are talking about here is an investment to try
and drive, from our perspective, a large sector of the economy.
I believe that commercial aviation is probably the largest
contributor to positive balance of trade, and it literally is a
significant fraction----
Mr. Rohrabacher. No doubt about it.
Mr. Tracy [continuing]. Of major post-domestic product. So
that is why we are interested, because this research does make
a great contribution to that.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, I am not sure. If we can actually
cut the budget and you don't have to let anybody off, I mean,
this is--I know you are an engineer, and engineers, maybe if
you could make the same thing with fewer people, I mean, we are
keeping the same people. Usually you would say you are going to
have to be doing less. If you have less money, you have less
personnel.
Let me just suggest that there is a lot of research going
on in the private sector, and maybe Ms. Blakely could tell us
about that, research that is going on in the private sector.
Can they pick up, can companies like Boeing and others pick up
hardware costs? It sounds like to me if you are not going to
reduce the number of people working, what we are reducing is
wind tunnels and things such as that. Is it possible that the
private sector could pick up those capital costs that are now
being funded by the government?
Ms. Blakey. Well, Congressman Rohrabacher, as you know from
a number of the companies that you know very well, they do
tremendous amounts----
Mr. Rohrabacher. They do.
Ms. Blakey [continuing]. Of R&D work. And they also work in
close partnership with NASA. They lease the use of those wind
tunnels, pay good private-sector money to be able to take
advantage of what essentially is an investment the government
made to make this early innovation happen. Tremendous amounts
of R&D go from our companies into the air and fly. What they
are not able to do though is this very fundamental basic
research which is where government always has had an important
role. That then translates to the kind of technological
advantage we enjoy worldwide. But it has always come, almost
always, and I won't say always because there were the Wright
brothers. I don't think they were working on a government
grant. But the fact of the matter is a great deal has come from
the military's research and from research at NASA.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Mr. Chairman, I would suggest that while I
am very supportive of the development technology, that my guess
sometimes when people cut back, sometimes it makes different
operations demand more efficiency. That is what happens in the
private sector. It is a little bit disconcerting to know that
we are cutting back, and there isn't any change in personnel.
That does not reflect to me the way things should go.
And one last note and that is if we spent $551 million on
this research, my guess also is that we are providing a subsidy
to those countries that steal our technology and steal the
research. Thus, we are not just carrying the load for our own
businesses. We are carrying the load for China's new space
program. Hunky dory. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Shin. Sir, could I offer just one thought?
Mr. Rohrabacher. Sure, go right ahead.
Dr. Shin. I want to make----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Proceed.
Dr. Shin. Yes, I want to make sure that my response earlier
was not misunderstood. When aeronautics budget was close to $1
billion or a little bit over $1 billion back in late 1990s, of
course we had a lot more people working on aeronautics. So I
want to make sure that the response that I provided to you,
sir, was for $570 million level budget, that has been going on
three or four years. And because of that, the reduction
happened many years ago and the number of workforce working on
aeronautics has come down quite a bit.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yeah, I don't quite understand that. I
thought we were talking about budget reduction here.
Dr. Shin. That budget reduction happened many years ago,
several years ago.
Mr. Costello. I wonder if my friend from California would
yield?
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, actually, it is the Chairman's time.
Mr. Chair.
Chairman Palazzo. We are being pretty flexible with the
five-minute rule today, so if Mr. Rohrabacher wants to----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Sure, go right ahead.
Chairman Palazzo [continuing]. Give you what time he has
left.
Mr. Costello. I want to clarify a point here just for my
information, because I think Mr. Rohrabacher makes some pretty
good points here, but one is that this isn't a $500 million
reduction from one year to the next. This has gone back three
or four years. Two, I don't know the level of funding that NASA
uses out of when you were at $1 billion or if you are at $551
million. How much of that money actually stays in the agency
and supports employees in-house versus what you contract out to
many private-sector companies that are members of Ms. Blakey's
association? Am I wrong about that? Is all the $551 million, if
that is what the funding level is, does that all stay in house
or you contract out with Boeing and many other companies to do
research with NASA, is that correct?
Dr. Shin. Yes, that is very correct. We do support in-house
capability because that is one of the charters for NASA
aeronautics. But roughly I think about 40 to 45 percent goes
out to out-of-house to certainly industry and universities and
others.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize the gentlelady from
Maryland, Ms. Edwards.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to our witnesses
today. I just want to point a couple of things out for the
record, that in 2004 the research budget was roughly seven
percent of the overall agency budget, and by this time, it has
leveled off to three percent. That is more than double a
reduction in the research budget, at a time when in 2006 the
Decadal survey actually recommended enhancing areas of research
that we are focused on today, and I think that that is an
important reminder to us, that we had a Decadal survey done of
the needs in civil aeronautics with recommendations, and we
have done exactly the opposite in terms of funding those areas
of recommendation that we paid for in 2006. So I don't really
get that but I offer that for the record.
Dr. Harris, in your testimony, you indicated the maturity
of the industry, and I think that that is true. But the
question for me really is about the future of our leadership in
aeronautics and in whether we are able to, in a robust way,
develop new and innovative technologies that are dependent on
core research to continue our competitive advantage. And so to
me these are questions that are really about the future.
And I think, you know, going to some other issues that are
not the jurisdiction of this committee about expanding and
making permanent research and development tax credits and
enhancing a domestic manufacturing credit that I think would
greatly benefit both the stability of what we are doing in
research but also the growth in aeronautics. Now, that said,
there is something about fundamental core research that each of
you has offered testimony for our record. Dr. Tracy, I think in
your testimony you indicate that Boeing spent about $3.9
billion in R&D. How much of that is fundamental research?
Dr. Tracy. Congressman Edwards, that amount you mentioned
does include both product development and technology. We don't
publically break out the split between the two, but it is a
substantial number measured in billions, the amount that goes
toward technology.
Ms. Edwards. But that goes toward fundamental research,
toward basic research?
Dr. Tracy. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Edwards. And so would you say, though, Ms. Blakey, that
in the industry, I mean, as you have indicated, that part of
the reason that you are able to spend, that a lot of the
industry is able to spend money on its core research is also
because you are dependent on the research that comes out of
NASA and out of the aeronautics research, and if that had to be
then put onto the backs of the industry, is it your view, Ms.
Blakey, that the industry would be able to do all of that?
Ms. Blakey. Well, Boeing, of course, is in a very powerful
position to make these kinds of investments. But remember, the
industry is populated by thousands and thousands of smaller
businesses. Innovation in this country is driven significantly
by small businesses, but they are not able to do the kinds of
things that involve big investments and test facilities and
work at the most academic level that really is undertaken by
NASA with the university community. That is not what a small
business can do, but they can pick up the advances there and
then bring them into the marketplace. And that is what is a
very exciting chain that goes on.
Ms. Edwards. Dr. Tracy?
Dr. Tracy. Congresswoman Edwards, Dr. Harris talked about
the maturity of the field, because it is 100 years old, but
there is no shortage of things to work on. The progress that we
are making today in aviation, aeronautics in particular, is
absolutely outstanding and it is astounding. And so we count on
being able to work jointly with NASA to investigate some of the
higher-risk things. It probably won't see commercial use for 20
years, but we need to have work going on them today to make
sure that the pipeline is filled, and some of these very
advanced technologies will be ready when companies like ours
are able to commercialize them.
Ms. Edwards. And I think that you draw the same conclusion
that if we don't do that, we will look 100 years down the line
and not have made the kinds of advancements that will actually
allow our domestic industry to be at the top of its game the
way that it is today, isn't that right?
Dr. Tracy. Yes, ma'am, I agree completely.
Ms. Edwards. And then I just want to ask Dr. Shin about the
hypersonic research program because there has been an
indication that perhaps the Department of Defense would then
assume some of that or all of that research agenda. Can you
tell me whether you really believe that that is appropriate and
perhaps, Ms. Blakey as well, if you could indicate whether
there have been some issues or challenges with fully marrying a
DOD agenda with what needs to take place in the civilian
sector.
Dr. Shin. Yes, Congresswoman. I think the first point I
would like to convey to you is our relationship with DOD in
hypersonic area has been very prosperous in the past couple
decades, to say the least. So with the priority exercise that
we have gone through with the NASA budget in proposing
reduction in hypersonic doesn't mean that we didn't know each
other and didn't work together and all of a sudden something
will fall off the cliff.
So I will propose one good example which was U.S. Air Force
program called X-51, and that was built upon the technological
accomplishments that NASA made through X-43 program. I am sorry
to throw all these numbers. But X-43 for the first time in
history demonstrated that we can fly supersonic and self-
ignited combustion could happen in a hypersonic regime. So
someone mentioned to me, an expert in the hypersonic area
mentioned to me, that igniting the combustor in this hypersonic
speed would be like trying to light a candle in the hurricane.
I think that is a very good analogy.
So we flew 10 seconds in hypersonic, self-ignited mode.
U.S. Air Force built upon that technology, and now X-51 flew
minutes and especially on not hydrogen fuel but carbon fuel,
hydrogen fuel that is a conventional fuel, and be able to build
upon the technology.
So to getting to your question, we have been in good
collaboration with DOD for years, so with this reduction on the
NASA part, certainly the partnership needs to be elevated into
higher level, more like reliance level. But we have been
discussing--I personally am engaged in several discussions with
officials in DOD and Air Force, and we are doing our best not
to damage the collaboration, certainly with DOD and for the
competency for the country.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Blakey. One thought to add to that from the vantage
point of looking at the situation of DOD very closely as we do
every day, the Budget Control Act has taken $487 billion out of
the DOD budget. The upcoming prospect of sequestration is
another half-trillion. We know that the operational aspects of
DOD's budget will continue to require to be funded and that
therefore means that it is the investment accounts, the R&D,
which is where those cuts will take place. I believe, as Dr.
Shin outlined, that there is the best intent in the world to
try to keep so much going that supports it. But in the reality
of the world that we are facing in terms of DOD's own budget,
it is an extremely bleak picture. So I think we should bear
that in mind.
And things such as you are highlighting, the R&D tax
credit, that could make a real difference. The United States
has dropped to 16th in the world in terms of the way we support
private-sector R&D. So looking outside the federal budget but
trying to be supportive, I would urge this Committee to keep
that in mind.
Chairman Palazzo. Go ahead, Doctor.
Dr. Harris. Mr. Chairman, may I speak to Congresswoman
Edwards' concern regarding DOD's support for hypersonics? First
of all, of all the flight regimes, it is hypersonics that
requires, that cannot make advances without flight research.
There is no way you can advance hypersonics with ground testing
facilities or computations, simulations alone. Flight test is
absolutely critical.
In terms of the budget or the responsibility being shifted
entirely to DOD, I would recommend that that is not a capital
idea, that NASA needs to maintain a capability in hypersonics.
Why? It is such a critical field that once you leave it, the
cost to rebuild it is enormous and it costs money as well as
time. I firmly believe NASA should maintain a presence in
hypersonics.
Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize Mr. Clarke from Michigan.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate it. Just a
general question to any panel member. It is regarding
opportunities that you see in NASA's aeronautics research that
could be easily commercialized, any low-hanging fruit that can
help us create jobs in the near future.
Dr. Harris. May I take that one? Sir, the committee that
reviewed NASA's flight research capabilities identified an area
of great opportunity, mainly the development of a supersonic
business jet. The requirement in terms of flight research is to
demonstrate a reduction in the impact of the sonic boom. We
feel that the Nation, industry and NASA has progressed to a
point where we are able to do that in a reasonable length of
time. That would generate an opportunity to build business
jets, a new industry, one that would lead to high-skilled,
high-wage jobs that would have a tremendous impact on our
economy, and I would say would offer opportunities to sell such
airplanes worldwide.
Mr. Clarke. Dr. Harris, is there anything that needs to be
done to help advance this commercialization?
Dr. Harris. Well, yes. I think we have to demonstrate
through flight tests that we can fly supersonic biz jets over
land without being a nuisance in terms of the sonic boom
produced. And that is a flight test requirement that it has to
be demonstrated in flight, and I think NASA should have the
opportunity to demonstrate that.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you. Anyone else have any suggestions?
Ms. Blakey. There is tremendous potential in the unmanned
aerial systems in domestic use of air space, cargo, all sorts
of security, homeland security monitoring. This is an area that
we will see a proliferation of vehicles if we could just get
over a few problems that we are trying to solve right now. So
that would be one.
And I would also say alternative jet fuels that NASA is
working on. There is a huge market there because we are going
to be moving to that, and we would like to see that those
companies in distribution come out of the United States.
Mr. Clarke. What are the difficulties you think we need to
overcome right now to best commercialize that research?
Dr. Shin. I think as Dr. Harris and Ms. Blakey mentioned,
NASA aeronautics has been really diligently working with
industry to make sure that technologies are transferred
effectively and timely. During my oral testimony, we showed
many of the NASA technologies that have been transferred to
industry and turned into commercial products for the past
several decades. We are continuing that role, and Ms. Blakey
mentioned about UAS. We have a project, started last year,
trying to make the UAS access to national air space, civil UAS.
That is what I am talking about, not military UAS, and so many
of the NASA capabilities and concepts and tools will be able to
work with FAA to help speeding the access of UAS into NASA. And
now the opportunities are just really limitless there, as Ms.
Blakey just alluded, that from high altitude, long endurance,
observation to--some people even conceive even a pizza
delivery, but I think that is a little too far-fetched.
But the opportunities are just boundless. So I think that
is what we would like to do. We push the boundary and develop
new capabilities to open up the market so our country stays
ahead of all this aviation sector, not just dwelling in what we
do best right now, but keep on investing in the future, as
Congresswoman Edwards so accurately pointed out, pushing the
boundary and putting it out there in the future so industry can
stay and remain in the leadership position for decades to come.
Mr. Clarke. When it comes to the development of these
unmanned surveillance vehicles, what is the timeframe that you
think we--how long would it take before this could be
commercialized?
Dr. Shin. Yes. So our project has a plan to make impact
from 2015 to next 10 years. So that is our target, and we do
need to remember that DOD has an enormous amount of experience
operating UAS. So we got to build upon that experience and
knowledge to transition to a civil UAS, and I think working
with FAA, DOD, and also Homeland Security, we are up to the
task, and we certainly will do our best to make that impact
from 2015 and out.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Clarke. At this time we
are going to go into a second round of questions, and I now
recognize myself for one question.
There is a lot of discussion this week on certain cyber
security bills. When you talk to a lot of our military leaders,
they say the things that keep them up at night is a short list,
and cyber security and cyber warfare is one of those.
So Dr. Tracy, some of your comments about the future system
architecture designs in your testimony was noteworthy. You go
on to say current and future generation aircraft, their flight
management systems and ATM systems, are highly dependent upon
highly complex software and hardware, digital system to
operate. What is being done today to protect current
generations of automation systems, and how severe a threat is
cyber security? And where does our Nation's expertise reside
for this type of research?
Dr. Tracy. Chairman Palazzo, thank you for the opportunity
to talk about cyber security. We and all of the industry take
the threat as very serious. We invest significant resources in
understanding what the threats are, where they are coming, and
we work very hard to mitigate them. The threats could be toward
our infrastructure, which is used to run the company or any
other company, and then also you have to always be on the alert
that people aren't trying to attack systems that you might have
on the airplane.
We go to a great extent to verify that the network
architecture on all our platforms is secure and that software
can't be injected into those systems through some unapproved
path.
We work jointly with the Department of Defense and other
government agencies to both understand the threat and come up
with mitigation plans for taking care of those threats in both
our infrastructure and in our platforms.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Costello
for a question.
Mr. Costello. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Dr. Shin, you and
Ms. Blakey touched on the unmanned aircraft system, the UAS.
They are playing more of a role every day in public missions
with border patrol, military training, weather monitoring, and
we are seeing companies that are being created and jobs being
created today and for the future for our unmanned aircraft. As
you know, after 23 extensions, we finally have an FAA
reauthorization bill that was passed by the Congress and signed
into law by the President, and it requires the FAA, by the
middle of next month, to determine how to expedite the
licensing process of certain government unmanned aircraft. But
it also requires the FAA to develop a plan later this year, a
comprehensive plan, for the integration of private, unmanned
aircraft systems into the U.S. airspace system by 2015.
So my question, Dr. Shin, is NASA currently working with
the FAA in order for them to implement what is required under
the FAA reauthorization bill, and is there anything that you
are doing now or can be doing in the future to meet these
timelines?
Dr. Shin. Yes, sir. A NASA project is working on separation
assurance, piggybacking and collaborating with--the DOD has
been working very hard, and also communication. We talked about
cyber security a little bit, and I think UAS has a big
importance when keeping that communication line secure and safe
and also the certification end of it that we are working with
FAA to support that. And then also human factors, man and
machine interaction in those areas.
So these are all very critically important areas, research
areas, that NASA is working to provide support to the community
and in particular FAA. But I am also a member to UAS executive
committee as you are well aware of. The DOD, FAA, Homeland
Security and NASA, the founding members, and I think we have
made a lot of progress, the special permit process between DOD
and FAA, and also NASA has been working with FAA, UAS office
and the safety office there to make sure that we are connected
in identifying the critical issues that FAA has been working
on.
So as an example, last year on the JPDO's oversight,
Department of Defense, NASA and FAA and a couple other agencies
also participated. But three agencies were the main workhorses
to generate this interagency, national UAS research,
technology, and demonstration roadmap. So that is a very
important piece of work that will guide all these participating
members in the Federal Government. But we have to build upon
that. That shouldn't be the end of our interagency efforts.
So through X-COM, through JPDO, I think there are
structures in place for our government agencies to work
together.
Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize Mr. Rohrabacher for a
question.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much. First of all, Ms.
Blakey, what is the depreciation schedule for your industry in
terms of purchasing new equipment, new machines?
Ms. Blakey. I will have to get back with you for that. I
don't have it.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Maybe our gentlemen?
Dr. Tracy. Same answer. I will have to get that.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let me just note, depreciation schedules
are really important for innovation, and perhaps even more
important than a direct subsidy to a specific company for a
specific research job. It is an enabler, and I understand that
the Japanese have a depreciation schedule that permits them to
write off the cost of new equipment and machines immediately
and that our companies are faced with a much greater burden.
But I certainly would like to know the statistics on that.
There is some reform that we could do that would have some
dramatic impact and not have a major impact on the budget.
Let me suggest this, Mr. Chairman. We are sort of taking a
microscope and looking at the impact of trying to balance the
budget. Well, maybe we don't need a microscope. Maybe we just
sort of step back and take a look at the picture here, and I
don't think that we would have any trouble financing any of
these research projects and keeping all of this equipment that
we need to help our private sector verify the technological
things, that they are research projects. They are the wind
tunnels and the various electronics that provide basic research
verification, et cetera. I don't think we would have a lack of
money if we perhaps weren't spending $3 billion a year on a
huge, huge rocket that may never go into service. $3 billion.
The SLS Orion project which will take an incredible amount of
time, and if you look at other NASA projects of this scope, we
will probably be way over budget. Anyway, just take a step back
because we have this mammoth program staring us right in the
face, and that is what is draining the money here. It is not
even a balanced budget. It is having grandiose plans when we
can't take care of fundamentals.
We also have a telescope project now that is almost $700
million a year. That is over $3.5 billion being extracted out
of the NASA budget. These are huge expenditures, and while I
certainly support the telescope and we have seen these
incredible expansions of the actual cost that we were promised
on these things.
Anyway, I would hope that we are a little bit more cautious
when we get ourselves involved in mega-projects because they
will impact on micro-projects like this.
One last thought on drones. Drones are going to really--you
got the radical left in this country who decided that having a
drone in the air is more of a threat to their privacy than to
having a helicopter pilot in the air in a helicopter. This type
of irrationality is up to us to combat, and that doesn't cost a
penny. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you. I thank the witnesses for
their valuable testimony and the Members for their questions.
The Members of the Subcommittee may have additional questions
for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to those in
writing. The record will remain open for two weeks for
additional comments and statements from Members. The witnesses
are excused, and this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:34 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.061

Responses by Dr. Wesley Harris
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74060.071



