- SPURRING ECONOMIC GROWTH AND COMPETITIVENESS THROUGH NASA-DERIVED TECHNOLOGIES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SPURRING ECONOMIC GROWTH AND
COMPETITIVENESS THROUGH
NASA-DERIVED TECHNOLOGIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, JULY 12, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-95

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

75-391 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              PAUL D. TONKO, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Tennessee                        VACANCY
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics

HON. STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER JR.,          JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
Wisconsin                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia
MO BROOKS, Alabama
RALPH M. HALL, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Thursday, July 12, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Steven M. Palazzo, Chair,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Jerry F. Costello, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    11
Written Statement............................................    11

Witnesses:

Dr. Mason Peck, Chief Technologist, National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    12
Written Statement............................................    15

Mr. George Beck, Chief Clinical and Technology Officer, Impact
Instrumentation, Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    24
Written Statement............................................    30

Mr. Brian Russell, Chief Executive Officer, Zephyr Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    28
Written Statement............................................    30

Mr. John Vilja, Vice President for Strategy, Innovation and
Growth, Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne
Oral Statement...............................................    33
Written Statement............................................    36

Dr. Richard Aubrecht, Vice President, Moog Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    45
Written Statement............................................    48

Discussion                                                           11

...............................................................

Appendix 1: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Mason Peck, Chief Technologist, National Aeronautics and
Space Administration...........................................    68

Mr. George Beck, Chief Clinical and Technology Officer, Impact
Instrumentation, Inc...........................................    73

Mr. Brian Russell, Chief Executive Officer, Zephyr Technology....    76

Mr. John Vilja, Vice President for Strategy, Innovation and
Growth, Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne.............................    78

Dr. Richard Aubrecht, Vice President, Moog Inc...................    86

SPURRING ECONOMIC GROWTH AND
COMPETITIVENESS THROUGH
NASA-DERIVED TECHNOLOGIES

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 12, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steven
Palazzo [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Palazzo. The Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics
will come to order.
Good morning. Welcome to today's hearing entitled
``Spurring Economic Growth and Competitiveness through NASA-
Derived Technologies.'' In front of you are packets containing
the written testimony, biographies and Truth in Testimony
disclosures for today's witness panel. I recognize myself for
five minutes for an opening statement.
I would like to begin by thanking our witnesses for taking
time from their busy schedules to appear before us this morning
and share their insight about the role NASA has played in
spurring technologies that yield economic growth and keep
America at the forefront of global technological
competitiveness. I realize you and your staff devoted
considerable time and effort preparing for this hearing, and I
want you to know that your expertise will help inform this
Committee and Congress during the coming months and years.
In the public media, discussions of NASA's general
contributions to society are often distilled down to Tang and
Teflon. Yet NASA-derived technologies have paved the way for
innovative advances in the medical field, environmental
stewardship and public safety. Today's hearing will only skim
the surface in highlighting the direct economic and societal
benefits investment in NASA has generated.
Since 1976, NASA has documented well over 1,700 successful
examples of technology transfer and commercialization. But
despite decades of demonstrated success, NASA's budget has
remained essentially flat even as other R&D agencies are seeing
increases. Investment in NASA's technology transfer activities,
however, has seen a drastic decline in recent years.
A recent NASA Inspector General audit on NASA's technology
and commercialization efforts concluded that NASA has missed
opportunities to transfer technologies and that industry and
the public have not fully benefited from the NASA-developed
technologies. The IG found a general lack of awareness among
NASA program managers about the technology transfer and
commercialization process and that many personnel did not
understand the range of technologies that could be considered
as technological assets. Furthermore, the report found that the
number of patent attorneys and dedicated Innovative Partnership
Office staff and related funding was insufficient given the
technology transfer and commercialization potential. The IG
recommended NASA implement a review of the policy process and
implement new procedures and training requirements to ensure
NASA personnel were fully aware of the process and their
responsibilities. The IG also recommended that NASA reassess
the allocation of resources for technology transfer. This
Committee will follow closely NASA's implementation of these
recommendations.
The IG report took a look at formal NASA processes in
place, but it begs the question: does technology transfer
happen in other, informal ways? And if so, how can NASA best
marry entrepreneurs with the technologies it has already
developed or those that it may still need for future missions?
Exploring both traditional and nontraditional means for
technology transfer to the private sector is equally important
if we hope to leverage space technology development as an
engine for economic growth and U.S. competitiveness.
Today's hearing will explore positive examples of
partnerships between NASA and the private sector yielding
American-made technologies beneficial to both NASA's space
exploration mission and to society as a whole. We will also
examine what strategies and programs NASA uses to disseminate
technology into the private sector and identify the greatest
challenges the private sector has in working with NASA to more
quickly transition ideas into new products.
I look forward to today's discussion, and wish to again
thank our witnesses for their presence.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Palazzo follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Chairman Steven M. Palazzo
I would like to begin by thanking our witnesses for taking time
from their busy schedules to appear before us this morning and share
their insight about the role NASA has played in spurring technologies
that yield economic growth and keep America at the forefront of global
technological competitiveness. I realize you and your staff devoted
considerable time and effort preparing for this hearing, and I want you
to know that your expertise will help inform this Committee and
Congress during the coming months and years.
In the public media, discussions of NASA's general contributions to
society are often distilled down to Tang and Teflon. Yet, NASA-derived
technologies have paved the way for innovative advances in the medical
field, environmental stewardship, and public safety. Today's hearing
will only skim the surface in highlighting the direct economic and
societal benefits investment in NASA has generated. Since 1976, NASA
has documented well over 1,700 successful examples of technology
transfer and commercialization. But despite decades of demonstrated
success, NASA's budget has remained essentially flat even as other R&D
agencies are seeing increases. Investment in NASA's technology transfer
activities, however, has seen a drastic decline in recent years.
A recent NASA Inspector General audit on NASA's technology and
commercialization efforts concluded that NASA has missed opportunities
to transfer technologies and that industry and the public have not
fully benefited from NASA-developed technologies. The IG found a
general lack of awareness among NASA program managers about the
technology transfer and commercialization process and that many
personnel did not understand the range of technologies that could be
considered as technological assets. Furthermore, the report found that
the number of patent attorneys and dedicated Innovative Partnership
Office staff--and related funding--was insufficient given the
technology transfer and commercialzation potential. The IG recommended
NASA implement a review of the policy process and implement new
procedures and training requirements to ensure NASA personnel were
fully aware of the process and their responsibilities. The IG also
recommended that NASA reassess the allocation of resources for
technology transfer. This Committee will follow closely NASA's
implementation of these recommendations.
The IG report took a look at formal NASA processes in place, but it
begs the question--does technology transfer happen in other, informal
ways? And if so, how can NASA best marry entrepreneurs with the
technologies it has already developed or those it may still need for
future missions? Exploring both traditional and nontraditional means
for technology transfer to the private sector is equally important if
we hope to leverage space technology development as an engine for
economic growth and U.S. competitiveness.
Today's hearing will explore positive examples of partnerships
between NASA and the private sector yielding American-made technologies
beneficial to both NASA's space exploration mission and to society as a
whole. We will also examine what strategies and programs NASA uses to
disseminate technology into the private sector and identify the
greatest challenges the private sector has in working with NASA to more
quickly transition ideas into new products.
I look forward to today's discussion, and wish to again thank our
witnesses for their presence.

Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize Mr. Costello for an
opening statement.
Mr. Costello. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and thank you for
calling the hearing today. I have a brief opening statement
which I will enter into the record so that we can hear from the
witnesses.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Costello follows:]

Good morning and thank you Mr. Chairman, for calling this important
hearing on NASA spinoffs.
NASA technologies produce direct economic and societal benefits for
all Americans. Since the agency was established in 1958, technical
challenges of NASA's space exploration, space science, and aeronautics
missions have led to technological advances, unique skills, and
scientific knowledge that have contributed to America's capacity for
innovation and global competitiveness.
Mr. Chairman, this hearing serves as an opportunity to educate the
public on the connection between the federal government's investments
in space and the benefits to society. These contributions developed
important products, such as satellite radio, medical diagnostics and
aeronautical advances that have improved the safety, and fuel-
efficiency performance of both commercial and military aircraft.
In carrying out its missions and developing these technologies,
NASA also has inspired young people to enter educational and career
paths in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses on what steps can be
taken to enhance NASA's technology transfer and commercialization
processes, how to increase the impacts of NASA-applied technologies to
the economy and society at large, and ways to improve NASA's
communication to the public to ensure the societal benefits of its
technology and R&D are better understood and appreciated.

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Costello.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time I would like to introduce our panel of
witnesses and we will proceed to hear from each of them in
order.
Our first witness is Dr. Mason Peck. Dr. Peck is Chief
Technology Officer for the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, where he serves as the agency's principal
advisor and advocate on matters concerning technology policy
and programs. Prior to joining NASA, Dr. Peck was Associate
Professor in the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
at Cornell for eight years. He earned his Ph.D. in aerospace
engineering at the University of California at Los Angeles. Dr.
Peck has a broad background in aerospace technology, which
comes from nearly 20 years in industry and academia.
Our next witness is Mr. George Beck, Chief Clinical and
Technology Officer for Impact Instrumentation Incorporated,
where he is responsible for the conceptualization and
development of new critical-care medical devices. He previously
worked for Wyle Laboratories at the Johnson Space Center, where
he led a team of scientists and engineers on work to develop a
new generation of medical equipment for use on the
International Space Station and space shuttle.
At this time I would like to yield to the gentlewoman from
Maryland, Ms. Edwards, who will introduce our next witness.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and to our
Ranking Member. It is a really great privilege to be able to
introduce Brian Russell, who is the CEO and founder of Zephyr
Technology in Annapolis, Maryland, and just to give you a
little bit of background, Mr. Russell received his bachelor's
of engineering degree from Auckland University in New Zealand
is a subject-matter expert in analog and electronics
communications and physiology. He holds three patents and
several more provisional applications in the area of
physiological sensing using smart fabric sensors. Zephyr
Technology is headquartered in Annapolis, has investors like
Motorola, 3M, and investors that understand government and
business, and employs 35 people at Zephyr and is a global
leader in the art and science of remote physiological status
monitoring, or PSM. I am delighted to be able to welcome Brian
Russell to the Committee today, and know that we are proud, as
all of our states are, in Maryland the kind of relationship
that has developed between the private sector and the public
sector and the innovation and technology exhibited by Mr.
Russell and by Zephyr Technology and welcome his testimony
today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Ms. Edwards.
Our next witness is Mr. John Vilja, Vice President for
Strategy, Innovation and Growth at Pratt and Whitney
Rocketdyne. Mr. Vilja has enjoyed a 28-year career with
Rocketdyne and was most recently the Vice President and Program
Manager for the J-2X Earth Departure Stage Engine Program for
NASA's Space Launch System. He earned his bachelor's degree in
mechanical engineering from California State University-
Northridge and an M.B.A. degree from the Anderson Graduate
School of Management at the University of California in Los
Angeles.
Our final witness is Mr. Richard Aubrecht, Vice President
of Moog Incorporated. Dr. Aubrecht has spent the bulk of his
40-year career at Moog after having earned his B.S., M.S. and
doctorate degrees in mechanical engineering from Cornell
University.
Welcome to you all. As our witnesses should know, spoken
testimony is limited to five minutes each. After all witnesses
have spoken, Members of Committee will have five minutes each
to ask questions.
I now recognize as our first witness, Dr. Mason Peck, for
five minutes to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. MASON PECK,

CHIEF TECHNOLOGIST,

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Dr. Peck. Chairman Palazzo, Ranking Member Costello and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify on NASA's technology transfer and commercialization
efforts and how investments in cutting-edge research and
development efforts such as those seen through space
exploration can benefit the entire Nation.
On a personal note, I am honored to be serving as NASA's
Chief Technologist. As the NASA Administrator's top advisor on
technology, I am responsible for a number of things, and that
is guiding strategic agency investments in technology,
facilitating technology transfer, partnerships in
commercialization activities across the agency, advocating
externally on behalf of NASA's R&D programs, demonstrating and
communicating societal impacts of NASA technology investments,
and overseeing executive management of NASA'S Space Technology
Program.
As we seek to achieve our national objectives in human
space, exploration, aeronautics and scientific discovery, we
share with the public the technical advancements we make so
that our Nation may benefit from these new ideas in other areas
such as efficiencies in manufacturing, advanced medical
procedures and protocols, increased agricultural yields and
cleaner, safer transportation.
NASA's innovations also stimulate the growth of our
innovation economy. Knowledge provided by weather and
navigational spacecraft, efficiency improvements in both ground
and air transportation, supercomputers, solar- and wind-
generated energy, improved biomedical applications including
advanced medical imaging as well as the protective gear that
keeps our military, firefighters and police safe, all of these
have benefited from our Nation's investments in aerospace
technology.
NASA provides America with unique capabilities because we
take on extraordinarily difficult problems in technology and
science. By taking humans to inhospitable places, we learn key
survival skills, and about keeping people healthy when the
nearest hospital is days away. This translates into benefits
like the advanced ultrasound devices created in partnership
with NASA: Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit and the company
Epiphan in Springfield, New Jersey. Using a portable ultrasound
machine, a non-physician can, with minimal technical know-how,
send medical imaging from remote locations for consultation
with experts. This device is now employed by emergency medical
personnel around the country, as well as by coaches and sports
teams. This is one of hundreds of examples of how solving
technical problems in aerospace also leads us to invent
technologies that make life better right here on Earth. It is a
single example but it is one of nearly 2,000 that NASA has
collected in its annual spin-off publication and I will be glad
to provide examples of that publication to you.
I have also brought with me a couple of other examples of
very compelling spin-offs--we have got them right here--
products derived from NASA technology. So first let me point
out this. It is called the Rescue Pod. It increases blood flow
to the brain and heart during CPR. It doubles systolic blood
pressure and increases survivability. It is used by our armed
forces overseas and our EMS units around the country. It was
designed as an emergency contingency device to regular blood
flow of astronauts transitioning from the reduced gravity
environment of space back to earth's gravity but now it saves
lives and it came from space.
I have to talk about Micro-Bac, and there is a couple
samples here of sand. Both of them were taken from the Gulf
shores are the Deepwater Horizon oil-rig spill. One was treated
with a solution developed by NASA through our SBIR program.
That's the Small Business Innovation Research Program. Marshall
Space Flight center in Alabama and Micro-Bac International of
Round Rock, Texas, developed a phototropic cell for water
purification in space. Inside the cell are millions of
photosynthetic bacteria. That formulation is now used for the
remediation of wastewater systems and waste from livestock
farms and food manufacturers but strains of that same SBIR-
derived bacteria also feature microbial solutions that treat
environmentally damaging oil spills from the dirty sands right
here to the clean sand that I have got in front of me.
And then my cell phone. Most of us have one of these. I am
holding up a standard smartphone here, and I am not about to
tell you that NASA invented the cell phone but NASA did bring
you the cell phone camera right in there. One of our inventors,
Eric Fossum out of the Jet Propulsion Lab in California,
designed and developed that CMOS camera on a chip that drove
the prices of digital imaging sensors low enough that modern
cell phones now have camera-quality capabilities. It is a
particularly striking example because NASA technology finds its
way into our pockets.
So NASA technology is all around us. It is making our lives
better, and we have hundreds of these stories to share. We do
this through our annual spin-off publication. It is a
longstanding NASA tradition where the agency publishes a report
on some of these annual technology successes.
Let me move on to talk about NASA's commitment to tech
transfer. We have added technology transfer to the top-level
agency-wide performance goals that are reported annually to the
Office of Management and Budget. We do have room for
improvement, though. You mentioned the IG report. They
concluded that we lack--or NASA personnel lack awareness of the
agency's technology transfer policy requirements; assets aren't
consistently identified or fully understood; innovators lack
awareness of new technology reporting processes, and new
reports are inaccessible. NASA agrees with these findings and
we are taking advantage of that report to make improvements in
the program. I have got a number of things I can offer here but
my time is about up.
So in closing, let me offer you a couple of final thoughts.
We are discussing today NASA's considerable success in tech
transfer and commercialization but we have to remember that
these great spin-offs rely on NASA having an ongoing, robust
investment in research and technology. If we don't create new
technologies, we will have no new transformational
capabilities, new industries, new economic growth and jobs or
tech transfer as a result of all those. This is why continued
investment by America in research and technology programs such
as NASA's Space Technology Program is essential.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your support and that of the
Committee. I would be pleased to respond to any questions you
or the other Committee Members may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Peck follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Dr. Peck.
I now recognize our next witness, Mr. George Beck, for five
minutes to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. GEORGE BECK,

CHIEF CLINICAL AND TECHNOLOGY OFFICER,

IMPACT INSTRUMENTATION, INC.

Mr. Beck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak on behalf of the owners of Impact
Instrumentation and the employees. We are a small business in
New Jersey, and this is a unique opportunity for all of us.
Our relationship with NASA has not been a traditional spin-
off. It has actually been more of a spin-in. Impact
Instrumentation has developed and manufactured life-support
equipment used by the Department of Defense and other
government organizations as well as civilian care providers for
the last 35 years.
While I was a member of Wyle Laboratories at the Johnson
Space Center, our group modified an Impact ventilator that was
currently being used by the military to transport critically
ill and injured war fighters back and forth from Iraq and
Afghanistan. We developed the device to answer the needs for
space and improve its capabilities so that it could work in a
bi-directional matter. While the modified ventilator was never
used in space, its development helped identify a method whereby
NASA and industry could work cooperatively to leverage
commercial technology for space.
Working together, we have developed a number of prototypes
for advanced life-support devices that replace a suite of
therapeutic and monitoring equipment. In addition, Impact has
completed development of a new ventilator that is deployed with
our forces that has also been tested by NASA with the
anticipation that it would replace existing equipment on space
station when it is retired.
That said, our biggest leverage has really been the
cultivation of a new generation of young engineers and
researchers that are working at NASA, at Impact or in academic
centers or have left to start their own small businesses. The
Space Act Agreement created a government, industry and academic
partnership that has allowed our group to work on a series of
medical challenges, sharing in the institutional knowledge and
experience of the organizations while developing solutions that
currently now benefit war fighters, astronauts and civilians,
so I look forward to answering any questions that you might
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Beck follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Beck.
I now recognize our next witness, Mr. Brian Russell, for
five minutes to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. BRIAN RUSSELL,

CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, ZEPHYR TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Russell. Chairman and Members of the Committee, it is
an honor to appear today before you to represent our friends
and partners at NASA. Zephyr is a global leader in the art and
science of remote physiological monitoring, or PSM. That is how
we became partners with NASA.
The story of that partnership illustrates the profound
benefits of NASA funding. That funding spurs and accelerates
research, technology and innovation that in partnership we are
helping to save lives and make people fitter and healthier.
Zephyr first became involved with NASA in 2008 where
William Toscano and Patricia Cowlings' work at the Ames
Research Facility, they studied people with motion sickness due
to zero gravity, fighter pilots and fatigue in airline pilots.
They used our BioHarness, which is our comfortable
physiological monitoring sensor, to measure people's vital
signs including fatigue, EKG and other parameters. We are also
working with NASA on PHASER, which is a DHS program to save
first responders lives.
Through these studies, Zephyr not only serves the interests
of NASA, DHS and DOD, they in turn served our needs. We receive
critical feedback based on decades on their experience that
helped us incorporate their experience into our design
decisions. Those products are now making major contributions in
several very important areas: sports and fitness, Special
Forces and first responders for both training and operations,
and perhaps most importantly today, mobile health.
Through TSWG we have partnered with Special Forces in the
Army and the Navy to create a system to not only train but to
monitor a person's safety and health during field missions.
Field commanders and medics can make more informed time-
critical decisions based on if someone is stationery, moving,
dehydrated, had heat stressed or is actually suffering trauma
from an injury. So we proving mission readiness, safety and
training and extending their abilities in dynamic asymmetric
warfare.
Zephyr's PSM solutions are currently being used in the
Olympics next month, Major League Baseball, NBA, collegiate
sports, and even on Formula One racecar drivers. A coach can
measure and train an athlete to peak performance while
preserving his health and keeping--sorry--enhancing the
athlete's health.
A terrific dual use of our technology is to help
professionals, hospitals, nursing homes, families and even
individuals. Zephyr's web and smartphone system called
ZephyrLIFE allows nurses to monitor real-time parameters in a
hospital and doctors remotely can measure them anywhere in the
world.
This technology is selling now. The availability in large
part is due to the researchers at NASA. Working with NASA gave
us the information and feedback we needed to move from the
realm of science fiction into the mainstream, and Zephyr is
giving back. NASA was deeply involved with the rescue of the 33
Chilean miners that were trapped 2,000 feet below the ground
last year. Because of our experience with NASA, Zephyr was
called on for help. We provided BioHarnesses, monitoring
software and field support. Doctors were able to monitor the
miners' wellness for the weeks underground to keep them fit and
healthy for their rescue while monitoring them during the
extraction and give them needed immediate medical support once
they reached the surface. And now Zephyr is sharing all of that
data collected during those dramatic weeks with NASA. It is the
only event in recorded human history that mimics the conditions
of long-endurance space travel where the nearest doctor may be
a very, very long way away.
This brings me to my concluding point. The scientists and
legal department at NASA understood us. They gave us a simple
process and brought us in as partners. As a result, Zephyr has
improved and advanced its products, which are truly dual use--
helping doctors, patients, athletes, soldiers, firemen and all
of us and our families who want to stay fit and healthy
including NASA and its astronauts. The success has let us grow
and employ more people. Some of those advancements from working
with NASA we could have predicted but some we couldn't have
imagined when we started.
So please allow me to finish where I started. Because of
this, the really basic truth of the testimony is the funding
that NASA has and the way it has helped us has truly made a
difference. Thank you.
Do we have a video to show now or at the end? Okay. So the
video I would like to show now is the latest release of a
sports product that is--this is a sports application. We have
just delivered this to Fort Bragg.
[Video playback]
[The prepared statement of Mr. Russell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Russell.
I now recognize our next witness, Mr. John Vilja, for five
minutes to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. JOHN VILJA,

VICE PRESIDENT FOR STRATEGY, INNOVATION AND GROWTH, PRATT &
WHITNEY ROCKETDYNE

Mr. Vilja. Chairman Palazzo and distinguished Committee
Members, thanks for taking the time to have some talks on this
very important subject to our Nation.
There has been a lot of debate on what the value of NASA is
to outside of the space world, and of course, everyone mentions
the Teflons, Tangs, memory foam mattresses, but rocket engines
are a little more obscure--and you might be wondering exactly
what does that have to do with anything else but going into
space. Well, to do that, you really have to understand what is
so special about these machines, and they are what we call
high-energy-density machines, or simply put, they create a lot
of energy in a relatively small space, and it creates new
engineering and multidisciplinary skills which are very hard to
duplicate anywhere else but they have applications across the
board. Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne has been launching
satellites, astronauts since the beginning of the space program
and we are currently launching most of the DOD satellites today
and we have a long heritage in harnessing this really specialty
engineering.
A good example of what one of these machines, this is the
space shuttle main engine, the RS-25. This is a machine that it
takes liquid hydrogen, which is the second coldest liquid in
existence, combines it with oxygen, and it produces at about
6,000 degrees Fahrenheit and throws it out at about mach 3, all
in the space of about a moderate commercial jet engine yet it
produces a thrust of 10 747 jumbo-jet engines. And just pumping
the hydrogen has to produce 70,000 horsepower, and the hydrogen
is then used to cool the chamber and the nozzle which is
directing that steam which is operating well past the boiling
point of steel. It would evaporate in seconds if we didn't do
this.
So the amount of different technologies that goes into
doing this is staggering. It has to control itself 50 times
every second just so it keeps at the right thrust level and
uses the propellants in the right combination as it ascends
into orbit.
In developing the space shuttle main engine, what really
drove advances in material science, combustion modeling, high-
speed turbo machinery, thermal management, structural
assessment, safety engineering, advanced manufacturer and rapid
health management. By investing in pushing the state-of-the-
art, it really created a source of intellectual capital that is
unparalleled anywhere in the world. As the engine development
continued, so did the learning. We were able to try new
processes. We were able to test them out on real machines, and
we learned a lot while we were doing it.
These multidisciplinary advances gained from this
investment enabled us to develop the first commercially
developed large rocket engine, the RS-68, which today powers
the Delta IV launch vehicle. Just recently, the Delta IV
launched a national-security payload on June 29th. It is the
largest hydrogen engine and we did it commercially because
there was going to be a large demand in how many launches we
needed. Well, that demand never materialized. In fact, the
launch market has been flat for the last several decades, and
with new international entrants coming into the market, it has
become a very difficult place. So a company like us who is a
commercial company really requires something to expand our
business so spin-offs are the only place we can go
realistically.
Now, we have a long history of doing this. In the past we
have commercialized a water-pumping technology, which is based
on how we pump propellants in a rocket engine. We have spun
that off. Jet skis are a result of that. And so there is that
kind of thing. We have also done selective laser centering,
making plastic parts, 3D parts printing. We helped pioneer that
in the mid-1990s in order to make complex rocket engine parts,
but since then we have spun off the business to service the
rest of industry and so that technology is a direct outgrowth.
There is other examples such as chemical lasers, hydrogen
recombiners and flue gas cleaning devices, and those are all
basically byproducts of this multidisciplinary skill.
Today we are taking this expertise and focusing it largely
on energy. The energy market is huge and growing. The world has
a constant need for energy and we need to get it cheaper and
cleaner, and so by applying rocket-engine technology, we find
that there are many opportunities in this area.
One of the key areas is in solar electric power plants. We
are building a solar electric power plant outside of the desert
in Nevada that stores electricity and then can dispatch the
solar electricity at night so we can produce electricity
throughout the evening. That is a world's first. The ability to
capture the heat of a thousand suns in a collector is directly
derived from our cooling technology experience. We are also
working on a gasification device. It is a compact, high-
pressure, high-temperature gasification device that can take
coal, petcoke and biomass and convert it into syngas. This
syngas is used in chemicals. It can be used to make fuel. It
can be used to make various other products. Our gassifier
operates at higher pressures and temperatures so we get a 90
percent reduction in pressures and temperatures, 20 percent
reduction in plant capital cost, and a 15 to 20 percent
reduction in end product cost, all this while giving a 30
percent reduction in water usage and a ten percent reduction in
CO
2
emissions.
Other technologies that are going along, we are working on
a hydrogen generator, a down-hole steam generator so we can go
after heavy oil production from deep and cold locations,
acoustic generators to improve hydraulic fracturing, and a
number of other areas including very efficient power plants
which can increase the efficiency of electricity generation by
30 percent. We are partnering with many folks including the DOE
and major oil companies in doing this.
It is real important that we have an energy policy or a
NASA science policy that continues to make the technology that
allows us to go forward and create spin-offs, and that means we
have to keep investing in development as well as production as
well as coming to new technologies. Having production allows
you to measure the quantified measurement of the technologies
and what they can mean for you. The development allows you to
take these very difficult things and bring them to a point
where spin-offs are even possible.
And finally, the advanced technology has to be there so you
can really push the bounds. There is no commercial case for
investigating these commercial bounds because the payback is so
uncertain. So the NASA technology is really that seed corn that
allows you later to go on and do that, and that is really where
the NASA policy has to be strong and they have to really focus.
So we would like to ask that NASA continue to have this whole
portfolio of things.
Thank you very much, and I would be happy to answer
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Vilja follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Vilja.
I now recognize our final witness, Dr. Richard Aubrecht,
for five minutes to present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF DR. RICHARD AUBRECHT,

VICE PRESIDENT, MOOG INC.

Dr. Aubrecht. Thank you very much for this invitation to
testify this morning.
Background on Moog. We are a company that started in
western New York about 50 years ago. It was actually a spin-off
of Cornell University at the time. And our core technology we
describe as precision motion control. We control flight
controls on all sorts of commercial and military aircraft. The
same sort of technology is applied on wind turbines, all sorts
of power generating. We have been a partner with my pal here
from Rocketdyne for about 40 years. We do the steering.
So we started working on NASA programs in the Mercury
program in the 1950s and continued evolving our technology as
NASA's needs evolved, eventually developing very complicated--
they are four-channel redundant flight controls that were
applied on the space shuttle. These are for not only steering
the rocket engines as it is launched but also the flight
control surfaces as the shuttle was landing. That formed a core
technology for us in doing our redundant flight controls.
So what is different about that? If you look at the NASA
missions, some missions at NASA I would call are hard missions.
Putting something into space to begin with was a hard mission.
What is really hard is doing a manned space program. So why is
that? To begin with, you have obviously people involved with
all that. What that means is, is that the probability of
failure has to be orders of magnitude less than you are willing
to stand for when you are just trying to launch a satellite. So
that is a really, really hard problem. And the other aspect of
that is, it becomes very public. There is lots of press
coverage on that. Other satellites are launched and you read in
the paper two days later a $100 million satellite failed to
reach orbit. People said oh, so what. If you have that happen
with a manned space program, it is all over the front page that
evening. So it is a really hard problem, and I think that NASA
should focus its efforts in the future on really hard problems,
and I will show you why.
Having developed that sort of technology to begin with
entails not only developing the hardware but you also have to
develop a whole series of other processes and technologies to
support doing that. The systems design analysis and integration
capability, the design tools, new materials have to be
qualified and learn how to fabricate them. All kinds of new
fabricating and measuring techniques have to be developed and
finally you end up with a design. The key part about that is
that there is a design team that works on all of that so it is
not just a single person or just a couple of people that are
doing this creative sort of work. There is a whole team that
enables doing all of that, and that is what I think is really
important for NASA to realize, is that the technology that you
are developing is not just in the drawings and the reports and
the hardware that is built.
What is really important is, you are building a capability
of a team of people who understand how to take on a really,
really hard problem and as a result of doing that, they develop
the confidence to be able to take on other really hard
problems. So you build this culture of innovation in a company
that is able to do really hard things, and that is what we have
done with this. So today we have all the flight controls on the
F-35 aircraft. We have all the flight controls on the new 787
at Boeing. We also won the contract at Airbus on the A-350.
This is the first time Airbus has ever gone outside Europe for
that scale of a subsystem within the aircraft.
So East Aurora, New York, has become the global center for
redundant flight controls but then we have also taken the same
sort of technologies and applied it to all sorts of other
applications for other kinds of launch vehicles, military
aircraft, commercial aircraft, business jets, and we also take
it and apply it in industrial markets--wind turbines, undersea
applications of all kinds. So it is that core technology that
we developed starting with NASA in the 1950s that has enabled
us to move into all these other fields.
So a couple of key messages with this. It seems to me that
NASA is really at a key turning point here. What has happened
over the last 40 years is that the technology for launching
things into space has become ubiquitous. You see people like
Iran and North Korea are able to launch satellites. That is not
hard anymore. There is a lot of people able to do that. What is
really hard still is manned space, and that will continue to be
a very hard problem, and that is where NASA ought to focus its
efforts. Deep-space programs the same way. The technology to do
the deep-space probes and also do the Mars Rovers and that kind
of thing, it is again a really hard problem, and those are the
sorts of things that NASA can really provide the funding to
advance the technologies to enable us to repeat what we did
starting with the NASA projects in the 1950s.
We are working on a couple of new projects right now that I
think are indicative of that sort of thing that NASA could
really help with. We are developing what are called green
propellants. Hydrazine that is used for a lot of applications
in space is a really nasty fluid, and we have been working
actually with Swedish space in developing green technologies
that you can actually take it, it is like alcohol. You can
spill it on your hands and it won't hurt you at all. And the
other is things like small satellites. Professor Peck can speak
on that a lot more than I can. But that is going to enable a
lot broader usage of space than previously and NASA is in a
position to be able to advance the technologies for doing small
satellites that commercial people are just never going to do,
and to me, that is the kind of leadership position that NASA
ought to be taking and sponsoring these projects and the
technologies that can become applicable across a wide range of
applications.
I don't think Moog is unique in that. You know, you have
heard of some of the other people here. We see the people on
either side of the systems we have on the NASA programs and
have seen what some of our other people have done. But the
other thing we have seen, we are pursuing the new launch
vehicles on Constellation and Orion and the derivatives of
those programs. We won about three times what we thought we
were going to win five years ago on that. So why is that? It is
because a lot of the people who used to build that hardware
have dropped out and are no longer competing. The reason is,
they lost their technology teams. They just simply didn't have
the capability internally. It wasn't the will. They just didn't
have the assets internally to be able to do the work.
So one of the things that NASA really needs to think about,
and I think it is a real challenge for this Committee to think
about, is to set program goals, very specific goals, very
specific timetables, very challenging technology targets, and
then stay with them and fund them consistently. If you don't
fund them consistently, the design teams don't stay together
and you lose the fundamental capability. If there is one
message you can take from me today, that is the thing you guys
ought to really focus on.
So thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Aubrecht follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Palazzo. Dr. Aubrecht, thank you, and I thank the
panel for their testimony. At this time I am going to yield as
much time as needed to a very special guest who has joined us.
He is a Member of the Science, Space and Technology. It is Mr.
Ralph Hall of Texas, the Chairman of the full Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology.
Chairman Hall. I thank you very much, and I thank you for
calling this meeting, and I thank you gentlemen. Is there a
lady there? I don't have good eyes. It is probably the one that
wrote most of your work for the information you gave us, and I
will read and study that on my airplane going back to Texas
today.
I won't have any questions, but I will just say that NASA
has developed a lot of innovative technologies that weren't
supplied and what NASA needs to do, as the last gentleman made
some suggestions, I think they need to think about how to use
the funds that they are getting. I think NASA has made some
pretty desperate decisions in the last three years. Maybe they
felt constrained to, but they have thrown money right and left,
and when the President ran a line through Constellation, he put
us on a road to lose our space station. I know that is not what
this is about. This is about new breakthroughs, and we need it,
but we need to know how to supply those, and Republicans and
Democrats, we are very close together on what we have learned
and were doing up to the time Constellation was cast aside. I
am not going to comment on that. I think you can tell how I
feel about it.
We have advanced aircraft and spacecraft design and
technologies that apply to our national security even and
certainly to public safety, and if you want to see how we are
really treated by the appropriators, just look at figure 4 of
R&D in fiscal year 2013 budget request. It goes all the way
down to where it looks like we have to pitch some money into
the budget. I don't understand the bottom part of that out
there. But we are not even keeping pace with inflation. We are
in a desperate situation. The last three Presidents did not
help us any at all. We have got to pray for this President. I
pray for him myself but I looked up the other day and God was
rolling his eyes at me, so I don't know if that is anything
that is really going to have any effect or not.
But I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your time. I yield back.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I now recognize myself for five minutes for questions. Dr.
Peck, in your testimony you mentioned the magazine that you all
put out, the spin-off that lists all the success stories
through technology transfer and partnerships with small
businesses, and I just--on page--and you all don't have to go
to this, but on page 84, there is one such small business that
actually is in my district in south Mississippi that has
partnered with Stennis Space Center. It is called Envision. It
is a minority woman-owned business. And the product--and I am
not going to go into the details of the product but it is
something in our region of the world, emergency response, that
is just second nature and they developed a product that has
been used in Hurricane Katrina, Ike, Gustav, and it has also
been used by the Mississippi National Guard and the EPA most
recently in helping to track the oil spill from 2010 in the
Gulf of Mexico.
My first question is going to be for Dr. Peck. To what
extent did the individual centers develop partnerships with the
private sector? What role did the centers play in disseminating
technologies available for commercialization and how is that
coordinated by NASA headquarters?
Dr. Peck. Well, Congressman, the centers, the field centers
of NASA, they really are where the tech transfer happens.
Headquarters function is one of leadership and coordination and
setting guidance for the field centers in their implementation
of the tech transfer policies of the Agency. The individual
field centers work closely with local businesses but then also
companies around the country to develop these partnerships.
There is a number of mechanisms that we use, but I will say
that that is the function that resides at the centers and that
is why we have those centers because their local expertise is
where the strength of NASA's tech transfer program comes from.
Chairman Palazzo. What is the appropriate balance between
Space Technology Program personnel at NASA headquarters and the
centers when it comes to effective technology transfer?
Dr. Peck. It is a great question because really the core of
the Space Technology Program extends beyond tech transfer, but
it is no accident that the Space Technology Program is where
the tech transfer function for the Agency really is led. The
Space Technology Program, as you know, has a broad mission at
the Agency of investing in cross-cutting, pioneering
technologies that will ensure NASA's future but then also
provide the kind of innovation you have heard discussed here at
the panel today.
When the Space Technology Program executes on its work, it
combines directed work, which happens at the centers, with
competed work where we look for the best ideas wherever they
can be found. So there is close to 1,000 projects right now
underway thanks to the Space Technology Program. Many of them
go through the SBIR/STTR Program, which again you understand is
the Small Business Innovation Research and Tech Transfer
Research Programs, but a bulk of them also are run through
academic institutions in the form of student fellowships and
soon faculty support, as well as the more traditional contracts
that we associate with new technology projects at NASA through
a number of different programs.
The balance of the personnel extends across NASA. There is
two issues. There is the issue of what happens within our
Innovative Partnerships Office (IPO) where the tech transfer
function resides, and there we try to operate a leading
function, but there are in fact IPO offices at each center with
the responsibility of executing on the tech transfer mission.
In addition to that, though, each center does have a Center
Chief Technologist and some staff that are meant to advocate
for the center's technology, as well as represent headquarters'
guidance throughout their center. So again it is a blend where
working together the technology development activity and the
tech transfer activity have representation at the centers in
terms of staff.
Chairman Palazzo. All right. Another question for Dr. Peck.
In your testimony you mentioned the President's charge to
accelerate federal technology transfer activities and indicate
where NASA has included such goals in its strategic planning.
However, the funding requested for research and development at
NASA is barely keeping pace with inflation even as other
agencies are reaping the benefits of increased investments. How
do you reconcile the increased focus on such activities at the
federal level without commensurate funds requested for NASA
specifically to meet this challenge?
Dr. Peck. Well, I believe that NASA historically has been
very successful in its tech transfer efforts. We have a proud
history of that. In fact, of the 4,700 invention disclosures
provided by the Federal Government a couple of years ago in
2010, 1,700 came from NASA, so close to a third of the total
for across the Federal Government. Our past success, though, we
shouldn't rest on those laurels as you suggest; we should take
advantage of the IG report and your guidance to really focus
our efforts on tech transfer.
There is a number of things we are doing to respond to the
Inspector General's report on this. For example, we are
rewriting the technology transfer policies to better match
current best practices, as well as address commercialization
planning. That new policy will provide a streamlined, broad,
flexible approach, and that increased coordination will help
NASA in best understanding the value of those innovative
technological assets.
Policy is part of it, also better training for our
personnel. Actually being able to focus our efforts on tech
transfer requires that the folks at NASA who do the work in
developing new technologies also understand that a
commercialization plan is necessary and required. They also
need to understand how to submit those so-called New Technology
Reports, the NTRs, that actually form the basis of our database
of technologies.
Fortunately, now, we have a new website, it is
technology.NASA.gov. It is an opportunity for us to reach out
very efficiently to the technology community and the community
of small businesses and large businesses who want to partner
with NASA. There you can find access to all of NASA's past
technologies, as well as so-called online partnering tool,
which allows for a very rapid turnaround connecting inventors
at NASA with opportunities to commercialize them in the private
sector.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Dr. Peck. Although I have some
questions for the other members of the panel, I am going to be
courteous to my other Members who are here who also have
questions. And with the pending votes being called, I will now
recognize Mr. Costello.
Mr. Costello. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Dr. Peck, we have talked about some examples about
technologies that have been discovered by NASA and have been
commercialized today. I think Members of this Subcommittee and
Members of Congress probably know some of the benefits of the
work that NASA has done, but there is a tremendous challenge, I
believe, in educating the public as to the benefits. Tell us
what NASA is doing to improve the public's understanding of the
derived technologies and the benefits to the American people
and to the world.
Dr. Peck. Well, Congressman Costello, that charge is one of
OCT's, the Office of the Chief Technologist. We have a number
of approaches we take. There is, of course, the spinoff
publication we have talked about already but also a website,
again, spinoff.NASA.gov, where folks can see the full history
of spinoffs from NASA technology. But it is more than that.
Rather than sort of passively waiting for folks to come to our
website, we actively engage them through social media. NASA
Twitter site has hundreds of thousands of views and that
provides us a way to actively engage the public communicating
NASA's benefits to them. In addition to that, there is a
Facebook presence and blogs, a number of ways that we actively
engage through social media, the public on these kinds of
issues.
But more than that, you know, when we talk about NASA, we
are careful to explain the relevance of what NASA does. So when
I am talking about new technology, although I like to delve
into the details a lot, I do my best to remind folks that the
technology influences everyone's lives. Again, it is no
accident that the space program undertakes difficult challenges
and those difficult challenges are the ones that create the
innovations and the new ideas that drive the Nation's economy.
As Dick Aubrecht explained, those are the kinds of ideas that
make America unique. In pursuing a space program, we undertake
these hard problems that motivate our future and provide
success for our businesses.
Mr. Costello. Can you talk a little bit about what you are
doing at universities and with teachers? The general public in
my opinion, they understand a little bit about the space
program. When I am home in my district and when I am traveling,
I hear a lot from constituents about we need additional funding
for new roads, bridges, highways, for the obvious things that
they use in their lives, but I rarely have anyone say to me
that you need to put more money into NASA in order to do
research and development because they have done all these
wonderful things for society. So what are you doing at the
common level I would say to educate people at a young age about
the benefits that have been derived from NASA?
Dr. Peck. Well, NASA's Office of Education has an
extraordinarily success history of outreach to K-12. Within the
Space Technology Program, we also have a number of educational
activities. They are focused on space technology. One is the
Space Technology Research Fellows Program, which provides
support for college students studying space technology. It is
the first time that NASA has provided this kind of support for
students. On top of that, we now also have a Space Technology
Research Grants Program that sponsors faculty--similar to the
NSF Career Award if you are familiar with that program--that
now again introduces the opportunity, which I did not have when
I was starting off at Cornell University, to be able to engage
with NASA in research in space technology.
The kind of trickle-down effect that we see by sponsoring
students and faculty changes the conversation. It makes NASA
very present in the lives of our students and it motivates
students to pursue STEM activities--that is science,
technology, engineering, and math--because the space program
quite simply, is exciting.
It is also true of aeronautics. We undertake a lot of
fantastic work here that motivates people of all age but
particularly students. So I am proud to say that NASA is the
reason why a number of students go into STEM and we can keep
that going.
Mr. Costello. Thank you. I will have further questions
later, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize Mr. Brooks from Alabama.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Peck, can you please explain how technologies developed
for NASA make their way into other seemingly nonrelated
products? And for example, how was the ultrasound device you
cite in your testimony a result of NASA research? And was that
technology specifically targeted or did it evolve from other
research? And do you have any other similar examples you can
share with us?
Dr. Peck. Well, Congressman Brooks, the real key to how
that happens is our active engagement in technology transfer.
We have a technology transfer process and experts at the NASA
centers who actively engage with businesses to ensure that NASA
technology--which is taxpayer-funded, remember--goes to the
private sector and benefits the American economy.
In that particular example, there is a number of mechanisms
whereby tech transfer can happen. It can happen simply because
a company comes to NASA or we can use our communications
techniques to actually seek out companies and find
opportunities to transfer that technology. I will offer that
the tech transfer pipeline at NASA is full but we can do better
to bring new ideas into that pipeline. As the Inspector
General's report suggested, we can be doing better to populate
that pipeline. But that is just a beginning because, as you
suggest, part of how we successfully transfer technologies, how
we successfully commercialize involves taking from that next
step. Merely inventing is not enough. We have also got to
engage with the private sector to do so.
Mr. Brooks. Well, a follow-up question, how does NASA
engage with the entrepreneurial community to ensure potential
technologies are recognized and taken advantage of? Are there
means of regular discourse with our Nation's technology areas
such as Silicon Valley or Research Triangle Park in North
Carolina, or Cummings Research Park in my hometown of
Huntsville, Alabama, if I could boast for a moment, which is
the second-largest research park in the United States of
America and the fourth-largest research park in the world?
Dr. Peck. You are absolutely right, sir. NASA actively
markets its technology to the technical community at large as
not just the area strictly outside of the field center gates.
The technology transfer program has an active technology and
marketing and outreach campaign. I have described some of the
elements of that already. There is also NASA Tech Briefs. This
is a free monthly publication, features over 600 NASA
technologies per year. It is also the largest circulation
engineering periodical in the country. It reaches over 200,000
people per month.
NASA brings its technologies to industry-specific
conferences, another method that we use. It brings new sensor
technologies to optics conferences, our new composites to
manufacturing conferences. The Agency has also recently started
hosting industry-specific events like a recent automotive
conference in Cleveland to which all the U.S. automakers were
invited. And that is to showcase technologies and to test
facilities that may be of use to that industry. And we have
also got a pilot program in Colorado to determine if regional
industrial clusters can benefit from an infusion of NASA
technologies.
Some of this work you can read more about at the NASA.gov/
OCTeconomicimpacts website, and there is a searchable map where
you can see how the investment in SBIR program particularly,
maps to local businesses and what do there.
Mr. Brooks. This question is with respect to the other four
witnesses, and whoever wants to grab it first can do so.
How might an entrepreneur view NASA's technologies
differently from NASA program managers and innovators? More
specifically, is this being taken into account when devising
better practices for dissemination of information?
Mr. Beck. I can actually echo some of Dr. Peck's work to
give a real example of that. The ultrasound work that was done
at the Johnson Space Center I was actually a part of. And one
of the things in how these things leverage is the realization
and how NASA demonstrates its relevancy to the U.S. populous is
NASA has a mission, and because of that mission, it creates a
need. We had a need to support our astronaut operators and be
able to diagnose illnesses that could occur on orbit.
As a result of that, given the limitations of orbit, a
technology was identified using ultrasound to be able to
diagnose several of the problems that could occur on orbit.
Space is unique but it is also a construction zone. Well, that
becomes very relevant because these techniques that were
developed in the ultrasound project found their way into being
used in ERs on a regular basis in a way that you can be
diagnosed in a bed as opposed to having to go off the CAT scan
so they can immediately decide whether or not you need surgery.
And I have personal knowledge of how the techniques that were
developed out of the papers that were published from that
program actually led to use directly by our military so that as
our special operators, medics fly to save a down pilot or an
operator that is remotely deployed and injured, when we get
them, we are able to actually diagnose them in time in flight
so that we can intervene immediately with a therapeutic
intervention. And in addition, we can also have the appropriate
care ready for them when they return.
So one of the things that NASA has to do in demonstrating
this is make itself more relevant to the public. That is
sometimes difficult. Unless you have a panel like this you
don't hear about how something is what one would think as
unique as ultrasound in space actually has real meaning. The
work that was done there was published in a series of over 11
peer-reviewed articles in the medical literature and has really
changed the way we provide pre-hospital care. No one really
knows about that and somehow that has to be changed and this
Committee offers an opportunity to make that known.
Mr. Brooks. In that vein, I would like to thank the
Chairman for calling this particular hearing. I have been a
long believer in NASA perhaps being the premier Federal
Government agency that has created technological advances that
in turn have made America exceptional. And so, Mr. Chairman,
thank you for calling this hearing. I also thank you,
witnesses, for helping to share the insight you have been able
to share today.
Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize Mr. Clarke from Michigan.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
recognizing me. I represent metropolitan Detroit and I am a
Cornell grad, too, so I am really happy to be here today,
although in a very non-STEM area, fine arts, painting.
To respond to the question posed by my good friend, the
gentleman from Alabama, about the development of the advanced
ultrasound devices, that was also facilitated by a partnership
with NASA and Henry Ford Health Systems, located in the heart
of the city of Detroit. And this is what I wanted to underscore
is that NASA recognizes the value that metro Detroit has to
commercialize NASA technologies. I appreciate NASA sending out
program managers, engineers, and technologists from three NASA
centers last year. This is something I encouraged, a greater
partnership between NASA and companies in metro Detroit. Also
your work with GM in developing robotics technology has been
very fruitful.
Detroit has huge capabilities. We have the companies that
know how to build and manufacture the best products and
technologies that could be sold worldwide. We have got the
best-trained people. We have got a lot of people who are out of
work who are willing and eager to work. We also have three
great research universities, all anchored in the center of
Detroit by Wayne State University, along with the University of
Michigan and Michigan State University.
Metro Detroit, especially the city, also has the capacity
for growth. We have a lot of cheap, vacant land so we could
build, let's say, a NASA center for advanced manufacturing
research and technology, which is something that I would like
to ask NASA to consider down the line.
My point is this: Detroit is ready and open to do business,
to do business with NASA. How do you think we can create more
metro Detroit jobs by leveraging NASA-derived technologies?
That could be to Dr. Peck or to any of the panelists.
Dr. Peck. Well, if I may, Congressman, I will start with an
answer to your question. Let me just mention briefly the
returns that we see on NASA's investment in technology and how
that impacts the country, I mentioned the Spinoff publication a
little while ago. Spinoff represents a fraction of all the
spinoffs that ultimately result from NASA. The companies
surveyed represented in Spinoff, we received about a 50 percent
response rate, and from that subset of the subset of all the
possible impacts that NASA has had, we found that over just the
past decade those investments have created 14,000 jobs through
NASA spinoffs, over five billion in revenue, and have saved
over 400,000 lives. So the impact of working with NASA on
technologies clearly is felt nationwide.
I would offer that specifically for Detroit, there is a
nearby NASA center; that is NASA Glenn Research Center. We have
piloted an activity there where NASA provides mentorship to
local businesses and helps solve technical problems with a
small number of NASA expertise hours total, but still, it is a
way for them to take what may be a tipping-point technology and
turn it into a successful program. It is through the so-called
MAGNET program in Cleveland. That is the kind of program that
we hope to be able to extend across the Nation. It has been
successful so far. I will offer that in the context of Detroit
specifically companies that can work with your educational
institutions and with NASA can form a three-legged stool of
success if you like where the expertise from NASA and from
education and from the manufacturing community can be a very
powerful combination.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you, Dr. Peck. What I would like to do is
follow up with you and--to see how we can further advance that.
You know, we can make that partnership happen. There are a lot
of companies that are ready to do business with NASA. I would
like to ask one more question.
And how difficult is it for companies to partner with NASA?
What barriers do they face in transitioning resulting
technologies into commercial products? And what improvements if
any would enhance NASA's ability to move more quickly the
transition of their ideas into new products? How can we best
make the commercialization process more effective and
efficient?
Mr. Vilja. I think one of the areas that we can really make
strides on if we continue programs to their fruition. You know,
one of the things that happens is that you spend a lot of money
and effort, and then, before you actually have to put a stamp
of completion on it, you stop and then you have to reform, make
new teams, and you really never get out to industry with that.
A good example was when the Constellation Program was
canceled, the Space Launch System took over many of the systems
that carried on from Constellation. The J-2X engine was one of
the examples. On its first nozzle, we had a situation where we
were coming up with a very complex process for making a very
difficult manifold, and that manifold was made of sheet metal
and it just wasn't coming together for us. And so we sat around
going, well, how are we going to do this? And again in the
problem-solving fashion that is derived by NASA to actually
make something, we end up going, you know who is really good at
stamping sheet metal? Detroit. And we actually went to a
company in Detroit and they did a great job. They stamped it
out in record time and it was a real neat situation. But if you
don't continue the project to the point where you have to bend
metal and join metal and actually complete it, you really don't
get the full benefit of things.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you. Yes?
Chairman Palazzo. Mr. Clarke, would you like to allow Dr.
Aubrecht to respond?
Mr. Clarke. Yes.
Chairman Palazzo. Okay.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Aubrecht. Just coming back to the point that he was
making in terms of completing projects, the thing that working
on NASA programs allows you to do is to complete the program
and demonstrate something, a capability in space. Once you do
that, other people are willing to listen to you, but you have
to complete the project and have something to show for it. And
that is what--my mentioning in terms of green propellants, we
have been struggling for five years now trying to get a program
to fly green propellants here in the United States. We have
been unsuccessful at doing that. Once we do that, we could sell
green propellants around the world. It would revolutionize the
way satellites are kept in orbit. But you need the initial
flight, and NASA is in the position to be able to do that kind
of thing. The other commercial guys are very cautious about
that because of the risk associated with it. NASA can undertake
the risk, demonstrate it. Once you have that, you can take it
elsewhere, but you got to complete the project.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you, Doctor.
Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize Mr. Rohrabacher from
California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for holding this hearing about the green propellant.
Once it is tested and once it is put to use and proven, will it
cost more or less than what current----
Dr. Aubrecht. It would cost a lot less handling hydrazine
is hugely expensive. It is not the cost of the fuel; it is the
cost of all of the associated support systems that you have to
have because it is so toxic. It is dramatically less expensive.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So then, what we need to do--and I will
wait to get the Chairman's attention--is what we need to do is
make sure that we provide--Mr. Chairman, his statement about
this ultimately being cheaper to go with the green propellant
means that we need to be involved in this----
Dr. Aubrecht. Um-hum.
Mr. Rohrabacher. --and we need to push this and make sure
that it doesn't sit on the shelf.
Dr. Aubrecht. Yeah.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And in the end it would be cost-effective
for us. So thank you for that.
I would like to ask about your technology--when you were
mentioning something that actually creates power at night?
Mr. Vilja. Yeah, what it is is it is a concentrated solar
power plant that has a field of about 10,000 mirrors that
focuses onto a solar receiver that is on top of a 550 foot
tower. It gets the intensity of about 1,000 suns on this
receiver. It is a pretty hostile environment but not so bad
compared to a rocket nozzle, for instance.
Mr. Rohrabacher. It doesn't sound like, however, that you
would be getting much energy----
Mr. Vilja. Well, we are making----
Mr. Rohrabacher. --for investment of----
Mr. Vilja. It is actually fairly cost-competitive and what
it allows us to do is we run molten salt through the receiver
and that molten salt is then put in storage tanks. And now you
have a hot reservoir source that you can make steam with
throughout the evening. So you can actually get solar power at
night and it actually applies toward base load rather than
peaking load. And that is a big deal because that is when you
start talking about taking coal offline.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right. I think if any spinoffs that we
have in the future we are going to find that there is a
relationship between the energy and what we are developing in
space, which leads me to Dr. Peck.
Years ago I was very involved with trying to advocate the
development of wireless projection of energy so that we might
be able to utilize the satellite as a system of transferring
energy from one place in the Earth to the other or collecting
it in space and transferring it to Earth. Has there been much
research on that or is that just a forgotten project?
Dr. Peck. Congressman Rohrabacher, thanks for bringing that
one up. It is an exciting idea and I am glad to report that
there are several efforts underway currently at NASA in that
particular technology. One is through the NASA Innovative
Advanced Concepts Program, which is part of the Space
Technology Program within my office. We have a so-called NIAC
Phase I study, the Solar Power Satellite via Arbitrarily Large
Phase Array--that is SPS-ALPHA. It focuses a modular approach
that would one day make a huge orbital platform to be megawatts
of wireless power. Now, NIAC is known for those very far-out
ideas.
In much more nearer term, we have the Centennial Challenges
Program. You may remember this is our flagship prize
competition activity. Prizes have often been recognized as a
great innovative way to bring in nontraditional offerers and
technologists to solve hard problems. We offered a prize for
beamed power in 2005 to 2009 looking at how to beam power to a
spacecraft that could rise through the atmosphere using that
kind of power. In fact, one of the competitors--LaserMotive,
LLC--was awarded $900,000 in the 2009 challenge because the
practical demonstration of power beaming.
And now, more recently, the game-changing development
program, again one of the Space Technology Programs. In 2011,
we awarded approximately $3 million for concept studies to
multiple companies for a first-phase study called Ride the
Light. There was work done by Teledyne Brown Engineering in
Huntsville, Alabama; Aerojet in Redmond, Washington; ATK in New
York; LaserMotive in Kent, Washington; and a number of others
including JPL Boeing and the Aerospace Corporation. These
studies show that the cost of a phase 2 ground-based
demonstration wouldn't be feasible in the fiscal year 2012
appropriated amount for space technology, but it does provide a
path forward for looking into this research in the future.
As you suggest, it is a far-out idea but it has got some
promise and this is the sort of thing that we pursue through
the Space Technology Program because where else are you going
to do it? You know, it has got to be done at NASA.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Most people don't know we lose a lot of
electricity when it goes--when it is transmitted over wires,
and come to think of it, is there that much loss when we
transmit it by beaming it? And that is the type of studies that
I would like to see because it might even be cost-effective to
transfer it from space to earth rather than produce it in Earth
and using wires to send it thousands of miles away.
One last thought--and I know I just got a few seconds
here--and that is we have heard about the sonogram and some of
these other spinoff technologies. I am very interested--and we
have heard a lot of questions today--about getting the new
things onto the market, but if once they are on the market we
have private companies that are making lots of money off the
jobs that they are doing in the private sector. Is there a
payback for NASA? Is there a--who owns the technology? And
should we have a system set up so that if someone has a
sonogram that becomes used all over the world and NASA's
technology development was instrumental in developing that, who
has got the patent and who is going to get the money and is
NASA going to get anything back? Maybe Dr. Peck or whoever
would like to comment on that.
Dr. Peck. Yes, sir. I will give you a brief response and
then maybe save some time for others. You know, briefly, a lot
of the tech transfer activity that we have undertaken at the
Agency is based on licensing. The licensing fees can come back
to the government through that. Part of it goes to the inventor
in fact, which motivates----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, we should have that but is NASA
getting anything back?
Dr. Peck. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rohrabacher. We are?
Dr. Peck. And I will take for the record to provide some
details on that.
Mr. Rohrabacher. That would be very nice. That would be
very good. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Palazzo. At this time, we are going to go into a
second round of questions. We are going to ask our Members to
only ask one question just in case votes are called.
And the first opportunity is going to go to Mr. Russell. I
think you raised your hand and the question was probably
centered around what is the greatest barrier your company faced
when working with NASA on technology transfer projects? What
was similar to what Mr. Clarke was going to ask you? But we
will give you an opportunity and we are going to count that as
his question.
Mr. Russell. Thank you. The point I wanted to make was
there are some softer aspects of the value of NASA, which is
critically important to small companies like mine. So the fact
that NASA is using our product allows us to market that fact,
which helps NASA and the general public get wider awareness. So
that fact that, you know, NASA has used us because they have
solved this problem in space for 30 years, that was before
people could do remote physiological monitoring due to
technology. So when we needed to field it onto special
operators, we used NASA's 30-year experience to help us solve
that problem for a DOD problem. Then they could take that
technology and use it for the washout program on the Air Force
and then DHS used that on first responders.
So I think NASA needs recognition that they are using the
advanced technology to help other government departments to
solve the problem as well. And so then into the general public
when our monitoring people at home across the country using
that technology, it is very cheap and is now helping everybody
in the general public not only be well but monitor their
chronic disease issues. So I think the fact that NASA has gone
into government departments who had the next need and then into
the general public at the consumer level helps NASA. And every
time we can tell people where the technology came from, I think
that adds a true value back to NASA that is not just financial
but helps justify why we are here today and helps the general
public back the funding for that next, hopeful that this
technology may help in the future.
Whether it is blue sky or deep space general today, I think
those are very good examples of how it does come down. And I
think that that experience bringing to us and helps our
scientists solve problems and excites them to build the
competencies of the teams that have been talked about, as well
as get that into Best Buy, I think that is a success that helps
everybody.
Chairman Palazzo. All right. Thank you, Mr. Russell.
Dr. Aubrecht and Mr. Vilja, both of you mention in your
written testimonies the need for NASA to maintain a clear
vision for the future and to continue investing in the hard and
challenging technological problems to ensure the United States
remains cutting edge. Do either of you have recommendations on
ways to improve NASA's strategic vision such as--that the
United States is consistently pushing the technological
envelope?
Mr. Vilja. Well, I think it is a three-pronged approach.
You know, first of all, you really do have to have some sort of
sustained production so that you can really get that. By going
to a continuous process and proven approach, you really get a
draw for what is the technology that you can use.
The second thing is you always have to have a development
program going that actually ends up in product. And that is
where you really introduce new concepts into practice. And
after it has been introduced into practice you know it is
practical; you know it is ready for further investment into the
commercial spinoff.
But then you also got to keep that third prong going where
you are saying, look, what is impossible today? And then start
exploring how you make the impossible possible. And that is
where you really start getting the breakthroughs. Now, they are
not always practical. You know, power beaming is a hard thing
to do. But once you start making those initial breakthroughs,
then you drive it into practice and then you start getting the
commercial spinoff.
So it is really--you have to have a pipeline going and you
have to stick to that pipeline because if you keep changing it
over, you don't ever really get the full benefit of it.
Dr. Aubrecht. Yeah, just to extend on that, to me the thing
that NASA has done well, where it has succeeded, is when it had
a very clear statement in terms of what the objective was on
one page. And you need to get NASA on the page, this Committee,
the rest of the Congress needs to be on that page, and the
White House needs to be on the same page. And it has to be
clear. It doesn't have to be very complicated language. It
doesn't have to be in scientific or engineering terms or
whatever, just a very clear objective in terms of what you are
trying to accomplish.
The question earlier in terms of engaging the public and
how to get the public understanding what NASA does. You have to
write it in terms of what the local newspapers can write
articles about that and say here is where NASA is going with
something. So to me it is almost a marketing challenge that you
have, but it starts with have a very clear, concise statement
in terms of what the objective is. And you go back to the
manned space program; that is what drove that all the way
through the '60s and '70s, which is very clear, continuous,
step-by-step here is where we want to go. And to me if you did
that with all of the rest of the NASA sort of projects, you
would have the same kind of result.
Chairman Palazzo. Dr. Aubrecht, I think you will find
complete agreement with this Committee on what you just said.
And at this time, I will recognize Mr. Costello.
Dr. Aubrecht. I notice the heads nodding.
Mr. Costello. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Vilja, let me ask you. You mentioned at Pratt Whitney
what you have learned and what your experience has been with
rocket engines and how it was instrumental in your ability to
design a rapid-mix injector. And you talked about the--in your
gas fire system. Tell me a little bit, if you will, about how
this technology, deploying this new technology in commercial
systems, how it may have a result on emission reduction and
greater use of coal gasification technology in energy
generation?
Mr. Vilja. Sure. I mean the thing that really drives
anything into practice is an economic benefit right off the
top. By being 90 percent smaller than the other alternatives
that exist today, you get a real benefit in just building the
plant in the first place, you know, on the order of like 30
percent of building the plant, then a 15, 20 percent reduction
in the amount of product that you get out of it for the product
you put in.
We are also finding that using this technology we are not
as susceptible to the grade of coal coming in. We have been
talking to a lot of users of existing plants. They have to
specially blend their various coals, and as a rocket guy, had
no idea there were that many different coals. But there are a
lot of different coals and you have to make a special blend so
the gasifiers don't have hiccups and they can still keep
producing. Ours seems to be pretty insensitive to that so you
can really start using more different grades of coal and still
get the same outcome.
Now, by getting the higher efficiency, you get a ten
percent lower amount of carbon dioxide that is produced in it
and it is coming out at a higher pressure, so if you wanted to
do carbon sequestration, you have higher pressure to work with
and it is much easier to do that.
And then the final benefit is the fact that since we are a
dry-feed system, we use 30 percent less water. And I think over
the course of things, water preservation is going to be a very
big thing in the environmental agenda, and so I think that I
am--you know, a lot of people talk about the air pollution side
but we think water conservation is another part of it that
makes it economically very attractive.
Mr. Costello. We obviously can't do this now but I will be
in touch with you later. I am very interested in pursuing some
other questions with you.
Mr. Vilja. That would be great.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Clarke.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I have been working to attract new companies to metro
Detroit. Many of them are startups and virtually all of them
are headed up by very bright individuals that understand a
partnership with NASA could be mutually beneficial, yet many of
them don't understand how to work with government. What steps
should a new startup take if they wanted to start a dialogue
with NASA on a future likely partnership? And that is to
anyone.
Mr. Russell. As a very small company and a foreigner, we
started actually when we were based in New Zealand before we
shifted the company wholly to the United States, and so we
engaged with the end researchers and subject matter experts in
NASA that wanted to work with us in a mutually beneficial way.
And that really helped us not have to learn the entire SBIR
process nor the contracting to begin with. We actually had a
value proposition that we could come to NASA and they could
help us with the process. And I think there has been some
amazing explanation of the processes that exist.
So my recommendation would be figure out what you want to
do first and what problem you want to solve rather than head
smack into all the bureaucracy that is going to overwhelm you.
Because once you have the passion inside NASA and your
organization, they are enthusiastic; they will help solve the
other problems for you.
Mr. Clarke. Yes?
Mr. Vilja. NASA has also got an active program where we can
have mentor protege relationships with new companies,
particularly in HUBZones or distressed areas, and we have
contract flow-downs where a certain percentage of our entire
contract value has to go to this kind of a spread. We have had
a lot of success on the J-2 program. We had a mentor- protege
relationship with several HUBZone companies where they actually
learn how to do government contracting and we were able to
bring them into the supplier base. Cain Tubular outside of
Chicago had never worked on rocket components. They did a great
job on some heat exchanger coils for us. The company in Detroit
who was able to stamp out the panels, we think they are going
to fall into our supplier base.
But, the intricacies of government contracting is something
they are going to have to learn. But these contracts give a
great opportunity for them to learn that without having to be
overcome by, you know, trying to bid on them individually. And
by going along with these kinds of programs, I think that is a
great way for them to become part of the NASA supplier base.
Mr. Clarke. That is great. So I will reach out to you
gentlemen, then, regarding some partnerships.
Dr. Peck. May I add something to that?
Mr. Clarke. Yes.
Dr. Peck. Thank you. Just briefly, I mentioned the online
partnering tool already. It is at technology.NASA.gov. That
actually allows companies to engage directly with NASA and get
handholding through the process. It is actually meant to
simplify the kind of relationship that Mr. Russell explained
can be overwhelming. But thanks to our new approach and using a
web-based interface, we think we are simplifying that. We have
even gone further to offer licensing available through the
internet, so as a small company, if you know that you want to
license a technology that has been developed for NASA, you can
go to the website, click on it, and procure it right there and
then.
Mr. Clarke. That is great. So I know I had one question but
you actually answered my other questions about licensing. Thank
you.
And I yield my time back.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Clarke.
I thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony and the
Members for their questions. The Members of the Subcommittee
may have additional questions for the witnesses and we will ask
for you to respond to those in writing.
The record will remain open for two weeks for additional
comments and statements from Members.
The witnesses are excused and this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:23 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


