- OFFICE OF COMMERCIAL SPACE TRANSPORTATION'S FISCAL YEAR 2012 BUDGET REQUEST

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OFFICE OF COMMERCIAL SPACE
TRANSPORTATION'S FISCAL YEAR
2012 BUDGET REQUEST

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, MAY 5, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-16

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-220                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DAVID WU, Oregon
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 PAUL D. TONKO, New York
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JERRY McNERNEY, California
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
Tennessee                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics

HON. STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER JR.,          GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
Wisconsin                        MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DAVID WU, Oregon
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia
MO BROOKS, Alabama
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Thursday, May 5, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Steven M. Palazzo, Chair,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........     7
Written Statement............................................     8

Statement by Representative Jerry F. Costello, Acting Ranking
Minority Member, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Witnesses:

Dr. George C. Nield. Associate Administrator for Commercial Space
Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    11
Written Statement............................................    13

Dr. Gerald Dillingham, Director, Physical Infrastructure, US
Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    19

Dr. Henry R. Hertzfeld, Research Professor of Space Policy and
International Affairs, Elliott School of International Affairs,
George Washington University
Oral Statement...............................................    30
Written Statement............................................    31

Discussion
...............................................................

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. George C. Nield, Associate Administrator for Commercial Space
Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration................    58

Dr. Gerald Dillingham, Director, Physical Infrastructure, U.S.
Government Accountability Office...............................    65

Dr. Henry R. Hertzfeld, Research Professor of Space Policy and
International Affairs, Elliott School of International Affairs,
George Washington University...................................    67

OFFICE OF COMMERCIAL SPACE TRANSPORTATION'S
FISCAL YEAR 2012 BUDGET REQUEST

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 5, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steven
Palazzo [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Office of Commercial Space Transportation's

Fiscal Year 2012 Budget Request

thursday, may 5, 2011
10:00 a.m.--12:00 p.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

Purpose

The purpose of the May 5 hearing held by the Subcommittee on Space
and Aeronautics is to review the Fiscal Year 2012 budget request
submitted by the FAA Office of Commercial Space Transportation (in FAA
shorthand the office is referred to as `AST') and to examine new
initiatives in the request to expand the office's roles and
responsibilities. AST's FY2012 budget request seeks $26.625 million, a
74% increase over the FY2010 enacted level ($15.237 million) and a
near-doubling of its workforce, asserting that NASA-sponsored
commercial cargo flights to the International Space Station, plus the
expected start-up of commercial human sub-orbital flights, places new
regulatory demands on their operations.

Witnesses

Dr. George C. Nield, Associate Administrator for
Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration

Dr. Gerald Dillingham, Director, Physical Infrastructure,
U.S. Government Accountability Office

Dr. Henry R. Hertzfeld, Research Professor of Space
Policy and International Affairs, Elliott School of International
Affairs, George Washington University

Background

The Office of Commercial Space Transportation (AST) licenses and
regulates U.S. commercial space launches and reentries, as well as the
operation of non-federal launch and reentry sites. It's mission
statement is: ``To ensure the protection of the public, property, and
the national security and foreign policy interests of the United States
during commercial launch and reentry activities, and to encourage,
facilitate, and promote U.S. commercial space transportation.'' AST
issued its first launch license in 1989 and since then has licensed 204
launches with no fatalities, serious injuries, or significant damage to
the uninvolved public.
In 1984 President Reagan signed an executive order designating the
Department of Transportation as the lead federal agency for encouraging
and facilitating commercial launch activities within the private
sector. Eight months later Congress passed the Commercial Space Launch
Act (P.L. 98- 575) which gave legislative authority to DOT's role as
the principal oversight agency for the regulation and licensing of
commercial space transportation systems. Subsequently, DOT shifted the
office to the FAA.
Congress last acted on legislation dealing with commercial space
transportation in the 108th Congress. Two bills were enacted: (1) ``The
Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act'', H.R. 5382 (PL 108-492) was
introduced by Rep. Dana Rohrabacher and expanded AST's authority to
regulate commercial human space flight; (2) H.R. 2608 (PL 108-360)
reauthorized the Office of Commercial Space Transportation through FY
2009. No subsequent bill addressing AST has since been enacted.

Licensing Activities

There are three types of launches--national security, civil, and
commercial. The Office of Commercial Space Transportation regulates
commercial launches; launches of NASA and DOD payloads do not require
licenses. In 2010, AST licensed four commercial orbital launches
compared to five licensed launches in 2009. For 2011 AST forecasts four
commercial launches will be licensed. No suborbital flights were
conducted under FAA experimental permits in 2010.
In 2010 one reentry was conducted under an FAA reentry license. The
SpaceX Dragon Capsule successfully reentered the atmosphere and landed
in the Pacific Ocean following its first NASA Commercial Orbital
Transportation System (COTS) demonstration flight. It was the first
reentry license ever granted by FAA. SpaceX anticipates flying its
second COTS demonstration flight later this year and Orbital also plans
to fly its first COTS demonstration before the end of 2011.
In addition to licensing launches, AST also licenses the operation
of commercial launch sites (or ``spaceports ''). Currently, there are
eight--

Spaceport Florida, Cape Canaveral Air Force Station,
FL

Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport, Wallops Island, VA

California Spaceport, Vandenberg Air Force Base, CA

Kodiak Launch Complex, Kodiak Island, AK

Mojave Air & Space Port, CA

Cecil Field Spaceport, Jacksonville, FL

Oklahoma Spaceport, Burns Flat, OK

Spaceport America, Las Cruces, NM

AST's FY12 budget request seeks $26.625 million, a 75% increase
over FY10 enacted, and compared to the FY11 request it represents a 69%
increase ($10.878 million). Three new proposals are responsible for the
spending growth--

(1)  proposed establishment of the ``FAA Commercial Spaceflight
Technical Center'' to be located at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida
($5 million in FY12 to hire 50 additional employees);

(2)  creation of a ``Space Incentives Program'' ($5 million in
FY12) ; and

(3)  hiring an additional seven employees ($1.25 million) for
development and implementation of safety requirements and human factors
to support development of commercial crew transportation systems and
missions.

The budget request includes the following justification: ``A key
challenge that we are facing today involves the beginning of a new era
in commercial human spaceflight: suborbital human spaceflight (space
tourism) and orbital crew transportation to the International Space
Station. The publication of the new National Space Policy signals an
even greater role for the commercial space industry in America's
overall space strategy and space traffic management and AST's
activities support the growth in the commercial space industry. In
addition, the 2012 Budget request supports the Presidential Task Force
on Space Industry Workforce and Economic Development's recommendation
that FAA establish a Commercial Spaceflight Technical Center. The
Technical Center will provide safety and technical support for future
commercial space launch activities and support the continued
development of standards and regulations for commercial spaceflight.
Due to a projected increase in commercial space transportation
launches, AST funding will be used to conduct appropriate research and
develop necessary regulations related to commercial human spaceflight
to ensure public safety.''
The FAA Commercial Spaceflight Technical Center. Many details about
the Center are still being developed. AST's budget request notes that
the Presidential Task Force recommended that FAA establish the Center
at the Kennedy Space Center, and that its main purpose will be ``to
develop safety processes and requirements related to commercial human
spaceflight (HSF), along with related research. Primary focus areas at
the Technical Center will include spaceflight safety, spaceflight
engineering and standards, and Space Traffic Management.'' In
supplementary budget material provided to committee staff, AST also
pointed out that establishing the Technical Center at Kennedy will
``enable the nation to continue to benefit from the contributions of a
significant number of highly-skilled aerospace workers who will be
seeking employment during the next 12 months. It will allow the FAA and
NASA to partner in developing an organization with a knowledgeable and
experienced staff to regulate future commercial space operations.''
Space Incentives Program. The request seeks $5 million to establish
a program for incentivizing advancements in space transportation by
non-governmental organizations. Modeled on previous successful prize
programs (e.g., the Ansari X Prize), AST proposes to put up a $5
million award for industry to develop and demonstrate a low-cost launch
system for CubeSats. These are very small low-cost satellites (10 x 10
x 10 cm) that are favored by universities and other research
institutions, and are typically carried as secondary payloads on
conventional satellite launches. Should the prize program produce a
winning design, it would enable frequent dedicated low-cost missions
carrying one or several CubeSats.

Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004

In 2004, SpaceShipOne successfully launched two suborbital flights
from the Mojave, CA, airport within a two week time-span, winning the
$10 million Ansari X-Prize. Space industry optimists believed then that
suborbital flights carrying space tourists would quickly develop with
several commercial companies entering the marketplace to offer routine
suborbital flights. Later that year Congress passed H.R. 5382 (P.L.
108-492), the Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004,
authorizing the Secretary of Transportation to license and regulate
commercial human space flight.
However, even though the Act extended regulatory authority to DOT
(specifically to the Office of Commercial Space Transportation), it
prohibited federal regulation of commercial human space flight
companies for eight years following enactment. This prohibition covers
both suborbital and orbital commercial launch systems.
The premise of the eight-year prohibition was rooted in the concern
that the industry did not yet exist, and thus DOT (and AST) had no
relevant experience upon which to regulate industry practices. During
this period, space launch companies would be able to experiment with
various designs and processes as they endeavored to improve their
vehicles' safety and performance prior to offering licensed suborbital
(or orbital) flights. The Act provided two exceptions to the regulatory
prohibition; AST could restrict or prohibit design features or
operating practices that (1) resulted in a serious or fatal injury to
crew or space flight participants, or (2) contributed to an unplanned
event during a commercial human space flight that posed a high risk of
causing a serious or fatal injury to crew or space flight participants.
The eight year ban expires December 23, 2012.
Thus the increase in AST's FY2012 budget request is predicated on
the expiration of the ban and with it the need to develop the technical
expertise, and to hire industry veterans. Their budget request states:
``The FY2012 request reflects the addition of crew and passenger safety
to our regulatory activities.''
The regulatory prohibition may be modified by Congress. On March
31, 2011, during House consideration of H.R. 658, the FAA Air
Transportation and Modernization and Safety Improvement Act of 2011, an
amendment was adopted by the House that, among other provisions,
extended the regulatory prohibition for another eight years following
the date of the first licensed commercial human space flight launch.
The Senate companion bill had no comparable provision.
To date only one company, Virgin Galactic, is known to be actively
testing a prototype sub-orbital commercial human spaceflight vehicle.
SpaceShipTwo, a larger version of the Ansari X-Prize winner, is
undergoing unpowered atmospheric testing in California. According to
the company, hundreds of interested purchasers have already placed
down-payments with Virgin Galatic for the privilege of flying on their
spacecraft once commercial flights get underway.

NASA's Commercial Cargo and Crew Programs

With the retirement of the Space Shuttle this summer, NASA plans to
rely on two companies--Orbital Sciences Corporation (Orbital) and Space
Exploration Technologies ( SpaceX)--to provide cargo resupply services
to the International Space Station until 2020. Under the current
contracts each company is obligated to launch two supply flights a
year, and with regard to SpaceX, it would also bring materials back
from ISS using their Dragon capsule to reenter the atmosphere and land
at a permitted site. For these resupply flights NASA is buying a
service as though it were a traditional commercial customer, thus
triggering coverage under AST's licensing regime. Once both companies
are operating resupply flights on a routine basis, AST's regulatory
workload will increase by four flights a year, plus two reentries.
NASA is also pursuing a longer term strategy to use a similar
approach of buying launch services to ferry astronauts to and from the
International Space Station, although agency plans are still uncertain
about when these ``commercial crew'' flights will begin. Most of the
agency's notional plans suggest 2016 as a likely date, though many
technical hurdles still remain, not the least of which is NASA
publishing a set of human rating requirements to be met by any of the
commercial launch bidders.
Non-NASA flights would also require a new set of regulations be
established and enforced by AST to ensure that the risk to non-
governmental crew and passengers are minimized. NASA has vast
experience in this arena while AST has none. FAA (AST) and NASA are in
discussions now about how the two agencies will exercise oversight and
insight into the design and operation of any commercial orbital crew
launch systems, as well as their reentry performance, landing sites,
and recovery operations. The goal is to minimize any overlap between
the agencies.
On Thursday, April 28, 2011, AST published a notice on its website
that it will hold a public meeting late this month in Florida to seek
input from the affected community. ``FAA is planning to propose
regulations to protect the health and safety of crew and space flight
participants for orbital human spaceflight as soon as circumstances
require after December 23, 2012'' (the end of the eight year regulatory
prohibition now in current law).
Chairman Palazzo. The Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics
will come to order.
Good morning. Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``The
Office of Commercial Space Transportation's Fiscal Year 2012
Budget Request.'' In front of you are packets containing the
written testimony, biographies and Truth in Testimony
disclosures for today's witness panel. I recognize myself for
five minutes for an opening statement.
Today, May 5th, marks the 50th anniversary of the first
flight of an American astronaut, and the second human being
into outer space. Alan Shepard, riding in a Mercury capsule,
launched atop a Redstone rocket on a 15-minute suborbital
flight that carried him to an altitude of 116 miles. His flight
was a major first step for America's space program, helping
bolster American pride and setting our country and NASA on a
spectacular course of space accomplishments.
Turning to the present, I want to thank our witnesses for
taking time from their busy schedules to appear before our
Subcommittee. I realize a lot of work by many people goes into
the preparation of your statements, and I want to assure you
that your expertise and wisdom will be valuable to this
Committee and Congress as we wrestle with issues related to our
Nation's commercial space program.
The Office of Commercial Space Transportation provides an
essential public service, ensuring that commercial launches are
undertaken with the highest level of safety. Their record of
achievement is significant, licensing over 200 launches without
any loss of life, serious injury, or notable property damage to
the general public.
However, over the next several years AST, as they are
commonly known within FAA and industry, faces an increased
workload and possible added regulatory duties, and their fiscal
year 2012 budget request reflects these new burdens. The
request seeks a 75 percent increase over the fiscal year 2010
enacted level and an expansion of its workforce by nearly 50
percent. A significant portion of the increase would be spent
hiring additional staff to develop and implement new safety
requirements for suborbital and orbital commercial human
spaceflight launch systems. AST also proposes to establish a
new program modeled after NASA's Centennial Challenges prize to
incentivize development of space transportation technologies.
Finally, the budget request proposes creation of a Commercial
Spaceflight Technical Center at NASA's Kennedy Space Center
that would initially employ a small number of aerospace
engineers, but could over time hire as many as a couple
hundred. The request is silent on associated infrastructure
costs.
With respect to commercial human spaceflight, the
Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004 included two
provisions that will be central to our discussions today. The
first authorized AST to regulate commercial human space flight
launch systems; the second prohibited AST from regulating
commercial human spaceflight for eight years in order to give
space tourism companies an opportunity to design, develop, and
operate new and experimental launch systems. The freeze was
expected to allow the nascent industry to gain experience
through experimental flights upon which AST could rely as it
began to draft a regulatory regime.
At the time Congress was considering the 2004 Act, industry
expressed concern that without any real-world experience,
regulation writers could choke off creation of the space
tourism marketplace by writing and enforcing unworkable and
overly prescriptive rules.
Roughly 6-1/2 years have elapsed since the bill's
enactment, and as many in this room are aware, there is an
effort underway in Congress to extend the regulatory
prohibition another eight years. Given that no prototype
commercial suborbital vehicle has yet flown into space, does
the argument still hold that AST needs an experience base upon
which it can draft regulations guiding the industry's design
and operation of their vehicles? To what degree should AST
regulate commercial human space launch systems? Should they
have insight down to the component level for each type of
launch vehicle, much the same way that FAA certifies commercial
civil aircraft? How would they acquire the knowledge and
expertise to take on this role? It is my hope this morning's
hearing will help shed light on these and other pressing
questions.
Before closing, I also want to express concerns about AST's
proposal to create a prize program. While I appreciate
government's interest in promoting technological development in
the space transportation industry, it is my view that NASA is
doing more than a sufficient job funding new technologies and
capabilities through aggressive use of Space Act agreements. In
these times when Congress and the White House are focusing on
reducing the federal budget deficit, I question the wisdom of
implementing another form of federal largesse.
Dr. Nield, don't take this personally, but I want the
record to note that the FAA's testimony was provided to our
Committee about 20 hours ago contrary to Committee rules and
past practice. By holding back testimony, Members and staff are
afforded only a handful of hours to review and analyze
Administration statements, undermining the ability of this body
to engage in a well-informed dialog with Executive Branch
witnesses. The White House's process for vetting testimony of
agency witnesses continues to frustrate this Committee and
Congress. This is not the first time in this still-young
Congress that testimony has arrived only hours before the
scheduled start of hearings, and I urge the White House to
exercise greater diligence.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Palazzo follows:]

Prepared Statement of Chairman Steven M. Palazzo

Good morning and welcome to today's hearing to discuss the Fiscal
Year 2012 budget request submitted by the FAA Office of Commercial
Space Transportation.
Today, May 5th, marks the 50th anniversary of the first flight of
an American astronaut - and the second human being - into outer space.
Alan Shepard, riding in a Mercury capsule, launched atop a Redstone
rocket on a fifteen minute suborbital flight that carried him to an
altitude of 116 miles. His flight was a major first step for America's
space program, helping bolster American pride and setting our country
and NASA on a spectacular course of space accomplishments.
Turning to the present, I want to thank our witnesses for taking
time from their busy schedules to appear before our Subcommittee. I
realize a lot of work by many people goes into the preparation of your
statements and I want to assure you that your expertise and wisdom will
be valuable to this Committee and Congress as we wrestle with issues
related to our nation's commercial space program.
The Office of Commercial Space Transportation provides an essential
public service, ensuring that commercial launches are undertaken with
the highest level of safety. Their record of achievement is
significant, licensing over 200 launches without any loss of life,
serious injury, or notable property damage to the general public.
However, over the next several years AST - as they are commonly
known within FAA and industry - faces an increased workload and
possible added regulatory duties, and their FY2012 budget request
reflects these new burdens. The request seeks a 75% increase over the
FY10 enacted level and an expansion of its workforce by nearly 50%. A
significant portion of the increase would be spent hiring additional
staff to develop and implement new safety requirements for sub-orbital
and orbital commercial human spaceflight launch systems. AST also
proposes to establish a new program - modeled after NASA's Centennial
Challenges prize - to incentivize development of space transportation
technologies. Finally, the budget request proposes creation of a
Commercial Spaceflight Technical Center at NASA's Kennedy Space Center
that would initially employ a small number of aerospace engineers, but
could over time hire as many as a couple hundred. The request is silent
on associated infrastructure costs.
With respect to commercial human space flight, the Commercial Space
Launch Amendments Act of 2004 included two provisions that will be
central to our discussions today. The first authorized AST to regulate
commercial human space flight launch systems; the second prohibited AST
from regulating commercial human space flight for eight years in order
to give space tourism companies an opportunity to design, develop and
operate new and experimental launch systems. The freeze was expected to
allow the nascent industry to gain experience through experimental
flights upon which AST could rely as it began to draft a regulatory
regime. At the time Congress was considering the 2004 Act, industry
expressed concern that without any real-world experience, regulation
writers could choke off creation of the space tourism marketplace by
writing and enforcing unworkable and overly-prescriptive rules.
Roughly six-and-a-half years have elapsed since the bill's
enactment, and as many in this room are aware, there is an effort
underway in Congress to extend the regulatory prohibition another eight
years. Given that no prototype commercial sub-orbital vehicle has yet
flown into space, does the argument still hold that AST needs an
experience base upon which it can draft regulations guiding the
industry's design and operation of their vehicles? To what degree
should AST regulate commercial human space launch systems? Should they
have insight down to the component level for each type of launch
vehicle, much the same way that FAA certifies commercial civil
aircraft? How would they acquire the knowledge and expertise to take on
this role? It is my hope this morning's hearing will help shed light on
these and other pressing questions.
Before closing, I also want to express concerns about AST's
proposal to create a prize program. While I appreciate government's
interest in promoting technological development in the space
transportation industry, it is my view that NASA is doing more than a
sufficient job funding new technologies and capabilities through
aggressive use of Space Act Agreements. In these times when Congress
and the White House are focusing on reducing the federal budget
deficit, I question the wisdom of implementing another form of federal
largesse.
Dr. Nield, don't take this personally, but I want the record to
note that the FAA's testimony was provided to our committee about 20
hours ago, contrary to committee rules and past practice. By holding
back testimony, Members and staff are afforded only a handful of hours
to review and analyze administration statements, undermining the
ability of this body to engage in a well-informed dialogue with
executive branch witnesses. The White House's process for vetting
testimony of agency witnesses continues to frustrate this committee and
Congress. This is not the first time in this still-young Congress that
testimony has arrived only hours before the scheduled start of
hearings, and I urge the White House to exercise greater diligence.

Chairman Palazzo. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Costello for
an opening statement.
Mr. Costello. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I thank you for
calling the hearing today, and let me just associate myself
with your remarks about testimony coming from the White House
in a timely manner consistent with the rules of this Committee.
It has been a longstanding problem. I have been on this
Committee for a number of years, and we experience the same
problem regardless of which Administration is in office, and I
would just say to you to go back, Dr. Nield, and express our
frustration. As the Chairman said, don't take it personal but
we know the vetting process needs to--you all need to do a
better job in the White House. We expressed that under the Bush
Administration. We will continue to express that under the
Obama Administration.
Mr. Chairman, I am very familiar with commercial space
transportation and the commercial space transportation
industry, not only from the hearings that I Chaired in the
Aviation Subcommittee but also from the X-Prize Foundation,
which is well known for designing and managing public
competitions for aviation and space. They are located across
the river, in St. Louis, Missouri, from my Congressional
district in southwestern Illinois.
AST's fiscal year 2012 budget request reflects the office's
changing role as the commercial spaceflight industry expands to
provide cargo and crew transportation for NASA, build
spaceports around the country, transport space tourists, and
fulfill other missions. Congress and the FAA will need to
decide how best to proceed with respect to safety regulations
of this emerging industry.
Congress passed several laws to allow commercial space
transportation to develop, and we must ensure the industry has
proper federal safety oversight. As the number of launches is
expected to increase with commercial space tourism and the
potential use of commercial space launch vehicles by NASA, it
is imperative that the FAA has the proper resources to ensure
new technologies and programs evolve safely.
I look forward to hearing from the FAA Associate
Administrator for Commercial Space Transportation about FAA's
role in overseeing the commercial space industry to ensure the
safety of the public, as well as crew and spaceflight
participants. I hope this hearing will be the first of many
substantive hearings by this Subcommittee to examine the
current status and future challenges of commercial space
operations. We need to determine our goals for the Office of
Commercial Space Transportation and evaluate the issues we must
consider for the future of the AST.
I welcome our witnesses and look forward to hearing their
testimony. Again, I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back
and look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Costello follows:]

Prepared Statement of Acting Ranking Member Jerry Costello

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding today's hearing to review the
Fiscal Year 2012 (FY12) budget request for the Federal Aviation
Administration's (FAA's) Office of Commercial Space Transportation
(AST).
I am very familiar with the emerging commercial space
transportation industry, not only from hearings I Chaired in the
Aviation Subcommittee, but also because the X-Prize Foundation, which
is most well known for designing and managing public competitions for
aviation and space, is located in St. Louis, Missouri --across the
river from my Congressional district.
AST's FY12 budget request reflects the office's changing role as
the commercial spaceflight industry expands to provide cargo and crew
transportation for NASA, build space ports around the country,
transport space tourists, and fulfill other missions. Congress and the
FAA will need to decide how best to proceed with respect to safety
regulation of this emerging industry.
Congress passed several laws to allow commercial space
transportation to develop and we must ensure the industry has proper
federal safety oversight. As the number of launches is expected to
increase with commercial space tourism and the potential use of
commercial space launch vehicles by National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA), it is imperative that the FAA has the proper
resources to ensure new technologies and programs evolve safely.
I look forward to hearing from the FAA Associate Administrator for
Commercial Space Transportation, Dr. George Nield, about FAA's role in
overseeing the commercial space industry to ensure the safety of the
public, as well as crew and space flight participants.
I hope this hearing will be the first of many substantive hearings
by this subcommittee to examine the current status and future
challenges of commercial space operations. We need to determine our
goals for the Office of Commercial Space Transportation and evaluate
the issues we must consider for the future of the AST.
I welcome our witnesses and look forward to their testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of mytime.

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Costello.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time I would like to introduce our witness panel.
Our first witness is Dr. George Nield, Associate Administrator
for Commercial Space Transportation at the FAA. He has over 30
years of aerospace experience with the Air Force, NASA, and
private industry. Dr. Nield came to FAA from the Orbital
Sciences Corporation, where he served as Senior Scientist for
the Advanced Programs Group. Our next witness is Dr. Gerald
Dillingham, Director of Civil Aviation Issues at the U.S.
Government Accountability Office. He is responsible for
directing program evaluations and policy analysis related to
all aspects of civilian aviation including safety, finance,
environment, air traffic control, airport development, and
international aviation issues. Our final witness is Dr. Henry
Hertzfeld, Research Professor of Space Policy and International
Affairs in the Space Policy Institute at the Elliott School of
International Affairs and an Adjunct Professor of Law at George
Washington University in Washington, DC. Welcome to all of you.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each after which the Members of the Committee
will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. George Nield,
Associate Administrator for Commercial Space Transportation at
the FAA.

STATEMENT OF DR. GEORGE C. NIELD,

ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR FOR COMMERCIAL SPACE

TRANSPORTATION, FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION

Dr. Nield. Chairman Palazzo, Congressman Costello and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
participate in this hearing on the activities of the Federal
Aviation Administration Office of Commercial Space
Transportation. This is my first opportunity to speak to many
of you, so I am particularly pleased to be here. I know the
Subcommittee is specifically interested in the Administration's
fiscal year 2012 budget request for AST. I would also like to
update the Subcommittee on some of our recent activities and
offer you our view of the future.
The mission of the Office of Commercial Space
Transportation is to ensure protection of the public, property,
and the national security and foreign policy interests of the
United States during commercial launch and reentry activities,
and to encourage, facilitate and promote commercial space
transportation.
While we take all of our statutory charges seriously, our
top priority is safety. To carry out our safety
responsibilities, we develop and issue regulations, grant
licenses, permits and safety approvals, and conduct safety
inspections during every licensed or permitted launch. To date,
we have an unblemished safety record: 204 licensed launches
without any loss of life, serious injuries, or significant
property damage to the general public.
We are also responsible for licensing the operation of
launch and reentry sites, or spaceports. Since 1996, we have
licensed the operation of eight different spaceports around the
country. Last year, the FAA awarded four grants for spaceport
development. We believe these investments will enhance safety
and facilitate future development efforts.
The capability to accomplish important commercial space
transportation research was significantly enhanced last fall
through the establishment of the Center of Excellence for
Commercial Space Transportation led by New Mexico State
University. The Center of Excellence is a partnership between
government, industry and academia, and will carry out research
necessary to maintain U.S. leadership in commercial space
transportation safety and technologies.
Fifty years ago on May 5, 1961, Alan Shepard became the
first American to travel into space, but today, we find
ourselves at a crossroads. Next month, NASA will carry out the
final launch of the space shuttle. While this is a bittersweet
event for all space enthusiasts, it is also an exciting time
and an opportunity to begin the next chapter in space
transportation.
After the completion of Atlantis's final mission, NASA is
planning to rely on private industry to launch cargo and
eventually crew members to and from the International Space
Station, thereby enabling NASA to focus its attention on
exploring the solar system. It will be the FAA's responsibility
to license and regulate those commercial launches to the ISS.
One of the most important contributors to our near-term
workload will be suborbital space flights. In fiscal year 2012,
we expect to see several dozen licensed or permitted launches,
many of which will involve suborbital flights. That will mark a
significant increase in activity for us, and it represents the
start of what is likely to be a period of sustained and rapid
growth.
The Administration's fiscal year 2012 budget request for
AST totals approximately $26.6 million and provides for 103
full-time employees. The request includes funding for a
Commercial Spaceflight Technical Center at the Kennedy Space
Center in Florida and a low-cost access to space incentive
program. I would be happy to discuss each of these initiatives
in more detail if there is interest.
Commercial space transportation is currently undergoing a
number of changes, and as the regulator, we need to be prepared
to change along with the industry. For example, in the coming
months, it may be necessary to revisit some of the statutes and
regulations that govern commercial space launch activities.
Specifically, the FAA's legislative authority may require
revision so that we can continue to ensure public safety both
in space and on the ground. We see the potential for greater
regulatory authority in the area of on-orbit transportation as
well as during launch and reentry. We welcome the opportunity
to work with Congress on these priorities.
Chairman Palazzo, Congressman Costello and Members of the
Subcommittee, this concludes my prepared remarks. I would be
pleased to answer any questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Nield follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF DR. GEORGE C. NIELD,
ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR FOR COMMERCIAL SPACE TRANSPORTATION,
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION

Chairman Palazzo, Congressman Costello, and Members of the
Subcommittee:
Thank you for inviting me to participate in this hearing on the
activities of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Office of
Commercial Space Transportation (AST). This is my first opportunity to
speak to many of you, so I am particularly pleased to be here. I know
the Subcommittee is specifically interested in the Administration's FY
2012 budget request for AST. I look forward to answering any questions
you may have about our request. I would also like to take this
opportunity to update the Subcommittee on some of our recent
activities, to highlight some of the changes to our industry during the
past year, and to offer a view of the future - what's on the horizon as
we transition to a new role for the nation's commercial space
transportation industry.

The Office of Commercial Space Transportation

The Office of Commercial Space Transportation (AST) was established
by Executive Order in 1984 and was located in the Office of the
Secretary of Transportation. In November of 1995, the office was
transferred to the FAA, where today it is one of the agency's four
lines of business, along with the Office of Aviation Safety, the Office
of Airports, and the Air Traffic Organization.
Space transportation activities in the United States fall into
three main sectors: the civil sector, where the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) has the primary lead; the national
security sector, involving the Department of Defense and the
intelligence community; and the commercial sector, which is regulated
by the FAA. In accordance with federal statute, it is the mission of
AST to ensure protection of the public, property, and the national
security and foreign policy interests of the United States during
commercial launch and reentry activities, and to encourage, facilitate,
and promote commercial space transportation. While we take all of our
statutory charges seriously, our top priority is safety. To carry out
our safety responsibilities, we develop and issue regulations; grant
licenses, permits, and safety approvals; and conduct safety inspections
during every licensed or permitted launch. To date, we have an
unblemished safety record: 204 licensed launches, without any loss of
life, serious injuries, or significant property damage to the general
public.
We are also responsible for licensing the operation of launch and
reentry sites or ``spaceports,'' as they are popularly known. Since
1996 we have licensed the operation of the California Spaceport at
Vandenberg Air Force Base; Spaceport Florida at Cape Canaveral Air
Force Station; the Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport at Wallops Flight
Facility in Virginia; Mojave Air and Space Port in California; Kodiak
Launch Complex on Kodiak Island, Alaska; the Oklahoma Spaceport in
Burns Flat, Oklahoma; Spaceport America near Las Cruces, New Mexico;
and Cecil Field in Jacksonville, Florida.
Development of these sites is necessary for the growth and success
of the industry. In FY 2010, the FAA awarded four grants for spaceport
development. These investments will facilitate safety and growth of
future spaceport development and should ultimately inspire additional
private investment in commercial space transportation.
Commercial space transportation research efforts were enhanced last
year by the establishment of the Center of Excellence for Commercial
Space Transportation, led by New Mexico State University, Las Cruces.
The other institutions that comprise the center include Stanford
University; the Florida Institute of Technology in Melbourne; the New
Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology in Socorro; the University of
Colorado at Boulder; the University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston;
and the Florida Center for Advanced Aero-Propulsion--a research
consortium made up of the University of Florida, Florida State
University, and the University of Central Florida. The Center of
Excellence is a partnership between academia, industry, and government,
and will carry out research necessary to maintain U.S. leadership in
commercial space transportation safety and technology.
Additionally, the FAA maintains important relationships with our
interagency partners. We continue our partnership with the Air Force
through our Common Standards Working Group where we coordinate on
safety issues for expendable launch vehicles. We also work with the
White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, NASA, and the
Departments of Commerce, State, and Defense in the development of
interagency policy for the industry, including the new National Space
Policy released in 2010. We consult with the Department of State
regularly to promote our commercial space transportation guidance
abroad.
The Administration's 2010 National Space Policy establishes
specific goals to strengthen stability in space by, among other things,
promoting safe and responsible operations in space. This will require
steps such as collecting and monitoring detailed knowledge of the
orbital environment, and the sharing of that information with a variety
of space actors. It will also be important to continue taking steps to
minimize the creation of orbital debris and otherwise help preserve the
space environment for responsible, peaceful, and safe activities by all
users. Over time, the FAA will play a central role in developing and
enhancing our nation's capacity to conduct such efforts, along with the
Departments of Defense, State, and Commerce; the Office of the Director
of National Intelligence; NASA; and the Federal Communications
Commission. This collaboration will provide global benefits.

Today and Moving Forward

As the FAA continues the work of overseeing and enabling the safe
development of the commercial space transportation industry, the space
community as a whole finds itself at a crossroads. Last month, we
celebrated the 50th anniversary of human space flight. Next month, NASA
will conduct its final Space Shuttle launch. While this is a
bittersweet event for all space enthusiasts, it is also an exciting
time and an opportunity to begin the next chapter in space access,
transportation, and development. After the completion of Atlantis'
final mission, NASA is planning to rely on private industry to launch
cargo, and eventually crew members, to and from the International Space
Station (ISS), thereby enabling NASA to focus its attention on
exploring the solar system. FAA is engaging with NASA to further refine
the licensing and regulatory process for these upcoming commercial crew
launches to the ISS.
Throughout the past 50 years, NASA has become the world leader in
human spaceflight, amassing vast experience and a wonderful track
record in space travel. There is no equal.
Similarly, during the past 50 years, the FAA has achieved a
stunning record of safety in commercial aviation. We are now leveraging
that half-century of experience and safety acumen in our regulation and
oversight of the commercial space transportation industry.
Working in tandem, the FAA and NASA can bring best practices and
our best experiences to bear on the future development of a safe and
robust commercial human spaceflight industry for our nation - a
priority of the Administration. Working with NASA and other experts, we
can ensure the United States maintains its leadership role as human
space flight becomes a reality for the commercial industry and private
sector development increases to meet demand.
One of the concerns we have heard expressed, and which Members of
this Subcommittee may share, pertains to the demand for commercial
launches to low Earth orbit: Is there a market? What does that market
look like now and in the future? Is it sustainable?
To answer these questions, Congress directed NASA, in coordination
with the FAA, to conduct an assessment of the potential non-
Governmental market for commercially developed crew and cargo
transportation systems and capabilities (apart from the more
established market for launched commercial spacecraft). Assessments by
NASA and the FAA reveal a diversity of opinion among the space
community regarding the size of the non-Governmental market for
commercial crew and cargo launches, as well as the price of a ticket to
space. The NASA report concluded that ``catalyzed by a successful
Commercial Crew Program, a stable commercial non-Government market is
likely to emerge.'' NASA investments to date have paid huge dividends
for industry, providing new capabilities and enabling the development
of new, lower-cost launch systems.
Multiple American companies--including small, entrepreneurial
enterprises and large, established aerospace corporations--have
announced that they are ready, willing, and able to meet NASA's future
needs, as well as those of non-Governmental customers.
The future of commercial cargo and crew transportation to low Earth
orbit is a coming reality, but the largest near-term expansion in
activity will be in suborbital spaceflight. In calendar year 2010,
there were four licensed orbital launches: two Falcon 9 test fights and
two satellite deployment missions--a Delta II and a Delta IV. That same
year, we saw the first FAA-licensed reentry, of SpaceX's Dragon
capsule. In FY 2012, we expect several dozen licensed or permitted
launches. Although most of those missions will involve suborbital
launches, it still will be quite a change. The dramatic increase in
launch numbers will provide the FAA and the space community .with
important data and facilitate significant improvements throughout the
industry.

The President's FY 2012 Budget

The Administration's FY 2012 budget request for AST totals
approximately $26.6 million and provides for 103 full-time employees
(FTEs), at a cost of approximately $15.8 million. The office's request
for non-pay activities totals approximately $10.8 million. Key outputs
of the request include a projected 6 license and permit applications,
40 launch or reentry operations inspections, 8 launch site inspections,
5 environmental assessments, plus new rulemaking products, the
Commercial Space Flight Technical Center, the Center of Excellence for
Commercial Space Transportation, and incentives for low cost access to
space. The budget requests $1.2 million and 14 positions to develop and
implement additional safety processes and requirements specifically for
commercial human spaceflight and the FAA's efforts to improve
spaceflight safety.

Commercial Space Flight Technical Center

The budget request for AST includes $5 million and 50 positions for
a Commercial Spaceflight Technical Center. In anticipation of the
commercial cargo launches to the ISS that are scheduled to begin this
year and with plans for eventual commercial crew missions, it will be
vitally important to enhance and ensure the highest levels of safety
for commercial spaceflight operations. The staffing and activities
planned for the Commercial Spaceflight Technical Center will provide
the detailed engineering and operational expertise that will be
required to oversee the emerging commercial spaceflight industry.
Specifically, the Commercial Spaceflight Technical Center will
perform several functions: spaceflight safety, including safety
inspections, and accident prevention and investigation activities;
spaceflight engineering and standards, to be developed in cooperation
with both NASA and the industry, for spacecraft, spaceports, flight
crew and participants, and aerospace technicians; range operations,
including planning for future upgrades; and facilitating interagency
coordination and information sharing with regard to space situational
awareness, orbital debris, and collision avoidance advisories.
On August 15, 2010, the Presidential Task Force on Space Industry
Workforce and Economic Development recommended that FAA establish the
new Center at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. By co-locating the
new Center at the Kennedy Space Center, we hope to benefit from the
contributions of a significant number of highly skilled aerospace
workers who will be seeking employment during the next 12 months.
Additionally, this co-location will allow the FAA and NASA to further
strengthen our partnership by developing a knowledgeable and
experienced staff to regulate future commercial space operations, and
to develop the technical standards that will be needed for this
emerging and critically important industry.
Although the relationship between the Commercial Spaceflight
Technical Center and NASA will be vital, the Center will not duplicate
NASA functions. NASA has a separate mission and is focused on
activities such as the safety of its personnel during transport to and
from the ISS, operation of the ISS, development of a new Heavy-Lift
launch vehicle, robotic and human exploration of the solar system,
Earth and space science, and aeronautics. The FAA is a regulatory
agency and has the statutory responsibility to oversee commercial space
launches and reentries, and to ensure public safety during these
operations. Establishment of the Commercial Spaceflight Technical
Center will enable the FAA to strengthen its partnership with NASA,
drawing on NASA's expertise and experience in space operations and
human space flight to augment the FAA's experience in licensing and
regulating commercial launches to develop a highly skilled cadre of
commercial space hardware and operations experts.

Low-Cost Access to Space Incentive

The FY 2012 budget request also includes $5 million to incentivize
advancements in the commercial space transportation industry. The Low
Cost Access to Space Incentive program will provide a $5 million award
to the first non-governmental team to develop and demonstrate the
capability to launch a 1-kilogram cubesat to orbit using a partially
reusable launch system. The Administration believes that prizes and
challenges have many potential benefits, including increasing the
number of organizations that are addressing a particular problem of
national significance, stimulating private sector investment that is
many times greater than the cash value of the prize, and allowing the
Federal Government to pay only for results.
The high cost of access to space has long been a major obstacle for
civil, military, and commercial space programs. The dream of low cost,
fully-reusable space launch systems has recently been demonstrated by
the X-Prize competitions, but only to suborbital space. This
competition will achieve significant reductions in the cost of getting
satellites to orbit.
The Space Incentive Program follows a long tradition of prize
competitions, including the AnsariX Prize won by Scaled Composites
SpaceShipOne in 2004 and the Orteig Prize won by Charles Lindbergh in
1927. These awards can lead to significant accomplishments in
transportation, and the use of prizes has been very successful in
enabling government and industry to come up with innovative solutions
to challenging problems. This incentive is expected to increase the
number of developers and operators focusing on the specific problem of
reusable, low-cost, orbital space launch systems, and we believe it is
of sufficient size to attract the investment and commitment of
companies who are capable of winning the prize.

Preparing for the Future

The FAA stands ready to meet the changes and challenges we know are
coming. The industry has made significant strides toward a future that
will make increasing demands on the FAA's role as a regulator. As
activities expand in the marketplace, our role will amplify as well. To
this end, we are constantly looking ahead.
In the coming months and years, it may be necessary to revisit some
of the statutes and regulations that govern the commercial space launch
activities of the FAA. Specifically, the FAA's legislative authority
may require expansion to ensure public safety in space and on Earth, as
the commercial space flight sector evolves. Potentially, there may be a
need for greater regulatory authority in the areas of transportation on
orbit as well as launch and reentry. In addition, the FAA's licensing
authority may also require revision regarding operations associated
with commercial hybrid launch systems and commercial cargo vehicles
intentionally returning to Earth, regardless of whether they return
substantially intact. We welcome the opportunity to work with Congress
on these priorities.
In this time of challenge and opportunity, the FAA is mindful of
our many responsibilities, and we look forward to working with this
Subcommittee as we tackle the challenges of shifting cargo and crew
launches to the commercial sector and opening space to tourism and
point-to-point transportation. The commercial space industry is ready
to expand--and with your support, we are ready for lift-off.
Chairman Palazzo, Congressman Costello, and Members of the
Subcommittee, this concludes my prepared remarks. I would be pleased to
answer any questions you may have.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Dr. Nield.
I now recognize our second witness, Dr. Gerald Dillingham,
Director of Civil Aviation Issues for the U.S. Government
Accountability Office.

STATEMENT OF DR. GERALD DILLINGHAM,

DIRECTOR, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE,

U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Dr. Dillingham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Costello,
Members of the Subcommittee.
My testimony this morning focuses on three areas. First,
the recent trends in the commercial space launch industry, and
second, fiscal year 2012 budget request for FAA's Office of
Commercial Space Transportation, or AST, and third, some of the
key challenges that FAA and the industry will need to address
as the industry matures.
Regarding the trends in the industry, after reaching a peak
of 22 launches in 1998, the frequency of commercial space
launches began to fluctuate and generally decline until an
uptick occurred in 2004. In 2004, five manned commercial test
flights took place, and since that time additional manned
flights have been anticipated but have not materialized.
However, other trends seem to indicate that the number of
commercial launches is expected to increase. For example, there
has been an increase in R&D activities including low-altitude
flight tests, reusable rocket-powered vehicles that are capable
of takeoffs and landings. We also see where private companies
and states are developing additional spaceports to accommodate
anticipated space tourism flights and expand the Nation's
launch capacity. In 2006, there were six FAA licensed
spaceports. In 2011, the number has increased to eight.
Additional commercial spaceports have been proposed in Hawaii,
Indiana and Wisconsin.
Now, let us turn to AST's fiscal year 2012 budget request.
FAA expects the number of commercial launches will increase
over the next several years for several reasons. First, the
first space tourism flights are expected to begin within two
years with several launches occurring each year. Second, NASA
plans to use private companies to transport cargo and
eventually personnel to the International Space Station. FAA
also expects its workload to increase over the next several
years as it begins to develop safety regulations for these
flights, so it has significantly increased its budget request.
FAA's fiscal year budget request would increase the budget for
AST by nearly 75 percent over fiscal year 2010 budget to about
$27 million in fiscal year 2012. According to FAA, this would
fund nearly a 45 percent increase in staffing from 71 Full-time
Equivalents in fiscal year 2010 to 103 in fiscal year 2012.
This request also asks for a $5 million increase in spending on
the office's space incentive awards program.
From our perspective, FAA's focus on the need to expand its
expertise in the areas of human factors and human spaceflight
appear reasonable. However, the timing of the requested
increase, given the current federal budget situation and
uncertainties as to when and how much FAA's workload will
expand, warrants careful consideration by the Congress.
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, let us turn
to the challenges we see on the horizon for FAA's oversight for
the industry as it continues to mature. First, FAA must ensure
that its regulations on licensing and safety requirements for
launches and launch sites, which are based on safety
requirements for expendable launch vehicle operations at
federal sites, will also be suitable for operations at private
sector spaceports.
A second challenge for FAA is its dual mandate to regulate
safety and promote human spaceflight. FAA and Congress must
remain vigilant to ensure that any relationship between FAA and
the commercial space launch industry remains appropriate.
A third challenge for FAA will be to ensure that planning
and implementation of NextGen accommodates spacecraft that are
traveling to and from space through the national airspace
system.
For the industry, a key challenge going forward will be
maintaining a strong international competitive position for the
U.S. commercial space launch industry. Foreign competitors have
historically offered lower launch prices than U.S. providers.
As the commercial space launch industry expands, high launch
costs and export controls will affect its ability to sell its
services abroad.
Finally, an overarching challenge for the industry and the
United States is a lack of a comprehensive national space
launch strategy. Numerous federal agencies have
responsibilities for space activities including FAA, NASA, DOD,
State and Commerce. According to a 2009 National Academy of
Sciences study, the process of alignment offers the opportunity
to leverage resources from various agencies to address such
shared challenges as a diminishing space industry base, the
dwindling technical workforce, and reduced funding levels.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Dillingham follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. Gerald Dillingham,

Director, Physical Infrastructure,

U.S. Government Accountability Office

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Dr. Dillingham.
I now recognize our final witness, Dr. Henry Hertzfeld,
Research Professor of Space Policy and International Affairs at
the Elliott School of International Affairs at George
Washington University.

STATEMENT OF DR. HENRY R. HERTZFELD,

RESEARCH PROFESSOR OF SPACE POLICY AND

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, ELLIOTT SCHOOL OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS,
GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY

Dr. Hertzfeld. Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity
to testify today. I am pleased that the Committee has begun the
important process of reviewing these matters as the space
industry in the United States is poised for very significant
changes.
Reviewing the findings of the congressionally mandated 2008
study of human safety regulations and noting important changes
in the development of commercial space as well as the
environment of space itself, I will discuss both near-term and
long-term issues that will need Congressional review.
First, because there have been no commercial suborbital
flights yet, the experimental period for the licensing of human
suborbital flights will need to be extended. The time period
should not have a limit determined by an arbitrary number of
years but should be measured by developing indicators of the
maturity of the industry and the risks involved. I would
recommend that the FAA, perhaps the Commercial Space
Transportation Advisory Committee (COMSTAC) or an independent
study, determine these types of market indicators. At a future
point, when and if suborbital commercial flights develop into a
marketable service, the regulatory oversight should be
transitioned to other parts of the FAA since these flights will
be within airspace and closer in form to aviation than space.
The second issue is an inherent conflict when one agency
has the dual mandate to both regulate and promote. The 2008
study found no complaints from industry about the OCST's dual
roles. This, though, should be carefully monitored and the
promotional aspects might eventually have to be shifted to
other agencies to preserve the integrity of the regulatory
process.
A related conflict-of-interest problem in the form of one
office regulating different competing modes of transportation,
in this case Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELVs), Reusable Launch
Vehicles (RLVs), suborbital flights and possibly even Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), also raise issues of fairness, undue
influence, and in the end of making difficult objective
decisions regarding safety. In the 2008 study, we noted that
there was overlapping jurisdiction in determining who will have
the lead if there is a serious commercial space accident. The
FAA OCST, through an agreement, delegates that lead to the
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), which at present
does not have a Congressional mandate to investigate space
transportation accidents. Also, a law enacted after the
Columbia accident, primarily focused on the Shuttle and Space
Station, requires a Presidential commission to be formed to
lead an accident investigation. However, that same law also
applies to a commercial space vehicle that is carrying a
government payload. Although all agencies have in the past
cooperated fully in these investigations, only one should have
the lead responsibility.
A uniform United States approach to regulating in-orbit
space activities will become necessary and should be integrated
with the licensing procedures for commercial space operations.
Difficult issues of in-orbit liability will need to be studied
very carefully before these rules are promulgated. At present
within the United States, the existing very limited and
uncoordinated in-orbit rules are split among the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the FAA. These should be
coordinated.
In addition, there are many international dimensions to in-
orbit regulations. If the United States does not take a
leadership role and initiate action in this area soon, other
nations will. This could lead to international rules that might
have negative effects on the growth of U.S. commercial space
operations. As we regulate in-orbit activities, the regulatory
regime should be clearly delineated between those vehicles that
intend to go to outer space and those that will remain within
airspace. The regulatory difference involves international
obligations the United States has agreed to under the space
treaties. A new distinction needs to be clearly made between
suborbital vehicles and vehicles that enter outer space but are
not intended to achieve orbit.
Finally, Congress might want to revisit the informed
consent rules in the CSLA for space participants. I have two
suggestions there. One is that the FAA be responsible for
drafting clauses dealing with information to be given to the
spaceflight participant on accident risk history and other data
that the FAA is in a better position to provide than private
companies. These clauses should be required to be included in
the consent form. However, the companies are still responsible
for drafting the form and making it specific to their vehicles.
And secondly, states are starting to compete with their own
passenger waivers of liability to the private operator.
Currently, Florida, Virginia and recently New Mexico and Texas
have these laws, each with different wording. Federal
preemption on this issue might be warranted to prevent
competition among states on an issue that involves interstate
commerce and may adversely affect safety decisions the
companies make concerning the vehicle and operations.
Thank you. I will be more than happy to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hertzfeld follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. Henry R. Hertzfeld,
Research Professor of Space Policy and International Affairs,
Elliott School of International Affairs, George Washington University

I appreciate the opportunity to testify today on the Federal
Aviation Administration's Office of Commercial Space Transportation's
role in the supervision and regulation of commercial space flight and
am pleased that the Committee has begun the important process of
reviewing these matters. The space industry in the United States is
poised for very significant changes and it is very timely to begin the
process of reviewing national and international issues that will need
to be resolved in the years ahead as commercial activity in space grows
and evolves.
Since its inception the Office of Commercial Space Transportation
(OCST) within the DOT and subsequently within the FAA has actively and
successfully developed a regulatory environment for commercial space
launches and related activities.
During the past decade the OCST has fulfilled its legislative
mandates to regulate commercial spaceflight. It has also licensed
private spaceports and other space and space-related activities
reflecting the growth of interest and investment in these areas by both
entrepreneurs and established companies.
Of particular interest are the Amendments to the CSLA in 2004,
which gave the FAA the authority to develop regulations for private
human space flight. The regulatory framework was oriented to
encouraging the development of commercial human suborbital flights and
was stimulated by the success of the X-Prize competition.
However, those promises have not yet, nearly eight years later,
resulted in any private paying passengers, although the companies
developing those vehicles are still planning to initiate space
adventure/tourist businesses.
Beyond the continued promises of suborbital commercial activity
there are other new developments. Among them are; 1) NASA plans to send
cargo and astronauts to the International Space Station on commercial
vehicles, 2) foreign nations are developing new capabilities which will
compete with U.S. commercial companies in all space efforts, 3) one
U.S. company has plans to transport paying customers to an in-orbit
space facility, 4) the Google Lunar X Prize could put a private vehicle
on the Moon that might be capable of performing relatively simple
activities with commercial value, and 5) commercial UAVs will begin
operations which will require new air traffic management in the same
high altitudes where suborbital vehicles will fly. These UAVs may have
functional capabilities that will compete with suborbital vehicles as
well as LEO satellites.
Until recently, the OCST focus for human space flight regulations
has been on suborbital vehicles and passengers. The experimental permit
period will end soon without any database on flights, safety, or
passengers. This experimental period should be continued, but instead
of an arbitrary period of years being designated for the sunset of that
provision, other tests should be developed to determine when the
regulations should be re-evaluated by Congress.
Those tests should focus on the availability of enough experience
and data from the industry to develop meaningful safely rules. Tests
should take into account factors such as;

The maturity of the business,

The ability to fly on a routine scheduled basis,

The number of passengers and the amount of cargo
transported or research experiments flown,

The standardization of vehicles and systems that could
provide the basis for a vehicle certification regime, and

A quantification of the different risks involved.

Ultimately, the safety of both people and property in flight as
well as the safety of people and property terrestrially should be the
paramount objective of regulations. Rather than go beyond my own
technical capabilities and suggest a specific test in this testimony, I
would recommend a panel of appropriate experts (e.g. COMSTAC) be
commissioned to study this issue and develop a set of specific
recommendations. While no statistical analysis will be perfect, a more
objective set of requirements will better meet the Congressional intent
than an arbitrary time horizon.

Five Different Space Regimes (when viewed from a legal/regulatory
perspective)

The OCST is primarily organized to license commercial space
launches and related activities including spaceports. Congress has
given additional responsibility to the FAA OCST to license re-entry
space vehicles and, most recently in 2004, to license commercial human
space flight.
OCST regulated launch activities include suborbital vehicles that
may or may not go into space but are separated from aircraft
regulations by a definition based on vehicle propulsion characteristics
that have a thrust greater than the lift during the greater part of
their ascent
The current division of regulations is fast approaching overlapping
and unsettled areas of regulation and jurisdiction. We are at a point
where the FAA has to do more than just license ELVs for launch.
Specifically, the most difficult future issues will be to regulate
commercial in-orbit activities, both for human space flight as well as
for other purposes. Because of the growing danger to space operations
from the crowding of certain orbits with human-created space debris as
well as the projected increased use of commercial services in space by
NASA and other government entities, we will need new regulatory
authority over in-orbit activity. This involves uncharted issues of
safety as well as financial responsibility to meet the needs of
international treaty obligations, the viability of U.S. space
operations, and fairness and equity for near-term activities that could
have a very long horizon of future responsibilities.
Simply extending the safety review and financial requirements of a
launch license regime to include in-orbit activities will not be
sufficient to solve the upcoming issues.
In order to try to understand these developing concerns in space
regulations, I suggest that we consider the following reorientation of
the categories of spaceflight regulation:
The categories are:

Activities under both domestic law and the Outer Space Treaties

1.  Launches to Orbit
2.  In-orbit activities
3.  Non-orbital launches and activities

Activities under domestic law

4.  Sub-orbital launches and activities
5.  Spaceports

The first three involve activities that fall under the
international space treaty obligations and therefore must take into
account several factors:

1.  Outer space is, through Article II of the Outer Space
Treaty (OST), a place without sovereignty;

2.  Article VI of the OST makes States Party to the Treaty
responsible for government activities and the activities of
non-government entities in space as well as requiring continued
national supervision;

3.  Article VII of the OST makes States liable for their launch
activities.

What is unique to space is the requirement of State responsibility
and liability. No other industry faces this. In fact, other high
technology industries with low probabilities of catastrophic accidents
but with a very high probability of severe damage (e.g. civil nuclear
power plants, oil platforms) are covered by different treaty
obligations. If an accident occurs under those international legal
regimes the operator will be primarily responsible and liable with the
States party to those treaties and agreements in a position as a
guarantor of payment.
The last two categories, suborbital launches and spaceports are
domestic, involving the use of national airspace and of terrestrial
spaceports. When (and if) suborbital markets develop, either for cargo
or people, these activities of the OCST should be transitioned to other
parts of the FAA, as they are closer to aircraft than to space from a
legal regulatory perspective. The question is when to begin that
transition.
I would recommend postponing a consideration of any transition of
responsibilities for suborbital launches to the indefinite future. As
described above, we need to develop a methodology to evaluate the
emerging suborbital activity. When we have the proper amount of data on
safety and reliability of the equipment and operating procedures and
when the companies have demonstrated that they can operate as a
business, then Congress can address this issue.
In outline format below, I have listed a more detailed description
of each category. Currently, only Category 2 (in-orbit activities) and
possibly parts of Category 3 (non-orbital activities) are largely
unregulated and will require a thorough study of three serious issues:
1) liability, 2) coordination among U.S. Agencies, and (3) coordination
and harmonization with other nations and international organizations.

1)  Launches to orbit

a.  This category represents the current FAA licensing regime
for launches vehicles and re-entry vehicles.
2)  In-orbit activities

a.  In general, in-orbit activities are unregulated. However,
there are some situations that have required the U.S.
Government to develop specific rules. These are spread among a
number of agencies and are not well coordinated. Specifically,
the Federal Communications Commission requires that
geosynchronous satellites at the end of their useful life
retain enough fuel to be transported into ``graveyard'' orbits;
enforcement and verification remains problematic. Additionally,
the FCC is the agency responsible for representing the U.S. at
the International Telecommunications Union meetings and for
authorizing the use of spectrum in the United States.

b.  NOAA has a similar requirement for the commercial earth
observation satellites under its jurisdiction. Rather than a
specific requirement for end-of-life, their regulations require
companies to submit a plan for disposal of the satellite that
will meet the approval of the Secretary of Commerce.

c.  The FAA OCST has the authority to oversee launches and
defines the end of the launch period as the time when the
launch vehicle last exercises it control over the payload.
Normally, this includes some in-orbit activities. They also
have authority for re-entry vehicles to oversee in-orbit
preparations for the re-entry.

d.  Finally, IADC Guidelines on Space Debris Mitigation are
voluntary rules with no specific enforcement provisions.
However, some of the recommended guidelines have become
enforceable through enactment of specific legislation and
agency regulations in the United States.

Congress has not given authority for any Agency to coordinate or
regulate most in-orbit commercial activities. Consideration should now
be given to studying in-orbit activities and for the United States to
take a leadership role in addressing a number of possible legal
problems associated with commercial in-orbit operations. These include
addressing:

i.  Liability issues under Treaties that are inadequate and need
attention through national legislative initiatives

ii.  Sustainability and debris issues remain unresolved including
legal uncertainties with future servicing satellites

iii. Human safety on private in-orbit vehicles may have conflicting
authority

1.  NASA ISS transportation for astronauts on commercial
vehicles could fall under FAA jurisdiction or be exempt and
under NASA regulations

2.  Interface with the ISS and international partners will
involve not only NASA directives but also those of other
nations.

3.  Proposals for a ``hotel'' or private research facility
remain open question on regulatory and liability exposure.

Additionally, other nations as well as the United Nations Committee
on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space are beginning to address issues of in-
orbit regulations mainly through activities on space debris and space
sustainability. The United States will need to coordinate its
activities with these on-going efforts.

3) Non-orbital activities:
(I am suggesting the use of a new term non-orbital, to separate
true suborbital flights within airspace from launches of rockets that
enter into outer space but have a planned trajectory that returns to
Earth without achieving orbit.)
Currently sounding rockets that can reach altitudes as high as
1000km, which is roughly 10 times the distance defined as the
``edge of space'' are included in the definition of a
suborbital trajectory. This is confusing, as the term,
suborbital, should mean just what it says: below the point
where a rocket or payload cannot reach orbital altitude. Since
once something reaches outer space there are different rules
that may apply due to international treaty agreements.
Therefore a separation between non-orbital activities and
suborbital activities may clarify a definitional problem,
particularly when and if separate in-orbit regulations of
commercial spacecraft are issued. An example of a non-orbital
commercial activity might be a launch vehicle used for point-
to-point delivery of cargo.

4) Sub-orbital activities
These should be limited to those non-aircraft activities that stay
within airspace (but could cross borders and also fly over the open
seas); they should be under FAA jurisdiction and be treated similarly
to aircraft. If the market becomes truly commercial, these activities
can graduate from the current experimental phase. At that point these
activities should be transitioned from OCST licensing to another part
of the FAA whether private human passengers are aboard or just cargo is
being flown.

5) Domestic spaceport regulations
These are currently being licensed by FAA under domestic law.

Accident Investigations

In the Congressionally-mandated 2008 Analysis of Human Space Flight
Study we discussed a potential conflict in the delegation of authority
for investigating an accident involving humans in space flight. After
the Shuttle Columbia accident, Congress passed legislation requiring a
Presidential Commission to be formed following certain types of space
accidents. (That legislation is now found at Title 51 of the U.S. Code,
Chapter 707.)
Those conditions are outlined in Sec. 70702, Establishment of
Commission. The relevant parts of that section for the issues presently
before this Committee are: . . . (3) any other United States space
vehicle carrying humans that is owned by the Federal Government or that
is being used pursuant to a contract with the Federal Government or (4)
a crew member or passenger of any space vehicle described in this
subsection.
Clearly, Congress intended that a high profile investigation occur
in the event of a space accident. Private launch vehicles and
spacecraft, whether licensed by the FAA or not, are within the purview
of this law. Furthermore, if humans are on board and are injured, a
Commission is also mandated. This section can also be read to include
suborbital vehicles (as now defined under OCST legislation) if they are
being used to carry research or other instruments that are under an
agreement with a Federal Agency. And these types of commercial services
onboard suborbital vehicles are the subject of current agreements and
discussions between government agencies and private companies, although
they have yet to actually fly.
We also were informed during the 2008 study that the FAA OCST has a
Memorandum of Agreement with the NTSB that in case of an accident with
more than $25,000 property damage and/or injury or death to a human
being onboard a vehicle licensed by the FAA, the NTSB will lead an
accident investigation. At present, the NTSB has legislative authority
to investigate virtually all modes of transport accidents except space.
However, in discussions the General Counsel of the NTSB in 2008, he was
clear that the NTSB was consulted and did actively participate in the
Columbia accident investigation and that there was good cooperation
among Federal Agencies.
Therefore, although there may not be any negative or competitive
issues regarding the cooperation among Agencies in the case of an
accident investigation, it would be advantageous for Congress to clear
up any ambiguities and to clearly designate who will be in charge of a
space accident under the specific situations that currently have
overlapping jurisdiction.

Inherent Conflicts Between FAA Role as Promoter and Regulator

A survey of firms involved in developing commercial space flight
capabilities done in connection with the 2008 Study found that none of
the companies had any issues with the FAA's dual roles of promoter and
regulator.
In my testimony in 2003 before this Subcommittee on this issue, I
pointed out that there is an inherent possible conflict if the same
Agency that is charged with promoting an activity is also in charge of
regulating it. The conflicts arise two ways: 1) since regulations cost
industry money and possibly market share or profits, there will always
be pressure from industry to minimize regulations, and 2) as competing
firms with different types of vehicles capable of serving similar
markets develop, they will pressure an Agency to favor specific
products or types of services with the larger and more powerful firms
prevailing.
Elements of these conflicts are present in commercial space, even
if today the industry is still too small and too risky for serious
issues to arise in regard the Agency's dual role. More specifically,
when the role of promotion was given to the FAA's commercial space
operations there was only one type of vehicle, the ELV. Today under FAA
regulatory authority there are ELVs plus companies developing reusable
launch vehicles (RLVs), suborbital commercial vehicles, and unmanned
high altitude vehicles (UAV), all of which can compete against each
other for air traffic control as well for services in certain markets.
For example, future UAVs will need coordination with all launch
vehicles in traffic management. But, even more importantly, UAVs will
perform services such as regional remote sensing and telecommunications
for private end users. These are the very same types of services that
companies now provide with LEO satellites and possibly may also provide
using suborbital rockets.
Congress should monitor the maturity of the industry. When and if
one regulatory Agency or one office within an Agency is burdened with
either regulating closely competing transportation services and/or
burdened with choices of which transport mode to promote and which to
ignore, these functions should be assigned to another Agency or to
different offices within an Agency.

ISS Crew Transfer Issues

As mentioned above under in-orbit regulatory activities, recent
plans of NASA rely on commercially provided services for transportation
to the ISS. Commercial vehicles will do what has been done previously
by government owned and operated vehicles or by payments to the Russian
Government for Souyz launches. FAA licenses were not required or
involved. But, they clearly could be if NASA's plans materialize.
There are a number of issues to consider before granting licensing
authority to the FAA for transporting U.S. Government astronauts or
payloads to the ISS. First, NASA already has a complex and well-
developed set of safety regulations in place for both human and non-
human space flights as well as for approaching and docking with the
ISS. What would a new set of regulations add? Would they be less
expensive? Would they compromise safety? Since there are no commercial
flights to the ISS at present, there is no database to judge the wisdom
of changing regulations and/or the regulatory agency.
This then could become a chicken-and-egg problem. NASA will
possibly be the prime customer of the first commercial U.S. in-orbit
flights with humans on board. It is unlikely that a human-rated private
vehicle will be available from any company before the planned ISS
flights. Therefore, there will be no database without NASA. The larger
question is, given cost and price, whether NASA will pay for what it
will demand (that is, safety regulations that are most likely more
costly and more comprehensive)? And, if so, will that become the
standard for FAA regulations for completely private passenger in-orbit
flights as well as NASA in the future, or will the FAA develop a
different set of regulations for private flights? Over time, if
successful, NASA could use those, but in the near-term it may be a
wiser path for Congress to allow NASA to determine the safety standards
for its missions.
There is yet another issue with the safety of the ISS itself that
involves not only NASA but also its international partners. Each has
veto powers in the ISS agreement. Just recently an announcement was in
the press that the Russians would not allow a private U.S. vehicle to
dock at the ISS. Whether they are concerned about their near monopoly
power with the Soyuz flights to the ISS or whether they are truly
concerned about safety is immaterial. If they have the right to deny a
U.S. vehicle access to (at least) their docking mechanism, then either
costs will be greater and/or there will be no market large enough for
the commercial U.S. vehicle. In this case the FAA will have no input
into the decision, as it is not a direct party to the ISS agreement.
Considering other non-government U.S. in-orbit commercial activity,
the FAA clearly should have a role in both safety and financial
responsibility. As with launch activities, where the FAA itself does
not have the technical competence, they can and should establish
agreements with NASA and the DOD to aid in the safety review process.
And, as they now do in aircraft certification, they can work with the
manufacturers of components to insure the best standards for quality
control and safety. At some future point when space vehicles are more
standard, the FAA should work toward a certification program that is
different technically but similar in process to the one now used for
aircraft.
The financial responsibility issue is more difficult for on-orbit
activities. The difficulties with the current space treaty liability
regime are too numerous and complex to describe in this brief summary.
As explained below, the core of the issue is determining how to
implement a fault liability regime as described in the Liability
Convention.
With the advent of commercial in-orbit vehicles as well as the more
traditional satellites and the ever-increasing probability of accidents
in space, diplomatic negotiations as required by the Treaty for the
first-order settlement of claims may not be successful. If these issues
are put before a tribunal, it is likely that nobody will be compensated
since there currently are no rules of evidence, no clear definition of
what a space object is, no standard of care that is commonly accepted,
and no history of prior court decisions. Adding to that is the
possibility that debris may create an accident many years ahead. Even
with insurance policies for liability on-orbit, the guarantee of a
payment to an innocent party is nonexistent. Extending the financial
responsibility regulations that now exist for launch vehicles and their
component parts to in-orbit activity will require much study, analysis,
and creativity. This difficult task will involve many Agencies of the
U.S. Government, foreign governments, international entities (e.g. ESA)
and the United Nations. The FAA will have an important role in these
discussions and in the future regulation of commercial in-orbit
activities.

Consent and Waiver for Private Passengers/Participants in Space

In the 2004 Amendments to the CSLA, Congress mandated that private
passengers on space flights were required to be informed by the
operator of the vehicle of the risks involved and were also required to
execute a reciprocal waiver of claims with the FAA. The legislation was
quite specific and, among many requirements to be disclosed also
included a full disclosure of the accidents that space vehicles of all
types have had.
The FAA decided to let the companies develop the consent form
rather than to develop a standard one. It may, at this time, be
advantageous for the FAA to draft model clauses for the form with the
generic information about all space accidents and other non-company and
non-vehicle related clauses that are required. The FAA is in a better
position to collect and distribute uniform, accurate, and full data on
those topics. Companies would be responsible for including those
clauses as well as drafting the informed consent agreement appropriate
to their vehicle and services.
Several States that have or are developing private spaceports have
enacted legislation that protects operators (private companies) from
being sued by passengers for liability in case of an accident. Florida,
Virginia, and most recently, Texas, have different versions of these
provisions. I would question whether this trend in competition among
the States in the form of protecting companies is beneficial.
First, this type of waiver can provide an incentive for
carelessness in safety. The States do exclude gross negligence or
willful actions from the waiver of liability. However, safety can be
jeopardized in other ways that simply may be financial decisions based
on reasonable risk analyses, but ones that are not standard practice in
most of today's space vehicles. Companies will argue that safety is
paramount since any accident in an infant industry situation will mean
serious economic losses to the company. But, that may not be sufficient
when dealing with the many unknowns and risks of spaceflight, as we
know it today.
Second, launches from non-coastal states will likely fly over
adjacent states. Accidents are adjudicated according to the laws of the
state where the accident occurs. Contract and tort laws are different
in each state. Therefore, there is a question as to whether a consent
and waiver form signed under the law of a state where the vehicle
originated would be honored in another state where the accident
occurred.
In short, it is time to study this issue more closely and for
Congress to make a clear determination of what authority states may
have in issuing waivers of passenger liability to the operator of
commercial space vehicles. Federal preemption would be appropriate
action to avoid an uncoordinated hodgepodge of different state rules
for an activity that is primarily national in character.

Summary of Recommendations:

1.  Experimental permits: The experimental permit for human
suborbital commercial flight should not be permitted to expire. Instead
of another arbitrary period of years being designated for the sunset of
experimental permits, other tests should be developed to determine when
the regulations should be re-evaluated by Congress. I would recommend a
panel of appropriate experts be commissioned to study this issue and
develop a set of quantifiable tests to evaluate the maturity of this
industry segment and to make recommendations based on the development
of a mature market and a reliable and safe operating record. At that
point these suborbital activities should be transitioned from OCST
licensing to another part of the FAA and have a regulatory framework
that is technically different but otherwise similar to aircraft,
whether private human passengers are aboard or cargo is being flown.
2.  On-orbit Regulations: Simply extending the safety review and
financial requirements of a launch license regime to include in-orbit
activities will not be sufficient to solve the complex future issues of
liability and sustainable space activities. In addition to in-orbit
regulations of satellites, non-orbital activities that enter outer
space should also be similarly regulated. Under international treaty
obligations they create the same U.S. Government liability exposure as
any other in-orbit activities. Congress should recommend that the FAA
commission a study to evaluate the complex legal environment of in-
orbit liability in order to develop effective and workable U.S.
regulations that will clearly provide protections that will not
unfairly burden industry or governments.
3.  Accident Investigation: Congress should clearly designate who
will be in charge of investigating a space accident under the specific
situations that currently have overlapping jurisdiction.
4.  Informed Consent Waivers: It may, at this time, be advantageous
for the FAA to draft model clauses for the form with generic
information about all space accidents and other non-company and non-
vehicle related clauses that are required. Companies would still be
responsible for the form and for providing information about any
specific vehicle they operate.
5.  State Laws Limiting Operator Liability to Passengers: Congress
should study this issue and make a clear determination of what
authority states have in permitting waivers of passenger liability to
the operator of commercial space vehicles. Issues of vehicle safety,
interstate commerce, and conflicts of laws among the various states
raise possible future problems.
6.  Promotion and Regulation in One Agency: When the OCST was
formed it had only one type of vehicle (ELVs) to regulate. It is
foreseeable that the OCST could be burdened with regulating closely
competing economic activities (e.g. ELVs, RLVs, suborbital vehicles and
UAVs all may be using or transporting payloads capable of providing
similar telecommunications or remote sensing services to end-users).
And, it is also possible that the OCST will be in charge of licensing
competing vehicles. Choices of which type of vehicle to promote and
which to ignore are as difficult as issues of developing different
rules and oversight for different vehicles. If any of these conditions
develop into true conflicts, Congress should consider a clear
separation of functions among different agencies.

Closing Statement

The future role of the FAA OCST in commercial space will be very
important. But it will also require changes from today's regulatory
structure. Those changes will reflect the changing commercial space
environment. If the projections of some advocates materialize and a
vibrant suborbital business is created, then these activities that
occur mainly in national airspace might logically be moved to other
parts of the FAA that manage domestic airspace and coordinate with ICAO
on international matters.
The licensing of in-orbit commercial activities will grow as
governments contract with commercial firms for different services.
There are many new issues that have domestic and international
implications with regulating in-orbit activities. The FAA will be
instrumental in shaping these rules for U.S. operations. However, it is
unlikely that these services will grow without a large initial market
funded by the traditional government space agencies (NASA, DOD, DOC/
NOAA) as the prime customers. Commercial firms initially will need to
abide by many existing government safety rules. Eventually, after
gaining practical experience, these rules may be subject to
modification, codification, and implementation by the FAA for licensing
of private operations in-orbit. Before the point where these firms have
obtained a level of expertise in safety that satisfies the Congress,
the operations of government missions in space should remain with the
Agencies that have historically demonstrated an excellent overall
safety record in a very hazardous and risky environment.

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Dr. Hertzfeld. I thank the
panel for their testimony, reminding Members that Committee
rules limit questioning to five minutes.
The Chair will at this point open the round of questions.
The Chair recognizes himself for five minutes.
Dr. Nield, your budget request appears to be premised in
part on the expiration of the eight-year regulatory prohibition
at the end of calendar year 2012. In the event that the
prohibition lapses, how will AST approach the task of drafting
a framework for regulating commercial human spaceflight in the
absence of any real experience? And question two, assuming AST
desires to put in place a structure that is workable and won't
choke the fledgling space tourism marketplace with overly
prescriptive regulations, how would AST go about the task of
regulating an industry that for all practical purposes doesn't
exist yet?
Dr. Nield. Thank you for that question. Certainly, the
development of regulations to ensure the safety of flight crew
and spaceflight participants is on our to-do list. That is
something we are focused on, thinking about, and talking about,
but until the Congressional moratorium is lifted, we would not
be in a position to issue any new regulations. However, we do
have responsibility to regulate the operations and safety of
the emerging commercial human spaceflight industry as Congress
specified in the Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004
and so we would propose using the tools that we have at our
disposal including the issuing of licenses, permits, safety
approvals, and conducting safety inspections to ensure that
safety.
We also continue to have the responsibility to ensure the
safety of the general public on the ground, and so we are in a
position today to be responsible for, as I said, 204 licensed
launches that have already occurred, so industry is present.
What is new now is the emergence of the commercial human
spaceflight, and that is really taking two different directions
as it goes forward. One, the commercial crew development in
support of the NASA space station which is coming in the next
years, and the second is the suborbital space tourism
activities. So both of those are very important and I think
they warrant different approaches, and we are trying to prepare
for both pieces of industry's activities.
Chairman Palazzo. Can you elaborate on the different
approaches between the two?
Dr. Nield. I think inherently the suborbital flights and
the orbital flights are different. On the suborbital side, you
have an opportunity for incremental step-by-step flight
testing, and of course, that is what we saw with the
SpaceShipOne winning the X Prize back in 2004 and now we have a
number of companies that are designing, building and testing
vehicles for that type of an operation, and we expect to see a
number of flight tests in the very near future, but those
flights will tend to be just 10 to 20 minutes long in the
spaceflight portion of it, and they are relatively benign in
terms of environmental conditions.
On the orbital side, you can do lots of analysis, you can
do lots of ground testing, but once you are ready to go to
space, you light the rocket engine and you pretty much need to
go all the way to orbit. So that is really a different
scenario, and of course, we do have 50 years of experience with
NASA conducting those human space flights to orbit that we can
draw on in terms of preparing some top-level guidance and
safety standards for industry, so we are not really starting
with a clean sheet. We would propose working closely with NASA
and the industry in preparing the overall guidance.
Chairman Palazzo. Another question, Dr. Nield. To what
level of detail does AST plan to regulate commercial human
launch systems seeking a permit or license? For instance, does
AST plan to get down to the component level of each system
approving their design, operation and maintenance, and will you
require several levels of redundancy for each critical system?
Dr. Nield. I think someday we will end up with a
certification process that is very similar to what the FAA does
for aviation and so that might well entail going down to the
system and subsystem level and components and so forth. That
has led to an incredible safety record for aviation. But I
think it is too early to try to do that kind of thing for space
transportation today, and so our approach has been to have top-
level system safety performance-based regulations that do not
dictate the particular kinds of designs or particular kinds of
operations that are being proposed, but rather make sure that
we have the right kind of end result, which is to ensure the
safety of the public on the ground, and to the extent possible
to also ensure the safety of those on board.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Costello.
Dr. Costello. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Dr. Nield, we all agree that safety is the number one
responsibility of all of us when it comes to this issue. You
indicated that the FAA is trying to prepare for putting
regulations into place for human space transportation. Can you
tell us where you are right now? Where are we as far as
planning is concerned?
Dr. Nield. Just to briefly review, we have had and continue
to have regulations in place to protect the safety of those on
the ground and so many of the rockets that are being proposed
for launching commercial crew have already been flying under
FAA licenses. What is new is having the people on board. So we
have known this was coming. We have been studying. We have been
talking. We have been debating. We have been researching to
find the best practices within NASA and the industry on how
best to do that. We worked very closely with NASA on their
proposed human rating draft requirements that have already been
issued, and in fact, we have just announced a public meeting
down in Cape Canaveral later on this month that would allow
industry and NASA and others to talk to us about the
recommendations that they would have on a regulatory approach.
Mr. Costello. In your opinion at this point, what criteria
or information do you think the FAA needs to begin to establish
regulations?
Dr. Nield. I think we have the basic information that is
needed. We have the 50 years of human spaceflight experience
gathered by NASA. We have 50 years of experience that the FAA
has in regulating the aviation community and 204 licensed
commercial launches. What we really need at this point is good
communication and coordination between the parties involved. In
order for this industry to be successful, we can't afford to
have one set of requirements for NASA missions and one set of
requirements for FAA regulations. That would not allow industry
to close their business cases and it would be needlessly
inefficient, so we need to work together to ensure that we have
consistent and compatible requirements.
Mr. Costello. And you mentioned that you are working with
NASA now. That relationship, would you tell the Committee that
it is working well, you feel that you are working
cooperatively?
Dr. Nield. I think we have made good strides there.
Frankly, our 2012 budget request has a key enabler for that
cooperation, and that is the Commercial Space Flight Technical
Center at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). We view that as an
excellent opportunity, not only to potentially hire some of the
experienced workforce that are going to be searching for work
in the months ahead, but also to be basically collocated with
NASA to build that cadre of subject-matter experts on
engineering standards and launch operations.
Mr. Costello. As you know, the FAA reauthorization that
passed the House has an extension of the prohibition on
regulations and would extend for eight years after the first
licensed launch of a spaceflight participant. I understand that
may move the prohibition to maybe the year 2020 and that the
FAA may have some concerns with that. Can you express the
concerns that the FAA may have?
Dr. Nield. Yes. I very much understand the intent of the
original moratorium, which was the fear that the government
could stifle industry and prevent it from doing creative and
original experimentation to really get its feet on the ground,
and although there have not been commercial human space flights
since 2004, I think our office's dual mandate of ensuring
public safety and to encourage, facilitate and promote the
industry gives us a unique perspective to be able to recognize
that the only way to be truly safe is not to fly at all. So we
understand the delicate balance there and we would propose to
have the option to be able to take advantage of trends, of best
practices, of lessons learned, of anomalies during flight
tests. If something should start to appear as an indicator of
problems, which was talked about by Dr. Dillingham, then we
want to be able to move quickly to be able to allow all to take
advantage of those lessons learned rather than potentially
having future accidents. So we are not ready to burden the
industry today. We just want to focus on safety and try to
allow experimentation and creativity as we go forward in a safe
manner.
Mr. Costello. Dr. Dillingham, would you comment on the
prohibition, the extension?
Dr. Dillingham. Yes, Mr. Costello. I think we are pretty
much in line across the panel with regard to the extension of
the prohibition. It is not clear to us at the GAO what is the
basis of the eight years. We would be in the line of sort of
incrementally looking at what is going on at that point and
moving as you get more information, but the caution that we
make with regard to sort of the eight years, be careful about
making regulations in times of crisis. That is, if the
industry, if there is an accident and all of a sudden we are
trying to make regulations, sometimes it doesn't quite work out
the way that the Congress wants it to work out when they don't
have the time to deliberate, and FAA in the same way. So we are
for incrementalism. We don't see any basis for eight years.
Mr. Rohrabacher. [Presiding] You have a new Chairman here
now. We have a vote on right now, and we will continue this
discussion after the vote, and I would expect that would be in
about 15 or 20 minutes, so if we could recess here. The
Subcommittee is recessed for 20 minutes.
[Recess.]
Mr. Rohrabacher. The Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics
will come to order. I want to thank the witnesses for sticking
around while we had to do our business on the Floor, and Mr.
Costello, the Ranking Member, has had his options, and are we
going to give the Chair back? Well, we will now proceed for
questions for our panel, and Mr. Brooks from Alabama, we will
proceed with your time.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Chairman. We
have got two of them right now.
You know, we are facing a $1.6 trillion deficit which I
would submit to you is a very serious threat to our country, it
could result in a Federal Government insolvency or bankruptcy
if we don't get it addressed, and I see where you are asking
for a 75 percent, or AST is asking for a 75 percent funding
increase. Then also look at the word ``commercial,'' and when I
see the word ``commercial,'' I see little or no government
involvement, not substantial or significant government
involvement. To me, commercial means free enterprise and
private sector as opposed to something that the government has
a heavy hand of managing or subsidizing. I also see commercial
as meaning that there is a profit motive and that is the reason
for the commercial activity is that there is a way that someone
in the private sector can do something faster or cheaper or
better than perhaps the government or its competitors and hence
they can make a profit because they are able to do that better
or faster or cheaper.
Now, of this $15 million that was budgeted in 2010 and $27
million that is requested in fiscal year 2012, Dr. Nield, can
you tell how much of this is paid for by the commercial space
entities via either license fees or taxes or some other source
of revenue?
Dr. Nield. None of it, because under current law, we are
not allowed to charge for licenses that we issue.
Mr. Brooks. Well, you have often used the FAA as an analogy
with commercial flight, and correct me if I am wrong, but isn't
the FAA's budget significantly paid for through ticket taxes,
landing fees, fuel taxes and things of that nature?
Dr. Nield. That is a significant component of overall FAA
expenditures and so as the industry develops, I think it
certainly is appropriate to think about whether similar ideas
can be incorporated for space transportation. The problem is
with a relatively low number of launches taking place, then if
you try to cover the cost per ticket, per passenger, for
rocket, that ends up putting additional burdens on the
industry, which is going to have a negative impact on the U.S.
efforts.
Mr. Brooks. Well, that kind of brings us to another
question that I had. With respect to the low number of
launches, why is it that we have that low number?
Dr. Nield. There is a variety of different reasons for
that. I think in recent years, the United States has not been
competitive with the rockets that are offered by other
countries. In other countries, the space programs tend to be
very much part of the government efforts. I think the United
States is rather unique in that we do have a commercial
industry. In recent years, DOD and NASA contracts with industry
have perhaps caused the U.S. efforts to not be as competitive
as we would like to see them, but I think recently there has
been some new entrants to the industry, some new ideas, some
new entrepreneurial spirit, and we are seeing some of the
prices come down, and I think that is going to lead to the U.S.
market share eventually growing back to where we would like to
see that in the future.
Mr. Brooks. If I recall correctly, AST was created sometime
around 1984. Is that----
Dr. Nield. That is correct.
Mr. Brooks. So it has been in existence for more than a
quarter of a century, and commercial launches appear to be on
the decline rather than the increase. Might that be because at
least as of now, there is little to no commercial viability?
Dr. Nield. I would disagree with that assessment. I think
the progress of the industry has been slower than people would
have liked to see, but as we look at what we are seeing now in
terms of research, development, plans, contracts, customers,
there is a lot bubbling out in the world right now and I think
we are about to see a rapid increase in a variety of different
parts of the industry, whether it is space tourism or
commercial involvement to allow NASA to get lower cost
transportation to low Earth orbit so that it can concentrate on
exploration and a variety of different other programs.
Mr. Brooks. Is there an impact on the commercial viability
of these private ventures caused by the regulatory atmosphere
of AST? Stated differently, are the AST regulations increasing
the cost of being commercially viable which in turn means they
are less commercially viable or not commercially viable, which
means that they don't do it?
Dr. Nield. I would state that we are not a cause of that. I
think it would be important for the Committee to talk to
industry to get their impressions, but I believe that the
regulations that we have in place are very much focused on
safety while allowing industry to take the steps that are
appropriate to have viable businesses.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you. As you may know, I am just a lowly
freshman on this panel trying to learn the ropes. This is my
first exposure to this particular issue, and I very much
appreciate your candor, and I yield the remainder of my time.
Mr. Palazzo. I now recognize Mrs. Edwards from Maryland.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses today. This is an issue that I have had a
longstanding interest in. I am trying to understand what the
role and responsibility of the commercial sector is with
respect to the commercial space industry and how that relates
also to the responsibilities that we have as a government and
that our agencies, particularly NASA, FAA and others have, so I
appreciate your testimony. And I, like others, want to express
that I share the hope that this is just the first of a series
of hearings that we hold on commercial space transportation
because there are a number of issues that I think it is
important to address and understand well prior to a robust
industry being developed. We have to understand the
implications of having the FAA as both the regulator of
commercial space transportation safety and the promoter of the
industry it is regulating. As we know, FAA used to have that
dual responsibility for the commercial airline industry until
Congress withdrew the FAA role for both promoting the industry
and regulating the industry because of a perceived conflict of
interest and so that the agency could focus on safety. I think
we have some very similar concerns right now, and rather than
waiting until the point where we know there is a problem and
have to withdraw the authority, we should deal with that at the
outset.
I think as well as NASA moves forward to work more closely
with the private sector, these issues of safety, regulatory
authority, and liability in commercial space will need to be
addressed rigorously to ensure the safety of the public and
individuals in space or near space as well as those of us who
are on the ground. So Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your holding
the hearing today because I think it is an important and timely
topic.
I have just a couple of questions, and probably will have
some additional ones for the record. I am particularly
concerned about this question of indemnification and liability,
because unlike when NASA launches even with commercial payloads
or purely government payloads and personnel, there is a deep,
close relationship there, and I can envision an environment
where you would have, say, a tourist on board. It is not like
an astronaut where an astronaut might have specific technical
expertise and responsibilities, has been engaged in the program
all along and understands the vehicle and those sorts of
things. If I go into space, and I might want to be one of those
if I win the lottery and can afford a ticket, I hope that
nobody gives me any technical responsibility on the vehicle. I
just want to be there, but I want to get up, get back and be
safe. So it is difficult also to imagine who the private
insurer is out there who will indemnify me as a tourist, and I
don't want that to be the responsibility of the American
taxpayer because some of us can afford to go into space and
think that would be a great vacation. So I wonder if you could
speak about the indemnification responsibilities, liability,
where that falls on the private sector versus on the
government, not on the taxpayer.
Dr. Nield. Yes. Thank you. That is an excellent question.
Congress in the Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004
went on the record and said spaceflight is inherently risky and
they told the FAA how we should handle the carrying of people
onboard rockets, and that is using an approach known as
informed consent, so these operators are going to have to
thoroughly brief those ticket buyers on all the things that
could go wrong, all the possible risks and hazards, and if they
understand that and they are still willing to go, they would
have to sign the paperwork and then be allowed to participate.
So it is very different from stepping on an airliner with the
expectation that you are going to arrive safely at your
destinations.
In terms of the overall risk sharing and liability system
that we have in place today, there is a three-tier system. The
FAA assesses the possible risks and things that could wrong
during a flight, and we come up with a number known as the MPL,
the maximum probable loss, and we use that to establish how
much insurance a launch operator has to go buy, and that will
be up to the level of the MPL, or $500 million, whichever is
less. The second tier then is what has come to be known as
indemnification and so the Secretary could ask the Congress to
appropriate funds up to $1.5 billion above that amount. If it
is a really, really bad day and the damages are greater than
that amount, then the liability reverts to the operator. So all
of that is talking about third-party damages. Right now, we
have no intention of having the taxpayer subsidize any claims
or complaints or injuries for those who fly on these vehicles.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, and with that I yield. I just would
say that there is where I will become a real fiscal hawk coming
out of this pretty liberal Democrat, because there is no way
the taxpayer should run that kind of risk with a purely private
program. Thank you.
Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize Ms. Adams from Florida.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I want to thank the
panel for being here today.
Mr. Chairman, I am very concerned about the budget which
has been proposed by AST in fiscal year 2012. I would like to
specifically address Dr. Nield first and then other witnesses
if I have time. But Dr. Nield, in your testimony, you state AST
is responsible for the safe operation of commercial companies
and promotion of a robust commercial human spaceflight
industry. However, in your testimony you reference regulating
space industry or the development of new regulations 11 times.
You mention six times the eventual or planned possibilities for
robust commercial market without any basis for this development
in the next few years and never once mention jobs or free
market solutions or economic development. This is kind of
troubling to me. The AST is asking for a 74 percent increase in
its budget over the 2010 enacted level because it wants to
prepare and implement regulations for an industry that in the
last 20 years has only required 204 instances of regulatory
intervention through some kind of license in the last 20 years.
Last year, AST oversaw four commercial orbital launches and no
suborbital flights, and yet in your testimony, Dr. Nield, you
said AST expects six license and permit applications, 40 launch
or reentry operation inspections, eight launch site
inspections, five environmental assessments plus new rulemaking
procedures.
My concern is the Administration is asking this Committee
to believe that after an eight-year moratorium on regulation
and an extension of the moratorium in the wings, your office is
going to require an expansion of government regulations,
spending and staff which to me just defies logic and good
sense.
I have a couple of quick questions. In your testimony, you
say, ``The high cost of access to space has long been a major
obstacle for civil, military, and commercial space programs.
The dream of low-cost fully reusable space launch systems has
recently been demonstrated by the X-Prize competitions but only
to suborbital space.'' Do you believe the dream of low-cost
access to space will be closer within your grasp, or our grasp,
with a 74 percent increase in your regulatory agency's budget?
Dr. Nield. If we spend it correctly, I believe it will, and
certainly some of the programs that we have proposed including
the incentive program, the Center of Excellence, and a number
of other activities are designed to enable commercial industry
to be successful, which is our hope and objective.
Mrs. Adams. So you believe the expansion of regulatory
authority is the best way to encourage the development of
commercial space?
Dr. Nield. By itself, regulations have the potential to
shut down the industry and that is not our objective. At the
same time, in order for industry to be successful, it is
helpful to have a common set of well-understood standards that
all can follow so that we would----
Mrs. Adams. And which would take a 74 percent increase of
your budget.
Dr. Nield. I think if we look at the particular proposals
which include incentive programs and the Commercial Space
Flight Technical Center, those are the kinds of things that
would be helpful to the industry to allow them to be successful
in the future.
Mrs. Adams. Do you have any concern that the development of
evolution and growth of a regulatory regime based on very
little data or information on what to expect from vehicle
design or human rating standards encourages a market
environment of stability that an investor would want to take
on?
Dr. Nield. I have had a number of discussions with industry
leaders, and that is exactly what they are asking for. They are
very fearful that we will end up with separate and conflicting
requirements from NASA, with its programs for the space station
and other activities, and the FAA as the designated regulator
for this industry, and they want to ensure that we have a
consistent and compatible set of requirements and so that is
why it is so important for us to work closely with NASA to take
advantage of that 50 years of human spaceflight experience,
which is a long time.
Mrs. Adams. I will get one last question hopefully. On
April 28, 2011, AST published a notice on its website that it
will hold a public meeting late this month in Florida to seek
input from the affected community. Are you expecting to issue
your first round of regulations on December 24, 2012, if the
eight-year moratorium expires?
Dr. Nield. No, we are not.
Mrs. Adams. I yield back the rest of my time.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you. We will now recognize Mr. Wu
from Oregon.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Nield, I had a set of questions about commercialization
and other issues which I think need to be answered, and I am
now going to give those questions to Committee staff and have
them submit them to you and ask for responses in writing
because your answer to a prior question, I thought would have
elicited a gasp from this audience, which is basically that
when we commercialize, people should not have an expectation of
safety, that it is very different from getting aboard an
airliner, and that we should have informed consent, sign a
disclosure form and then you board the booster and vehicle and
then you take your chances. Now, I am just stunned. I am
absolutely stunned about that characterization of the future of
commercial human spaceflight.
Now, Dr. Nield, there are a couple of consequences from
this picture that you painted, and one is that any launch
failure which hurts people or kills people, there are immense
consequences in addition to killing people, which is something
that we should strive with every energy to avoid. It would also
potentially flatten the space program for a period of years
just as it did after fatal events in the space shuttle and
prior. Isn't that a likely consequence and that is the risk
that we are taking in the scenario that you paint?
Dr. Nield. That is a very important risk and that is why it
is so important that we have good safety processes in place.
That is why we have the regulations that we do, and on the
commercial side, that is why they have the need to pay
attention to safety as well because not only are they
potentially losing their mission, their rocket, the people on
board but that has the potential to wipe out that business if
there is a serious accident. So I think they are focused
correctly on doing things safely.
In terms of the informed consent process, that is the
direction that the Congress has given us and so we are
following that to the best of our ability. In the future----
Mr. Wu. Okay. I just want to set aside the commercial
satellite side of this and focus on the potential for
commercial human flight, and we basically treat human
spaceflight very differently, and I am just very concerned that
any fatalities would cause a dramatic pause in U.S. human
spaceflight activity to the detriment of our national
interests, and apparently you are saying that we can't prevent
that currently.
Dr. Nield. Our office will do anything we can to ensure
safe operations going forward. However, with all due respect, I
would point out that all forms of transportation have
accidents, have fatalities, whether it is in cars, airplanes,
boats and trains, and so the Nation needs to understand that
that is part of the risk of exploring the unknown, of doing new
things, and we should anticipate that, try to prevent it where
we can but not let deter us from moving forward and advancing
technology so that the United States can remain as a leader in
spaceflight.
Mr. Wu. And that is my goal, to have the United States
remain a leader, and I am concerned that fatalities will
undermine our ability to do that because, you know, a pause
happened after Challenger and Columbia, which were federal
projects, and that was bad enough. I suspect that with a
private venture, the effects would be even more dire.
Let me pull you to a slightly different issue, because I
think the loss of life and the loss of leadership in space are
the most important ones, but if there is an accident like that
in a private venture, we are talking about public indemnity,
taxpayer indemnity for damages whereas when it is a federal
venture, in essence the government is self-insured. So we are
taking on an extra cost, are we not, when we put the risk in a
commercial space venture for human spaceflight?
Dr. Nield. On the contrary, I would say that under the
current liability risk-sharing scheme which I mentioned a few
minutes ago, there is a requirement in order to get the FAA
license to purchase insurance from these commercial entities
and so to that extent, it is a better deal for the taxpayer
than an all-government program which uses all taxpayer money.
Mr. Wu. Wasn't the thrust of Congresswoman Edwards'
question that there would have to be some kind of liability cap
and that the Federal Government assumed risk beyond that?
Dr. Nield. The current law involves this three-tier system
but the basic first tier is composed of insurance that the
companies are required to buy by FAA regulations.
Mr. Wu. Yes, but that is the point, that there are
additional tiers beyond that.
Dr. Nield. That is true.
Mr. Wu. And private entities are not going to assume all of
the risk but the potential high cost.
Dr. Nield. That is an important factor, and we need to look
at how competitive the U.S. endeavors are compared to other
countries that do not have different tiers. I would point out
that in the 25 years of operation, not a dime of taxpayer
dollars has ever been used. We have never had to exercise that
liability risk-sharing scheme, but it is very important to have
that in place in order to give some certainty to the businesses
that their liability is capped.
Mr. Wu. Yes, but you are proposing changes both on the
commercial satellite side and human spaceflight, so the risk
profile is changing.
Dr. Nield. Pardon me if I gave that impression. I am not
proposing any changes to the liability.
Mr. Wu. I mean the flight profiles and the numbers and the
missions.
Dr. Nield. We hope to see lots of launches, and that is
going to help insurers to get confidence in the business if we
do it well, and that could be a win-win for all, but I am not
proposing any changes to the liability regimes.
Mr. Wu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for permitting me to go a
little bit beyond my time, but I may come back to this line of
questioning. Thank you.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you. Now we recognize Mr.
Rohrabacher from California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and let
me associate myself with the questions of Mrs. Adams, who I
think was trying to get to a very important heart of the issue
of today's discussion. However, for my friend Mr. Wu, the
Congress specifically voted on informed consent and limited
liability. I know, I am the author of the amendment. I was told
not to bring it to the Floor, it wouldn't pass. We brought it
to the Floor. It passed by a vote of the Congress and then went
on to be voted by the Senate. So I think that might have been
before you were here, however, but it was when I was Chairman
of this Committee--Subcommittee, that is.
So informed consent is part of it, and it may or may not be
a policy that you want to continue past a certain time period
after our technology and after this new type of transportation
system has been developed. Let us just note that we have had
certain other industries that have benefited by this type of
approach, by limiting liability. We do know that it has been
long recognized that overcoming gravity is not the most serious
obstacle that has to be overcome. Quite often, overcoming the
power of trial lawyers is at least as equal a challenge, and
not necessarily overcoming gravity may be much more beneficial
to mankind in establishing that capability rather than just
overcoming trial lawyers.
With that said, about expanding your budget, let me just
note, they say idle hands are the devil's tool, and idle
government regulators looking for something to do could
actually be of greater concern than being idle hands in the
private sector. If we are not going to be increasing the
regulatory scope of your operation and actually the situation,
this prohibition is extended, why do you need a bigger budget?
I mean, aren't we just calling for what Mrs. Adams was pointing
to? We now are bringing on a bigger staff but your
responsibilities if we do which I think we should, which is
continue this prohibition, that really your responsibilities
haven't been expanded.
Dr. Nield. I would beg to differ. I think the
responsibilities potentially are increasing as the industry is
increasing, and we would like to be prepared to do what we can
to enable the successful growth. And so if you look at where we
were in past years in terms of the small number of launches and
where we expect to be in 2012, I expect again a tenfold
increase in the number of launches. We need to follow through
on those license applications, do the evaluations, make sure
they are safe, process those. We need to have our safety
inspectors to make sure we are doing all we can to ensure safe
and successful operations. We have also tried to come up with
some other ideas including the Commercial Space Flight
Technical Center and the prize and other ideas that would hold
out some incentives.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, let me put it this way. At a time
when we have a trillion and a half dollar deficit and we are
trying to find ways of cutting across the board, it might be
beneficial to try to see if we can use the staffs that we
already have and the budgets that we already have by giving
people more responsibilities and thus maybe getting more
productivity out of our offices.
Let me just note that if we have a variety of spacecraft to
choose from rather than just one governmental system, which
some people seem to be pushing to have--NASA has got to be in
charge, we have to have the NASA alternative. Well, if we just
have the NASA alternative as compared to three or four
commercial activities, once there is an accident, we are shut
down, as we saw with the space shuttle. Instead, if we have
various alternatives in the private sector, there is a big
benefit to being able to ease over to another alternative
rather than just putting it all on the government's shoulders
no matter what the liability question is there. There is a
major societal benefit to having these alternatives.
Let me go to Mr. Hertzfeld. You state in your report that
without sufficient data, defining a minimum set of criteria for
human spaceflight services, because we are already--let me make
this very clear. We can already regulate for safety of the
people on the ground, and that is already a regulatory power of
this office. What we are really talking about is expanding the
ability of people to go without the regulation and the massive
expansion of regulation on the passengers who we believe can
decide for themselves whether they want to step onto a
spacecraft, which is of course the informed consent which Mr.
Wu was talking about. But if you continue this where people
have that choice and thus we don't have to have further
regulation, do we see this expansion of power that we are
talking about as a necessity for expanding the role of this
office?
Dr. Hertzfeld. I think the answer really eludes us today
because this industry is changing rapidly, and I see it as a
process looking to the future. I was suggesting that we study
different types of industry indicators such as the structure of
the industry, the maturity, how many passengers, and how many
flights are really going to happen. We have had a lot of
promises in the past. They are slow to materialize. I do
believe someday they will but I don't know when that day is.
And there are a lot of regulatory issues that we can't get
around. We have air traffic control issues, if we really go to
outer space, we have treaty issues where the government has
committed to pay if there is a----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, if this eight-year regulatory
prohibition does not expire, what burden would that add to the
public and the industry that you see?
Dr. Hertzfeld. It really depends on what the FAA is
prepared to do when it does expire. I don't think they have
been specific yet. If I remember the legislation correctly, and
please correct me if I am wrong, that it only gives them the
option of looking at regulations when it expires. It doesn't
necessarily mean they are going to have to, and that is why I
am suggesting we develop a process, we develop a way of
approaching it so that if it is necessary, they can.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And if we don't have any experience at
that moment with taking passengers up in a commercial way, how
are we going to then put in place regulations when we don't
even have the operation happening yet because we don't have a
significant number of passengers. And by the way, Mr. Wu, it
seems that you did vote for that amendment when I brought it to
the Floor back in 2004.
Mr. Wu. I see the wisdom of my colleague.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I yield back my time. Thank you.
Chairman Palazzo. All right. Thank you. Mr. Wu would like
the opportunity to have one more question. If the other Members
are so inclined, they will have an opportunity to ask one more
question as well.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
This is a topic which has been brought up repeatedly in the
commercial airline context where the FAA has responsibility for
both regulating the airlines as well as promoting commercial
airline flight, airline travel. The same apparently applies in
commercial spaceflight, and Dr. Hertzfeld and Dr. Dillingham, I
would like each of you to comment on this regime and the
potential for conflict and whether this is a good arrangement
or whether as has been proposed on a the commercial airline
side that these functions ought to be separated.
Dr. Dillingham. Thank you, Mr. Wu. Where we are now, when
we looked at this issue, this potential conflict of interest,
we did not see any at that point in time. We looked at it a few
years ago. It does not mean that this situation will not change
as the industry matures. One of our concerns is that we not
wait until there is a situation where we have this crisis, and
it would be like the Air Tran accident. All of a sudden we
realized that maybe this is not the way it should be. So our
position is, it is fine now. As the industry matures, we think
that that separation of promotion and safety should be looked
at real close and maybe Commerce would be the place for the
promotion aspect of it.
Dr. Hertzfeld. Back in the late 1980s, early 1990s when the
FAA really began to gear up, they were only regulating
expendable launch vehicles, and so there didn't seem to be much
of any potential conflict between promotion and regulation at
that time. Today, from everything I have seen, we hear no
criticism from industry about this dual role, and I think that
would be a measure when we begin to hear complaints, and as I
mentioned in the testimony----
Mr. Wu. You mean complaints about the regulatory side?
Dr. Hertzfeld. No--well, the regulatory--when you regulate,
you are going to cost industry some money, and many regulations
are necessary in this very risky business. It is a question of
how much and the balance and whether the same agency can
successfully promote, which means trying to expand industry,
while at the same time other parts of the same office are going
to regulate and put possible burdens on the industry. So it is
a balance between a social good and competition. Commerce
traditionally has had the promotion of industry as one of its
major mandates, but also, Commerce has the National Technical
Information Service (NTIS) and it has regulations for NOAA. It
is not regulatory authority as well. I understand that the FAA
has agreements with the space part of NOAA in Commerce but--and
so there are already some building blocks of spreading the
promotion of the industry among other agencies, and I think at
a point where you may be faced with this delicate balance, then
the Congress might have to look into the problem. Today, none
of us, I think, have seen any indications that there is a
conflict there.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much, Dr. Hertzfeld. Dr. Dillingham,
thank you.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Wu. Ms. Adams from Florida
has indicated she would like to have a question. You are now
recognized.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Nield, do you believe that the design and operation of
private spaceflight capabilities have occurred? Do you believe
they exist today?
Dr. Nield. Yes, I do.
Mrs. Adams. So you believe that you know for a fact what
the design is going to be and therefore you are able to
regulate that design?
Dr. Nield. In our regulatory approach, we try not to be
prescriptive and so we don't specify what kinds of design of
hardware or operations that an operator may choose. We try to
be performance based so again we are protecting the public.
Mrs. Adams. So you believe that the design for performance
is created and therefore you can regulate it?
Dr. Nield. On a top-level system safety basis, I would say
the answer is yes.
Mrs. Adams. Okay. And that is how you are estimating how
much money it will cost to regulate this by your budget. How
long did the process of issuing the first reentry license take
from application to issuance?
Dr. Nield. Under the law, we are given 180 days to conduct
an evaluation of a complete application package, either for
launch or reentry, and----
Mrs. Adams. Well, the question was very simple. How long
did it take?
Dr. Nield. It was about two weeks from receiving the
complete package until we were able to make a decision. Now,
that is an iterative process. We received the----
Mrs. Adams. So my information that it took somewhere around
a year is incorrect, from the time it was applied until the
time it was issued? You are telling me it is two weeks?
Dr. Nield. It was about two weeks from a complete
application until a decision, yes.
Mrs. Adams. That is not what I asked you. Issuance.
Dr. Nield. Someone can submit a cover letter and say we are
going to apply for a reentry license but that doesn't meet the
intent of the regulations, so it can drag on until all of the
information----
Mrs. Adams. Dr. Nield, if you don't want to answer, that is
fine. When I ask you a specific question, I think I should at
least get a specific answer. We will move on.
Dr. Dillingham, GAO reports there will be a 45 percent
increase in staffing. Do you believe there is enough certainty
in the demand on FAA to require such a dramatic increase in
their staff?
Dr. Dillingham. No, ma'am.
Mrs. Adams. Does GAO agree with the assertion by AST they
will need the type of dramatic increases in funding they are
requesting for fiscal year 2012?
Dr. Dillingham. No, ma'am.
Mrs. Adams. There are currently eight licensed spaceports,
according to your testimony. There is not activity at all of
them. How many spaceports currently have routine flights from
them?
Dr. Dillingham. I don't think there are any spaceports that
have routine flights from them.
Mrs. Adams. That is what I was hearing. Do you believe the
billions in tax incentives, direct investments and grants at
the state and federal level for commercialization has yielded
the type of fast-paced growth originally envisioned?
Dr. Dillingham. No, ma'am.
Mrs. Adams. Does the increased activity GAO would expect in
the next two years for suborbital flights justify a 45 percent
increase in staff and a 74 percent increase in the AST budget?
Dr. Dillingham. No, ma'am. We have argued that may be
incrementally based on the development of the industry, one
could start making that move in that direction rather than the
big bang theory.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you. And under your understanding of the
current regulatory regime, does FAA have the authority to
regulate a commercial rocket launch with NASA astronauts going
to station if NASA has contracted with a commercial company for
the seats?
Dr. Dillingham. I do not know the answer to that but I can
get the answer back to you. Maybe Dr. Nield may help.
Mrs. Adams. Dr. Nield, would you like to take a shot at
that?
Dr. Nield. Ma'am, it would depend on how the services were
procured. If NASA is conducting the launch, no license is
required. If NASA is having industry conduct the launch, then a
license would be required under the law.
Mrs. Adams. What about if the commercial rocket is carrying
a payload to the station?
Dr. Nield. That would not be a determining factor. And
again, we are working with NASA to ensure that their needs and
FAA public safety needs can be met and have a successful
outcome of these types of activities.
Mrs. Adams. Dr. Nield, you have heard the discussion here
and you can see where I am going. 74 percent increase in a time
where economic restraint should be held. You are asking for us
to increase your budget for what if. I have grave concerns
about that. I just want you to know that.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Brooks
from Alabama.
Mr. Brooks. It seems to me that the real key to whether we
are going to have a private sector or a commercial venture in
America that is successful is dependent on whether the
businesses that are exploring this can make a profit. Short of
subsidies by the Federal Government--and this is a question I
would like for each of you to consider. Short of subsidies by
the Federal Government, what can Congress do to reduce
regulatory or other costs of commercial space ventures in order
to enhance the prospect of profitability which in turn would
enhance the ability of the private sector to compete in space?
Dr. Nield. First of all, I think having an enlightened but
responsible regulator would ensure that the industry can be
successful, and that is what we aim to be. Other things would
include ensuring that the liability structure that is set up is
appropriate to allow the businesses to compete internationally.
Certainly, research is an important area to the extent that we
can provide the tools that the companies need to have the
latest rockets and engineering operations. That would be very
important. And I think through the use of contests and prizes,
the government can have a leverage effect on its investment
without paying out taxpayer dollars until or unless the
requirements of the prize have been met. Historically, that has
been a very successful incentive for industry investment. So
those are some of the things that come to mind, sir.
Dr. Dillingham. I would think that the current regime that
is in place now where regulation is in fact sort of balanced
with the development of the industry has been one of the major
contributing factors to the industry moving as it has up to
this point. It is not as fast as one might want it to be, but
anything that does not tamp down the idea of profit for the
industry will be helpful, I believe.
Mr. Brooks. Do you have any specifics?
Dr. Dillingham. No, sir, not now, but I can in fact get
back to you with some specifics.
Dr. Hertzfeld. I think all the things that Dr. Nield
mentioned will help, more research and more balanced approach
and all the rest, but I think we have to keep in mind that for
the near-term future, maybe for longer and in the history, this
is a dual use. Space is dual use. We have had private companies
involved for many, many years, mainly as contractors as opposed
to selling services to the government, but the government
depends on all of the private companies and always has. This is
a slight change in what we see in terms of some of the private
developments and the entrepreneurial efforts, but the
government's research is really what has stimulated space and
probably the government services will for quite a while, and
what is happening in the commercial sector is interesting. It
may take time, but I think that our core dependence on the
space capabilities will remain as the primary stimulus for
technology changes and through technology changes primarily for
cost reductions. I don't believe the regulatory burden is so
expensive compared to the technologies in getting to space that
making regulation a little less expensive is going to make a
big difference in the price or supply and demand for space as
we move along.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you. If there is anything specific that
comes to mind in the future of what we can do to help our
commercial space industry be more competitive, cheaper to
operate, more profitable, particularly in the face of
international competition, I would welcome that communication
to my office.
Dr. Nield. Mr. Brooks, if you would permit me?
Mr. Brooks. Please.
Dr. Nield. One idea built on what Dr. Hertzfeld said is
very important, and I think that the effort that NASA has
recently employed to purchase services rather than build its
own rockets to operate could be a huge incentive to our
industry by having companies design their own systems to
provide cargo to the space station and some day to transport
astronauts. I think that could be a real enabler to the success
of the industry in the long term that NASA can take advantage
of and that will allow the United States to be competitive in
this area internationally.
Mr. Brooks. Is the private sector now less expensive in
delivering payloads to space than NASA?
Dr. Nield. Absolutely.
Mr. Brooks. We have got the satellites. How about man?
Dr. Nield. We have had only limited commercial human
spaceflight, a few flights by SpaceShipOne, but I think in the
future as industry starts to offer that option too, then I
believe it will end up costing less than a government program
as well, and that remains to be seen but I think that is the
promise of enabling our industry.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you.
Chairman Palazzo. I recognize Mr. Rohrabacher from
California for our final series of questions.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, and let me just note
that whatever money is invested by these private companies and
whatever systems we have available to us then without having to
worry about budget interrogations as you have gone through
today because we always take it for granted that a private
company is trying its very best to be as productive and keeping
those budgets down as much as they can because there is that
dynamic that doesn't exist in the Federal Government because
government doesn't have the same dynamic as the private sector.
And then also if one system goes down, we have other
alternatives to choose from, as I say, compared to the shuttle
where we put all our eggs in the shuttle basket and it really
put us in jeopardy after those accidents.
Commercial space companies--let me know, Mr. Chairman--I
believe are on the edge, the cutting edge of human progress. We
now have a gang of industrialists, inventors, explorers,
entrepreneurs and yes, adventurers who are pushing the
envelope, and this is very American and this is what we are
supposed to be all about. They are going into the new frontier
and they are utilizing it and taming it and finding ways of how
we can utilize the great resources that are on the frontier. I
would suggest that the area between the moon and the Earth will
become a commercial enterprise zone basically being utilized by
commercial enterprises and that NASA in the future will be
looking to further exploration and the moon and beyond and
developing new technologies. We have reached--your point about
well, developing the technology, that is really where the cost
is as compared to regulatory cost, well, that is true, but we
have reached the plateau on the development of technologies now
that will permit commercial enterprise and those technologies
are there and the cost has already been paid, so I would say at
this point the regulatory burden is what is probably the
greatest threat in holding us back from utilizing that space
between the Earth and the moon for the benefit of humankind.
This is very similar to the time period during the last
half of the last century when aviation was developed in 1903,
the first plane that went off, and at a certain point it became
possible through contracts, mail contracts, through war
contracts, dual use with military and civilian use, civilian
airlines became profitable, they became a potential. We are at
that point right now with commercial space, and let me
congratulate the Obama Administration, which you will rarely
hear from me, and they have managed to see this where some of
my own colleagues on the Republican side who always talk about
enterprise and keeping costs down and making profit ventures
don't seem to have grasped what this Administration has
grasped, and that is, the more money that is invested in the
private sector and the more potential profit we are making for
these entrepreneurs, that means there will be more money for
NASA and other people to do their job and expand the potential
of human activity in space.
So Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for a very important
hearing and I am looking forward in the days ahead to working
with you to make sure America reaches its potential both with
NASA and in the commercial area. Thank you very much.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Rohrabacher, and thank you
for stepping in for me while I had to go to another Committee
to cast a vote.
I thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony and the
Members for their questions. The Members of the Subcommittee
may have additional questions for the witnesses, and we will
ask you to respond to those in writing. The record will remain
open for two weeks for additional comments from Members.
The witnesses are excused and this hearing is adjourned.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Responses by Dr. George C. Nield, Associate Administrator
for Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration

Questions submitted by Chairman Steven Palazzo

Q1.  You testified during the hearing that, `` . . . in the coming
months, it may be necessary to revisit some of the statutes and
regulations that govern commercial space launch activities.
Specifically, the FAA's legislative authority may require revision so
that we can continue to ensure public safety both in space and on the
ground. We see the potential for greater regulatory authority in the
area of on-orbit transportation as well as during launch and reentry.''

a.  What circumstances would trigger AST's decision to
promulgate additional regulations to ensure public safety?

A1(a). The testimony referred to legislative authority and associated
regulation changes. The circumstances which drive a need for revision
to legislative authority are a result of the evolving industry and the
complexities of the types of technical solutions that are being
developed. Specifically, there are four areas where the FAA believes
legislative changes may be warranted:

On-Orbit authority - see full discussion in part B of
this question

Hybrid activities -The current FAA regulatory structure
does not fully accommodate non-launch operations of a combined carrier
aircraft/launch vehicle system (hybrid activity). Allowing FAA/AST to
oversee the entire operation will be more efficient for the operator as
well as the FAA.

Safety Approvals - Clarify the scope of Safety Approvals
to facilitate the introduction of safety services and components into
the commercial space transportation industry.

Reentry - Remove the ``substantially intact'' language
from reentry authority; this definition treats vehicles designed to
survive reentry in one piece differently from vehicles that break up
upon reentry. This is not rational from a public safety perspective
because vehicles that break up upon reentry, but do not burn up, can
pose an equal or greater public safety risk than those that survive by
scattering vehicle components and other debris over a wide area.
In addition, NASA has recently identified the potential need for
changes to statutory definitions (such as the one that identifies crew
solely as an employee of the licensee) to assist the FAA in working
with them on the Commercial Crew Program. We are in the process of
evaluating those definitions to determine if a change may be necessary.
As to the specific area of future regulatory action, the evolution of
the industry is driving revisions intended to improve, clarify, and
streamline regulations. Proposed revisions result from lessons learned
in issuing licenses and permits, or from changing standards,
technology, or hazards in the commercial space transportation industry.
In many cases, regulatory revisions can reduce the burden on the
industry and the government. For example, the FAA recently issued final
regulations that will ease launch window constraints due to concerns
about lightning. In the near future, the FAA plans to improve and
streamline requirements for the launch of reusable and expendable
launch vehicles, for the launch of amateur rockets, and for the
operation of launch and reentry sites. Regulatory updates also come
from changing standards or technology in the commercial space
transportation industry. Additionally, the FAA has several rule updates
under consideration to maintain consistency with Air Force and NASA
range guidelines, thus reducing the burden on industry.

b.  What would be the rationale for seeking greater regulatory
authority for on-orbit transportation as well as launch and
reentry? What is the scope of on-orbit activities that AST
would seek to regulate?

A1(b). The FAA's interest in incorporating on-orbit authority is
intended to cover existing gaps in the protection of public and private
property on orbit. Two specific examples have been discussed. The first
involves NASA's Commercial Resupply Services (CRS) contract. Currently,
the FAA's authority ends at the completion of the launch and deployment
of the payload. NASA is primarily interested in operations of the
payload during proximity operations (23 km from the International Space
Station). After the vehicles undock they will maneuver for an orbit or
two prior to reentry. Ensuring collision avoidance and prevention of
possible damage to property on-orbit is increasingly critical, as the
Iridium satellite collision shows. The second example is protection of
public and private property on-orbit during commercial space station
operations

Q2.  During the hearing there was discussion about extending the
experimental period for manned space flight systems, but in lieu of a
schedule-driven regulatory moratorium, it was suggested that an
alternative approach based on performance or other indicators should be
considered. In your view, is this a better approach? If yes, what
metrics do you believe should be used?

A2. The FAA believes the ability to propose regulations is critical to
the safety of commercial space transportation. Rather than wait for a
catastrophic or near-catastrophic event to occur, a well-thought out
approach to human space flight regulations developed in consultation
with industry is needed. To ensure that the appropriate work of
considering occupant safety may begin, the FAA opposes the extension of
the moratorium on proposing regulations.
We believe the original intent of the Commercial Space Launch
Amendments Act moratorium was to preclude regulations from being
written before industry had sufficient experience in building and
operating commercial human space transportation systems. At the time,
it was thought that suborbital space tourism would be the very first
commercial human space business, and that commercial human orbital
spaceflight was many years away. Suborbital human space flight is
following developmental processes similar to aviation in the area of
envelope expansion and incremental development, allowing safety insight
every step of the way. The FAA has maintained adequate safety oversight
through permitted activities and pre-license activities to have
confidence in the safety of this part of the industry without the need
to actively pursue additional suborbital human spaceflight regulations
at this time. See answer to question 4 for more detail on the
differences between orbital and suborbital human spaceflight.
NASA's Commercial Crew Program (CCP) has made commercial human
orbital flight a much nearer-term proposition than previously expected.
Orbital human space flight is a much more substantial safety challenge
from the first flight, requiring greater oversight. With orbital human
space flight now in its 50th year, there is both sufficient experience
and a need to allow the discussions to begin on development of human
spaceflight occupant safety regulations.
It takes many years to craft a good regulation; It is important
that the FAA begin this work to meet the eventual needs of both NASA-
sponsored and non-NASA sponsored flights. Additionally, the
availability of potential safety requirements will facilitate orbital
commercial space activities by providing greater transparency about the
potential regulations future vehicles may need to satisfy.
If metrics are desired, we would be willing to work collaboratively
with Congress, NASA, and industry to determine them.

Q3.  FAA and NASA are now engaged in discussions on regulating
commercial cargo and crew launches to the International Space Station.

a.  With respect to commercial cargo, does FAA anticipate
promulgating additional regulations to regulate this activity,
and if so, how soon do you anticipate publishing a NPRM?

A3(a). At this time, the FAA has the authority and regulations that are
needed to license commercial cargo launches to the International Space
Station. No additional needed regulations have been identified that are
specific to commercial cargo. As mentioned in the answer to question
1B, additional regulatory authority for on-orbit operations to protect
public and private property may be warranted, but until Congress
provides that authority, there can be no rulemaking in that area.

b.  With respect to commercial crew, from FAA's perspective,
during the launch phase, how do the agencies distinguish their
regulatory roles over the design and performance of the crew
capsule and the design and performance of the launch system?

A3b. The FAA derives its authority and responsibilities from the
Commercial Space Launch Act, recently re-codified at 51 U.S.C. Subtitle
V, ch. 509. The FAA's current regulatory authority extends to launch
and reentry operations only as they affect public safety. Therefore,
the FAA's oversight of the crew capsule design and performance would be
restricted to its impact on public safety and would be exercised
through the licensing process. NASA maintains the responsibility for
occupant safety and mission assurance. NASA's role is not regulatory.
Instead, it imposes requirements for mission assurance and for occupant
safety through direct contractual requirements (and related NASA
oversight) with the launch or capsule designer/operator.
The Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004 restricts the
FAA's ability to protect persons on board a launch or reentry vehicle
until the end of CY2012, unless there has been a death or serious
injury to crew or a space flight participant during a licensed or
permitted human space flight; or there has been an unplanned event or
series of events during a licensed or permitted flight that posed a
high risk of causing a serious injury or death. At some point after
CY2012, the FAA may exercise its responsibility for occupant safety as
its regulations and experience mature, but the timeline for that
transition with regards to the Commercial Crew Program will be
determined in the future. NASA will retain the responsibility for
mission assurance.

Questions submitted by Representative Jerry Costello

Q1.  What is AST's FY 2011 funding level? We have been trying to obtain
this information, and it has been some time since Congress passed a
final FY 2011 appropriation. Please deliver to us a final FY 11 funding
level for AST at the earliest possible date.

A1. AST's FY 2011 funding allotment was $15,021,161.

Q2.  Within the FY 2012 request for AST, how would you prioritize AST's
programs and activities?

A2. AST's top-priority activities are those that are intended to ensure
public safety, including issuing licenses and permits, conducting
hazard analyses, developing regulations, and performing safety
inspections. These activities account for approximately 40% of our FY
2012 request. Our second priority activities are those related to
enabling industry, including preparing market forecasts and other
publications, and awarding spaceport infrastructure grants. For FY 2012
only, a space transportation incentives program is included that is
intended to encourage the development of low-cost access to space for a
variety of government, industry, and academic users. These activities
constitute approximately 27% of our request. Third priority is our
safety-related research efforts, including work done by the Center of
Excellence for Commercial Space Transportation, totaling 13% of our
request. Fourth priority is our activities in support of international
and interagency coordination, including significant interactions with
both NASA and the US Air Force, totaling 12% of our request. Finally,
fifth priority is the work we are doing related to Space Traffic
Management. This area represents about 7% of our request, but is
expected to grow in future years.

Q3.  Your FY 2012 request includes $5 million to ``establish a program
for incentivizing advancements in space transportation by non-
governmental organizations''. Your justification further states that
``The Low Cost Access to Space Incentive would provide a $5 million
award designed to jump-start the creation of an entirely new market
segment. ''

a.  In this time of tight budgets, why is providing such prizes
a priority for FAA, which is an operational and regulatory
agency?

A3(a). The FAA supports the President's Innovation Initiative and
Congress' America COMPETES Act by offering this prize, which is
intended to stimulate private investment in low-cost access to space.
The incentive model has a long history in aviation and other
transportation industries of stimulating innovation to the benefit of
the whole industry. According to the Congressional Research Service,
the return on investment for the NASA Lunar Lander Challenge was 6
times the prize amount, and Ansari X Prize Foundation leaders have
estimated that 10 times the prize amount was invested by the industry.
Prizes also offer a unique advantage in that money is not expended
until the objectives have been successfully achieved.

b.  Having recently experienced a reduction to both its
Facilities and Equipment and Research and Development
appropriations in the recently passed Continuing Resolution for
FY 2011, is FAA prepared to carve out $5 million of its budget
to fund the space incentives program if similar reductions are
made to FAA's FY 2012 budget?

A3(b). The FAA's top priority is ensuring public safety, to include
licenses and permits with supporting analyses; safety inspections; and
tools related to license analysis. Activities supporting the economic
competitiveness of the commercial space transportation industry, such
as the Space Incentive program, are of secondary priority. In the event
of budgetary reductions, the FAA would focus its resources on its
highest priority safety mission.

c.  Does it make sense for an agency with primary regulatory
responsibility to undertake such a program rather than R&D
organizations who are not so encumbered, such as the National
Science Foundation or NASA or, alternatively, the Department of
Commerce's Office of Space Commercialization?

A3(c). The FAA's regulatory role does not preclude its ability to be a
meaningful R&D organization as well. Although seemingly small ($170
million in FY11) in comparison to the budget numbers for other R&D
organizations, the R&D activities conducted by FAA lines of business
are important components of and large contributors to the development
and execution of FAA's regulatory authority. This prize is specifically
designed not to overlap with any NASA prize initiative. The FAA
believes this prize will encourage transportation technologies, rather
than support an agency specific mission. The FAA is in a unique
position to understand commercial space transportation, and the
incentive is intended to specifically support the space transportation
industry. There are no US government programs aimed at reducing the
costs of access to space by developing reusable space launch systems to
build upon the advancements of the Space Shuttle. Reusability is widely
recognized and accepted as being a necessary technology before
commercial space transportation can achieve its full potential.
The National Science Foundation supports science research, not
systems development, so there is no overlap. The Department of Commerce
has not pursued any space-related prize initiatives.

Q4.  A 2008 report conducted by the Aerospace Corporation pursuant to
direction in the 2004 Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act found that
human suborbital and orbital flights should be regulated differently.
What is the AST doing to understand the risks specific to suborbital
and to orbital systems and how is it using that information to inform
its approach to safety and regulations?

A4. This is a very important question, and the FAA is in a unique
position to see the differences between orbital and sub-orbital
operations through our work with licensing and permits. Suborbital
flights are developing with more of a build-up approach, similar to
aircraft development, and involve a shorter duration of exposure to the
hazards of space. As a result, the FAA has elected not to pursue
suborbital human space flight regulatory changes once the 2012
moratorium expires. We believe that we have adequate insight to the
safety levels of sub-orbital vehicles through the development and
envelope expansion that take place during flight testing. However,
orbital operations are by their nature ``all-or-nothing'' in that the
vehicle must achieve orbit completely in order to be successful, and
the duration of exposure to the hazards of space is much more
substantial. The FAA believes that the development of orbital
spaceflight regulations must begin soon in order to ensure consistency
of approach among all government agencies for the benefit of industry.
With regards to studying the risks specific to suborbital and
orbital systems, the FAA is investigating the health effects of
spaceflight on participants from the general public--as opposed to
highly trained and healthy astronauts. In addition, the FAA is
investigating the effects of frequent space launch activities on the
National Air Space System and associated impacts to commercial airline
operations. An ``anomaly database'' is being developed to track
unexpected events in commercial space transportation that relate to
safety. Finally, the FAA is sponsoring several areas of research under
the Center of Excellence that directly relate to industry safety
issues.

Q5.  To what extent has FAA been involved in NASA's commercial crew
development (CCDev) program and in the selection of funding recipients
for NASA's CCDev2 solicitation and what further involvement, if any is
planned?

A5. The FAA has two full time employees located in the NASA Johnson
Space Center Commercial Resupply Services (CRS) office and one in the
NASA Kennedy Space Center Commercial Crew Program (CCP) office to
coordinate and communicate regarding these interagency topics. NASA has
one full time employee at FAA Headquarters in Washington DC for the
same purposes. The FAA participated in NASA's review and evaluation of
CCDev proposals but was not a ``voting member'' in the selection of
winning proposals for contract. Our participation was to ensure that
relevant FAA regulatory requirements were properly addressed in the
acquisition process. The FAA and NASA are actively engaged in
discussions to determine the best path forward to strengthen our
government partnership both to increase safety and to benefit industry.

a.  What, in your view, would give FAA the authority to impose
safety regulations for NASA crew members that may fly on
commercial spaceflight systems for ISS crew rotations rather
than having NASA do it?

A5(a). 51 U.S.C. Sec. 50905(c) provides the FAA authority to issue
regulations governing the design or operation of a launch vehicle
operating under an FAA license to protect the health and safety of crew
and space flight participants. The intent of the Commercial Crew
Program (CCP) is to develop a commercial capability for launches to the
ISS. Since the FAA licenses commercial launches, it is the intent of
both NASA and the FAA that the FAA will ultimately license these
launches within the limits of its regulatory authority. This is to
industry's benefit so that it may leverage the developments of the CCP
to extend to non-NASA customers. For licensed operations, the FAA has
responsibility for public safety. At some time in the future, and after
the expiration for the 2012 moratorium, NASA and the FAA may agree that
the FAA will exercise responsibility for occupant safety as well.

b.  What are FAA's plans for working with NASA on human rating
requirements and safety for potential commercial human
spaceflight operations involving government crew?

A5(b). A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the NASA Commercial
Resupply Services Program and the FAA is already in place, and an MOU
between the NASA Commercial Crew Program (CCP) and the FAA is currently
being drafted. The FAA and NASA CCP have been conducting joint reviews
of NASA 's requirements and FAA regulations to determine if there are
any incompatibilities or conflicts between them. We are also examining
how the FAA's regulations would apply under various acquisition
strategies being considered by NASA. As part of our ongoing
collaboration, the FAA attended NASA's requirements workshop in June
2011. The FAA will continue to stay abreast of requirements development
in order to ensure consistency, to reduce industry's data burden, and
ensure that industry can leverage the developments of the CCP to extend
to non-NASA customers.

Q6.  What specific issues and questions does Congress need to consider
before determining how to handle accidents or collisions that may occur
on-orbit?

A6. Space mishap investigation is extremely challenging, partly because
of the remote environment that hampers investigation and partly because
many entities could be involved or have a stake in the investigation
and the outcome. In order to address this problem, the FAA, NASA, and
the NTSB have a Mishap Tri-Chair Working Group which meets monthly;
they have agreed to a matrix of responsibilities if a mishap occurs
based on their discussions. This matrix would likely be of value to
Congress in framing the discussion.
Congress should consider these specific issues when determining how
to handle accidents or collisions that may occur on-orbit:

a.  On-orbit authority

b.  Liability and indemnification issues under U.S. laws and
international treaties

c.  Which entity is best suited to conduct the efforts during the
various stages or components of an investigation most efficiently;
these stages include detection, data-gathering, investigation,
compliance, enforcement, and international coordination

d.  Existing treaties and legislation regarding mishaps involving
NASA or NASA -contracted vehicles, to include:

The Astronaut Rescue Agreement

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Authorization Act of 2005, (specifically Section 822).

Q7.  In your testimony, you noted that having one set of requirements
for NASA and one for FAA would not allow companies to close their
business cases. Would not having regulations in place at the time of
any future NASA commercial spaceflights for ISS crew rotations be a
show-stopper for companies?

A7. Many in the industry have expressed a desire for the FAA to begin
developing occupant safety regulations for human spaceflight to provide
confidence to their investors that the appropriate regulatory structure
is in place to use the commercial vehicles they develop in support of
NASA 's requirements for non-NASA missions. Not having regulations
compatible with the requirements that guided the development of the
vehicles could lead to delays in licensing these vehicles commercially.

Q8.  In your prepared statement, you said that in FY 2012 you ``expect
several dozen licensed or permitted launches''. How many of those will
be licensed launches? What is the basis of your expectation?

A8. A conservative estimate, taking into consideration range and
technical delays, is that there will be 20 - 25 licensed launches
during FY 2012, of which 12 - 15 will be orbital launches and 8 - 10
will be suborbital launches. Permitted launches are much more difficult
to estimate. Based on self-reported intentions of industry combined
with prudent judgment of the uncertainties, we believe a number of
commercial reusable launch operators will conduct 20 - 30 research and
development launches in FY2012 under experimental permits. In total, we
expect 40 - 55 licensed or permitted launches during FY2012. The basis
of our expectation is from analysis of current launch manifests,
industry reported intentions, and existing contracts. The sum total of
these projections is subject to a high level of uncertainty for various
reasons, therefore the FAA has revised the total down to a more
conservative number.

Q9.  You noted in testimony that ``ensuring that the liability
structure that is set up is appropriate'' for allowing businesses to
compete internationally will be important for the success of the
commercial human spaceflight industry. Could you please elaborate on
how the current liability structure in the U.S. compares to the
liability structure internationally and how the U.S. structure may
affect competition?

A9. The current U.S. regime, set forth under Title 51, Chapter 509, has
three tiers.
Tier I: Maximum Probable Loss (MPL)-Based Financial Responsibility
Requirements. The launch licensee is required to obtain insurance to
cover claims of third parties, including government personnel. The FAA
sets the requirements based on the largest accident probable, not
possible, that would result from licensed launch or reentry activities,
not to exceed the lesser of $500 million for third party liability, or
the maximum available on the world market at reasonable cost or $100
million for U.S. Government range property, or the maximum available on
the world market at reasonable cost.
Tier II: Catastrophic Loss Protection (Government Payment of Excess
Claims, Known as ``Indemnification''). Subject to appropriations, the
U.S. Government may pay successful third-party liability claims in
excess of required MPL-based insurance up to $1.5 billion [$2.7 billion
adjusted for inflation]. The U.S. Government waives claims for
government property damage above required property insurance.
Tier III: Above MPL-Based Insurance plus Indemnification. If a
claim exceeds Tier I and II the remaining financial responsibility
reverts back to the licensee or legally liable party.
The following are examples from the leading providers of commercial
services for expendable launch vehicles:

``Arianespace shall be required to reimburse the French
government, up to a ceiling of 60 million euros per launch
[about $85 million in 2011], in the case of damages caused by
Ariane launches. Arianespace typically purchases insurance to
cover this amount. If the damages exceed this amount the French
government is obliged to indemnify the difference.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  ``Study of Liability Risk-Sharing Regime in the United States
for Commercial Space Transportation'' page 48, August 1,2006. This
report, in response to Public Law 108-492, is available at: http://
www.faa.gov//about/office_org/headquarters_offices/ast/reports_studies/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Russia, ``[t]ypical levels of compulsory insurance vary
from $80 million for Start launch vehicles to $300 million for
Soyuz and Proton. The Russian government pays liability claims
in excess of insurance coverage if this specified in the launch
services contract. If it is not, the launch customer is liable
for these claims.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Ibid, page 52.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the expendable launch vehicle (ELV) satellite services
market, if there was no U.S. Government indemnification, the
FAA believes that U.S. providers would be unable to compete
against foreign providers. Industry has stated the same
position. \3\ In addition, as detailed in the 2006 report to
Congress: ``. . . private insurance markets still are not able
to provide full liability (maximum probable loss) coverage to
the commercial launch industry. Private liability insurance
capacity remains fragile and far below what would be needed to
compensate for government indemnification if it were
eliminated. Foreign competition has increased, and all credible
international competitors have risk-sharing schemes rivaling or
surpassing that of the U.S.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Ibid, page 36-37.
\4\ Ibid., page 10, Executive Summary
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regarding human space flight, the 2004 Commercial Space
Launch Amendments Act excludes space flight participants from
indemnification eligibility against third party claims. If a
foreign human space flight competitor had indemnification and
the U.S. did not, the FAA believes that in the mid-to-Iong
term, the U.S. human space flight industry--both orbital and
suborbital--would be negatively impacted.
Given the approach to date in ELVs for satellites, foreign
competitors may try to institute an indemnification system that
is more favorable to industry than the U.S. liability regime
for human space flight.
The FAA's commercial space industry advisory committee,
COMSTAC, told the FAA on June 1, 2011: ``We advocate increased
protection of operators and their associates when they serve
spaceflight participants. While the specific mechanism is yet
to be determined, the current indemnification regime (i.e.,
private insurance up to $500M, Government indemnification to
$1.5B over that) would seem to be the correct way to achieve
this protection.''

Q10.  To what extent is data being collected to understand the range
safety implications of different designs and approaches for commercial
spaceflight systems and to inform any potential changes in regulations?
Does FAA have access to company-proprietary data?

A10. Range safety implications of a design are always reviewed and
analyzed in detail for each licensed or permitted launch, including
proprietary data. We track and annually review with the US Air Force
all waivers and exceptions to safety systems that were considered or
granted by the USAF and the FAA. The FAA has four full time employees
located at Patrick AFB (Eastern Range) for these purposes, with direct
support provided from other FAA staff as required.
We actively and continuously participate in joint USAF/FAA Common
Standards Working Groups and in the USAF Range Commanders Council.
There is a constant evolution of range operations and the FAA has
several rule updates in consideration now to maintain consistency with
USAF and NASA range guidelines.

Questions submitted by Representative David Wu

Q1.  What did FAA use as evidence of a commercial market to justify the
significant increase in workforce and supporting activities detailed in
its FY 2012 budget request, especially since the commercial market
assessment for crew and cargo systems that NASA recently transmitted to
Congress was not completed at the time of the FY 2012 budget process?

A1. The FY2012 budget request for AST was based upon a variety of
factors that affect our workforce and supporting activities. These
factors include the number of commercial space launches anticipated in
FY2012, but also include the increase in the breadth and complexity of
planned commercial space operations. Measuring this increase is
challenging to do; however, market assessments are one good option.
This is why the FAA annually conducts our own commercial space
transportation industry orbital market assessment. We provided this
data to NASA for its report, including having our market analysis
contractor perform specific new market assessments for NASA to use in
its report.
Additionally, the FAA regularly polls industry as to its intended
schedules. This is particularly crucial in the area of suborbital
markets, where data is more difficult to obtain.
Another indicator of potential future activity is the amount of
money being invested in the industry. The FAA notes that between the
Commercial Resupply Services (CRS) contracts, CCDev and Commercial Crew
Program (CCP), and the Commercial Reusable Suborbital Research (CRuSR)
program, NASA has been ramping up investment in the commercial space
industry. Previously insignificant figures from a few years ago have
increased to over $800 million in FY2011. $1.6 billion has been
proposed for FY 2012 and subsequent years. Although the investments
will take time to mature into actual launch events, NASA's investments
alone will create a large increase in activities requiring the FAA's
engagement as industry progresses towards licensed launch events.
Responses by Dr. Gerald Dillingham, Director, Physical Infrastructure,
US Government Accountability Office

Questions submitted by Chairman Steven Palazzo

Q1.  During the hearing there was discussion about extending the
experimental period for manned space flight systems, but in lieu of a
schedule-driven regulatory moratorium, it was suggested that an
alternative approach based on performance or other indicators should be
considered. In your view, is this a better approach? If yes, what
metrics do you believe should be used?

A1. GAO Response: Yes, we believe that a performance-driven approach is
better than a schedule-driven approach. In 2006, we recommended that
the Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA) Office of Commercial Space
Transportation (AST) identify and monitor safety indicators for manned
spaceflight so that it could be proactive in determining when to
regulate crew and flight participant safety. \1\ The agency has not
implemented our recommendation because commercial manned space flight
has not yet occurred. However, in the absence of such flights, metrics
could be used along the lines suggested by Dr. Hertzfeld in his
testimony. We agree with Dr. Hertzfeld that such metrics could take
into account factors such as the maturity of the industry; the ability
of companies to operate on a routine, scheduled basis; the number of
passengers and the amount of cargo transported or the number of
research experiments flown; the standardization of vehicles and systems
that could provide the basis for a vehicle certification regime; and a
quantification of the different risks involved.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, Commercial Space Launches: FAA Needs Continued Planning
and Monitoring to Oversee the Safety of the Emerging Space Tourism
Industry, GAO-07-16 (Washington, D.C.: Oct. 20, 2006).

Q2.  As part of its FY2012 budget request, AST is proposing greater
regulatory authority in the area of on-orbit transportation. Does GAO
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
agree with this concept? Does AST have the resources and expertise?

A2. GAO Response: Ultimately, increasing AST's regulatory authority is
a policy decision for the Congress. We have not completed the work that
would provide a basis for discussing the regulatory authority for on-
orbit transportation. Likewise, we have not assessed whether AST has
the resources and expertise to undertake significant additional
regulatory responsibility in this area.

Questions submitted by Representative Jerry Costello

Q1.  What liability and indemnification issues would commercial human
spaceflight vehicles carrying U.S. government astronauts or crew raise?

a.  What issues are raised when both government crew and paying
spaceflight participants are onboard together?

b.  What are the most critical issues for Congress to consider?

A1. GAO Response: Currently, for commercial launches licensed by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the U.S. government may pay
third-party liability claims in excess of required launch insurance, up
to $1.5 billion. This catastrophic loss protection in the event of a
commercial launch incident is known as indemnification. The National
Aeronautics and Space Administration's (NASA) current plan calls for
launch contractors to obtain an FAA license for crew flights to the
International Space Station and, therefore, these flights would be
covered under this government indemnification. Additionally, space
tourism flights require an FAA license and would also be covered under
this government indemnification. Congress could consider several issues
related to indemnification such as: (1) the point at which the industry
will have outgrown the need for federal indemnification; (2) if federal
indemnification is eliminated, how much time should be provided for
industry to develop alternatives to government indemnification; and (3)
if federal indemnification continues, whether an overall funding cap
should be established.

Q2.  What does Congress need to understand before determining how
accident investigations for commercial human spaceflight and suborbital
flights should be handled, including on-orbit accidents?

a.  Should the process and authority for accident investigation
be the same or different if humans are involved?

b.  Should the same organization that investigates launches
also investigate on orbit accidents and if not, why not?

A2. GAO Response: As we reported in 2009, the role of the National
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) in investigating space flight
accidents has not been resolved and, to our knowledge, that issue
remains unresolved. NTSB does not have space transportation explicitly
included in its statutory jurisdiction, although it does have
agreements with FAA and the Air Force under which it will lead
investigations of commercial space launch accidents. \2\ A 2008 FAA-
commissioned report on human space flight suggested that Congress may
want to consider explicitly designating a lead agency for accident
investigations involving space vehicles to avoid potential overlapping
jurisdictions. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ GAO, Commercial Space Transportation: Development of the
Commercial Space Launch Industry Presents Safety Oversight Challenges
for FAA and Raises Issues Affecting Federal Roles, GAO-10-286T
(Washington, D.C.: Dec. 2, 2009).
\3\ The Aerospace Corporation, et al., Analysis of Human Space
Flight Safety, Report to Congress (El Segundo, Calif.: Nov. 11, 2008).

Q3.  How should any potential civil space traffic management regime
correspond to national security needs for space traffic management and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
space situational awareness?

a.  Should these functions be handled separately or by one
entity?

b.  What criteria should inform the decision of what entity (or
entities) is given authority for space traffic management?

A3. GAO Response: Our work indicates that a civil space traffic
management function, which could be carried out by one entity, would
have to be coordinated or linked with the national security community
and specifically with the Department of Defense's U.S. Strategic
Command-the organization responsible for executing the space
situational awareness mission. \4\ We have no basis to recommend any
one entity to handle this function.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ GAO, Space Acquisitions: Development and Oversight Challenges
in Delivering Improved SpaceSituational Awareness Capabilities, GAO-11-
545 (Washington, D.C.: May 27, 2011).

Q4. The 2004 Act limits the commercial human spaceflight safety regime
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
to ``informed consent.'' Should Congress revisit that approach?

A4. GAO Response: Because commercial space flights have not yet begun,
we do not have any basis to challenge the concept of ``informed
consent.'' Congress could revisit the issue after the industry develops
further and FAA develops safety regulations for human space flight,
which would replace the informed consent regime.
Responses by Dr. Henry R. Hertzfeld, Research Professor of Space Policy

and International Affairs, Elliott School of International Affairs,
George Washington University

Questions submitted by Chairman Steven Palazzo

Q1.  As part of its FY2012 budget request AST is proposing greater
regulatory authority in the area of on-orbit transportation. Your
statement also notes the need for new regulatory authority. For the
near term (next ten years), what on-orbit activities do you believe
merit the highest concern, and what tools does AST need to regulate
them?

A1. There is an assumption built into the question that the AST will be
the regulator of all on-orbit activities for the United States
Government payloads on commercial space flights as well as the
commercial sector. I do believe that the U.S. will need more on-orbit
supervision of its activities, but the FAA is not the regulator for all
commercial on-orbit activities, whether government-sponsored or not.
NASA, NOAA, and the DOD have been performing in-orbit activities
since the 1960s and have adequately developed technical means to
perform in-orbit activities. They have the full support of overall
government policy based on our treaty obligations and requirements
should liability issues arise from their activities in space. The
safety record of government operations in space, although not perfect
in the hazardous environment of space, has generally been as good as
reasonably could be expected. And, it has improved with the lessons
learned from experience.
But, Congress has not given any federal agency the mandate to fully
regulate commercial on-orbit activities. The space regulatory agencies,
the FAA, NOAA and the FCC, have issued rules and regulations for
launches that extend the launching activity to the placement in the
proper orbit of a payload and to the on-orbit preparations for re-
entry. Additionally, the FCC and NOAA have end-of-life requirements
that requires payloads to safely be put into ``graveyard orbits'' or
deorbited.
Specifically, meeting the liability obligations of the space
treaties (particularly Article VII of the Outer Space Treaty and
Articles III and IV of the Liability Convention) may involve the
finding of fault for accidents in space. If a U.S. payload is at fault,
the U.S. Government is liable for damages to the assets of another
State Party to the Convention. The Government can then turn to a
commercial operator of that satellite or payload and attempt to recover
those damage payments. However, currently there are no requirements for
commercial firms to purchase insurance for on-orbit activities,
although some companies do. (Iridium, a U.S. company which was involved
in a serious accident a couple of years ago, did not insure its
satellites. Fortunately, there was no significant near-term economic
damage in space from that accident.)
Whether it is through requiring the commercial operator of a space
asset to purchase private insurance or through some other financial
arrangement, Congress should consider a new on-orbit commercial
protocol for space activities. Additionally, the government needs to do
more to prevent accidents. The recent U.S. policy adopting the IADC
Debris Mitigation Guidelines as well as increasing the coordination and
accuracy of SSA is an example of what has already begun in the U.S.
Although the FAA has been involved, it is only one part of the broad
reaching regulatory system that will be needed.

Q2.  FAA and NASA are now engaged in discussions on regulating
commercial cargo and crew launches to the International Space Station,
especially with regard to crew safety, third-party safety, and
International Space Station proximity operations. Current proposals
suggests that NASA would certify crew capsules used to carry government
astronauts to and from orbit, while FAA would license their launch.
What are your thoughts about this division of responsibility? In your
view, is it sensible? What steps should be taken to ensure there are no
safety `gaps'?

A2. I would need to know more about what is now being discussed between
the FAA and NASA, but I am concerned about this division of
responsibilities. Currently, FAA certifies airplanes for flight; it
does not certify space vehicles-it only licenses them subject to a
safety review and a showing of financial liability. FAA aviation
certification is a well-developed system and the rules and requirements
are codified. NASA ``certifies'' the Shuttle. That is really different
process than aviation certification and is more like a quality control
process. Each Shuttle flight is separately certified while aircraft
certification is valid for all flights of a particular type of
airplane. There is no current certification procedure for commercial
space vehicles, either by the government or by industry. Developing a
certification process for a launch vehicle and its payload is an
entirely new concept and will take years of work and experience before
it could reach the level of assurance now in place for aviation.
I don't see any essential reason for the FAA to get involved in
technical issues of on-orbit activity for a government payload. NASA is
well positioned to do that. Dividing the responsibility between the FAA
and NASA will only create difficult communications problems between the
Agencies and could possibly increase the risk of accidents rather than
reduce them.
Launching government satellites on U.S. commercial launch vehicles
does not require an FAA license. If the launch is for a dedicated
government payload, then NASA procedures (or DOD) are applied for
safety reviews and financial responsibility remains a Government
guarantee. However, companies may prefer to go through the FAA and get
a license. This may be advantageous for the company for two reasons: 1)
the vehicle may be similar to others of its class and already covered
under an FAA review, and 2) it may provide an extra measure of
assurance for the company should anything go wrong with the launch.
But, to emphasize again, it is not absolutely necessary that a
commercial launch get a license from the FAA for dedicated NASA
payloads.
In the case of ISS supply, even though the current trend in policy
is to have NASA pay for commercial services, rather than build space
hardware themselves or through an R&D contract, NASA is still the
customer. If NASA wants to impose its own criteria for safety and it
(or the Government) is able to indemnify those activities, and if NASA
is willing to pay for the extra safeguards that it wants, there is
precedent to bypass the FAA licensing procedures on those particular
launches.
Since a commercial company launching NASA cargo and eventually crew
to the ISS will also want to market those services and capabilities to
private customers, they may desire an FAA license for NASA launches as
a marketing and quality assurance tool for other commercial sales.
A benefit of involving the FAA as an observer, advisor, and partner
in NASA missions (but not as a regulator) would be the development of a
good database of operations for launch and on-orbit activities.
Eventually the FAA can make good use of the accumulated data and
experience in developing future regulations of purely commercial
launches and on-orbit activities. This is particularly relevant for the
future unknowns of private human activity in orbit and for the ISS.

Questions submitted by Representative Jerry Costello

Q1.  What liability and indemnification issues would commercial human
spaceflight vehicles carrying U.S. government astronauts or crew raise?

a.  What issues are raised when both government crew and paying
spaceflight participants are onboard together?

b.  What are the most critical issues for Congress to consider?

A1. Liability in space is an untested legal regime, particularly for
commercial enterprises in space. Through Article VI of the Outer Space
treaty, States are responsible for the activities in space of their
citizens and non-governmental entities. This provision exposes the
State to potential payment for damages to the assets of other nations
caused, not directly by the State, but by one of its companies
operating in space. No other industry or sector is treated this way. In
other high-technology, high-damage industries such as civil nuclear
plants or large oil platforms, the operator has the primary
responsibility for liability payments with governments sometimes a
secondary guarantor.
Domestic law, it should be noted, often can and will require a
company to have insurance (FAA does this now with launches) so that the
exposure of the government is actually minimized, except in exceptional
situations.
a)   The mixing of government personnel with private crew and/or
private passengers is complicated. The problems are as diverse as the
reasons for having private citizens on a spacecraft. Are they
government contractors? Are they ``tourists?'' Are they doing private
R&D or science related to a government project? Each scenario might
trigger a different legal answer.
It is possible that those passengers can get in the way of mission
personnel (space vehicles are not roomy and it is impossible to
physically separate private from government people). If an accident
occurred as a result, as they have on ships and submarines, assigning
liability is of concern. Informed consent is not enough in these cases;
the passengers and companies involved must have comprehensive financial
responsibility procedures for all types of fault-based liability.

Q2.  The 2004 Act limits the commercial human spaceflight safety regime
to ``informed consent''. Should Congress revisit that approach?

A2. Yes, it should be reviewed. Informed consent from passengers is
aimed at suborbital human flights and at stimulating the companies by
not requiring them to insure their passengers who recognize, through
informed consent statements, that they are taking certain risks. The
informed consent requirement also makes it clear to the passenger that
the FAA has not certified the vehicle or flight (and may therefore
absolve the Government from being sued by the passenger).
However, as mentioned in the testimony, four States that have
spaceports are now moving to further protect the private launch
companies from virtually any legal suits from passengers. Each State
has slightly different wording in its laws which may now result in
competition among the various States for launch operators to locate
there based on the costs associated with safety issues. (Economic
competition based on the price of the flight and on other incentives
States may give companies such as building facilities or providing tax
incentives should not be discouraged.)
Furthermore, these types of informed consent waivers that protect
the companies may not even be practical from a legal view. For
instance, if a launch originates in New Mexico (a state with an
informed consent law) and then has an accident in U.S. airspace above
Colorado (a state without such a law), Colorado tort law would be
applied to the accident and it is highly probable that a Colorado court
would not allow the application of that waiver to the launch company.
Predictability and uniformity in these safety regulations across the
U.S. would be preferable.

Q3.  What does Congress need to understand before determining how
accident investigations for commercial human spaceflight and suborbital
flights should be handled, including on-orbit accidents?

a.  Should the process and authority for accident investigation
be the same or different if humans are involved?

b.  Should the same organization that investigates launches
also investigate on-orbit accidents and if not, why not?

A3. The expertise required to investigate an accident involving space
technologies is quite limited. Only a very few agencies (e.g. NASA,
DOD, and some parts of DOT and others) have the expertise to perform
the analyses required. Historically, all agencies as well as private
consultants, industry experts, etc. have fully cooperated in these
investigations. I do not believe there has been any serious problem in
obtaining that cooperation.
Therefore, I believe that it is not a question of accidents with or
without humans, or accidents involving space hardware on Earth, during
launch, in-orbit, or returning from orbit, but only one of clearly
designating one organization to coordinate an accident investigation.
That organization could take any format ranging from an ad hoc office
or Board within an agency such as NASA or DOT created especially for
each commercial space accident to a more formal office created within
an agency organized specifically to develop protocols and procedures
for a space accident. That organization should be given all necessary
legal powers to conduct an investigation, obtain evidence, review and
keep secure any confidential information (classified or commercially
proprietary) and procure all necessary technical expertise. The
investigatory panel should be completely independent of the Agency
hierarchy and should report directly to either (or both) the President
and Congress.
There are several possible locations (none need to be permanent
organizations or office) for this independent activity. NASA itself has
a safety office and advisory group that could create an investigation
panel. The DOT/FAA might also be appropriate, but it currently does not
have a full spectrum of technical space expertise. The NTSB is an
independent body within the Executive Branch but does not specifically
have space in its legislative charter. It does, however, have the
organizational expertise to conduct accident investigations in other
transportation modes and currently does have a MOU with the FAA for the
investigation of certain space-related accidents.

Q4.  How should any potential civil space traffic management regime
correspond to national security needs for space traffic management and
space situational awareness?

a.  Should these functions be handled separately or by one
entity?

b.  What criteria should inform the decision of what entity (or
entities) is given authority for space traffic management?

A4. This is not my specific expertise. I do believe that the key to a
successful regime for space traffic management must be coordination,
just as it is for air traffic control. And, of course, to get to space
or to get back from space involves going through air space. Therefore,
on either a national or international level, not only does space
traffic management have to be coordinated in space itself, but also it
must be coordinated with air traffic control.
Therefore, whether one entity does both or whether there are
different organizations controlling traffic in and to space, they must
work together (and also interface smoothly with military traffic
command, as is also done currently with air traffic control).
Criteria for this decision should rest mainly on the ability to
coordinate the information required. The range of information is vast
and complicated and with the global reach of space, will involve access
to many different types of information such as air traffic data,
weather data, space weather data, national and international launch
information. The function will also require a sophisticated level of
analysis and the ability to make real-time decisions.

Q5.  Should FAA require evidence of a real demand for launch services
at a prospective spaceport prior to investing its resources for the
work leading to granting a license?

A5. This is a difficult question. If and when there is a surge of
private space launch activity, the FAA will need the resources.
However, at present, the FAA data indicate that number of commercial
launches is slightly over 10 per year. Forecasts indicate that the
number of launches will remain relatively stable for the next several
years and may rise to near 20 per year late in this decade. But, those
forecasts are based on a number of assumptions, including the success
of the NASA-led effort for commercial crew and cargo flights to the
ISS.
It appears from these numbers there will no surges in launch
activity in the immediate future. But, given the many differences in
the technical approach to launching from the private companies now
building new and experimental launch vehicles that the FAA will need
for a broad range of technical expertise and possibly new resources to
evaluate these different approaches. The FAA is closely monitoring the
development of these new vehicles and, as yet, none are commercially
operating. Congress should be kept informed and ready to act when and
if the FAA needs the resources to adequately license these new vehicles
and possible new surges in launch demand.

Q6.  What, if any, risks are raised when range safety at a private
spaceport is conducted by the organization that is operating the
spaceport, and how should those risks be addressed?

A6. The obvious risks are the inherent decision conflicts between
making money in a profit-motivated organization and developing a level
of safety that is as high as possible and practicable as it could be.
There will always be trade-offs between money and safety; nothing is
100% safe. For the most part, government agencies dealing with space
issues are well funded and, particularly when dealing with human
safety, will err on the side of spending the funds necessary for a
higher level of safety than a private firm would.
On the other hand, a private firm will argue that the government is
overly cautious and near equivalents in safety can be met with less
expensive investments. And, they argue, that customers will not buy
their services if there is a serious safety breach that was responsible
for the loss of life.
One way the risks can be addressed and possibly managed in an
optimum level for safety is to require the private spaceport to use a
new part-time board that would combine government expertise with
private sector executives. This relatively small office/panel/board
would consist of independent individuals who are experts in appropriate
space and ground support technology, operations, law, and safety. This
one office would employ a small permanent staff and would be
established to oversee and advise all domestic spaceports. The funding
for this would be through an obligatory payment or tax from each U.S.
spaceport (charged on the basis of a formula to insure a proportionate
and fair share payment by each spaceport). Each spaceport would be
required to abide by the recommendations of this Board and an FAA
license to launch from that facility would be granted only if there
were full compliance with those recommendations. The FAA licensing
process would be independent from this Board.
One final note on the suggestion for a new Board to be formed (and
this note equally applies to a possible new organization for accident
investigations mentioned above) is that the demand for spaceports (and
the number of accidents that might occur) would warrant the
expenditures for these organizations. It might be more appropriate if
demand is low to have ad hoc committees of experts both within the
Government and outside formed for these purposes.


