- OFFSHORE DRILLING SAFETY AND RESPONSE TECHNOLOGIES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OFFSHORE DRILLING SAFETY AND RESPONSE TECHNOLOGIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND

ENVIRONMENT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 6, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-12

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-807                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DAVID WU, Oregon
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 PAUL D. TONKO, New York
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JERRY McNERNEY, California
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
Tennessee                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Energy and Environment

HON. ANDY HARRIS, Maryland, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               ZOE LOFGREN, California
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, April 6, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Andy Harris, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Brad Miller, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    11
Written Statement............................................    13

Witnesses:

Dr. Victor Der, Acting Assistant Secretary for Fossil Energy,
Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    17

Mr. David Miller, Director, Standards, American Petroleum
Institute
Oral Statement...............................................    19
Written Statement............................................    21

Mr. Owen Kratz, President and CEO, Helix Energy Solutions Group
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    25

Dr. Molly Macauley, Research Director and Senior Fellow,
Resources for the Future
Oral Statement...............................................    27
Written Statement............................................    29

Discussion.......................................................    35

Appendix I: Additional Material for the Record

Prepared Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson,
Ranking Minority Member, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................   100

OFFSHORE DRILLING SAFETY AND RESPONSE TECHNIQUES

----------

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 6, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:47 p.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy
Harris [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

hearing charter

Chairman Harris. The Subcommittee on Energy and Environment
will come to order. Good afternoon. Welcome to today's hearing
entitled, ``Offshore Drilling Safety and Response
Technologies.'' In front of you are packets containing the
written testimony, biographies, and truth in testimony
disclosures for today's witness panel.
Before we get started, though, this being the first meeting
of the Energy and Environment Subcommittee for the 112th
Congress, I would like to ask the Subcommittee's indulgence to
introduce myself, welcome back returning Members, and introduce
any new Members on our side of the dais. Afterwards I will
recognize Mr. Miller to do the same.
It is an honor and pleasure for me to Chair the Energy and
Environment Subcommittee for this Congress, and it is a
position I don't take lightly. I want all Members of the
Subcommittee to know that I will endeavor to serve all the
Members fairly and impartially, and that I will work to serve
the best interests of Congress and all Americans to ensure that
the agencies and programs under our jurisdiction are worthy of
the public support.
Although they are not here now, I would like to formally
welcome back our returning Members Rohrabacher, Bartlett,
Lucas, Biggert, Akin, Neugebauer, and Broun, and I would also
like to welcome, when he arrives, our newest member, Chuck
Fleischmann of Tennessee.
At this point I will recognize Mr. Miller for any--if you
want to introduce or just mention your Members.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. I can do it in my opening
statement.
Chairman Harris. Okay. Thank you. I will recognize myself
for five minutes for an opening statement.
The title of today's hearing is, ``Offshore Drilling Safety
and Response Technologies.'' The context under which we review
the issue is framed by complex and interrelated environmental,
economic, and even geopolitical policy concerns. Looming large,
of course, is the Deep Water Horizon oil spill of which we are
still assessing its root causes and environmental impacts even
as we approach the one-year anniversary of the disaster.
Meanwhile, American families are being hit hard at the gas
pump due to multiple market factors; headlined, though, by
tight supplies, rising global demand for oil, growing political
instability in North Africa and the Middle East, and decreasing
American production. The current national average price for a
gallon of gas is over $3.60, the highest ever for this time of
the year. This, of course, effectively amounts to a tax
increase on our consumers and families and a drag on our
economic recovery.
Accordingly, I believe we must attack the energy problem
from every angle we can and expanding domestic oil and natural
gas supply and production absolutely must be part of this
equation. Offshore drilling holds incredible promise to help
deliver on this goal. The Federal Government currently
estimates the U.S. Outer Continental Shelf holds 85 billion
barrels of technically-recoverable oil at this point, over half
of which is in the Gulf of Mexico and 400 trillion cubic feet
of natural gas.
We must pursue exploration and production of these valuable
resources, but we all realize on both sides of the aisle that
we must do it safely and be prepared with effective well
containment and response if and when an accident should occur.
To this end, through this hearing we aim to examine the
status of safety-related drilling and response technologies and
standards with an emphasis on progress made since last year's
accident. We also want to hear how best we should structure and
prioritize federal programs in these areas, particularly those
of the Department of Energy but also interagency response
efforts authorized by the Oil Pollution Act of 1990.
Look. We all know it is impossible to completely and
positively eliminate risks associated with complex endeavors
such as deep water drilling, but we must continuously work to
reduce risks and to manage them in a way that allows our
economy and American consumers to benefit from our vast supply
of domestic offshore oil and gas resources.
I yield back the balance of my time and now recognize
Ranking Member Miller for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harris follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Andy Harris
The title of today's hearing is Offshore Drilling Safety and
Response Technologies. The context under which we review this issue is
framed by complex and interrelated environmental, economic, and even
geopolitical policy concerns. Looming large of course is the Deepwater
Horizon oil spill, of which we are still assessing its root causes and
environmental impacts as we approach the one year anniversary of the
disaster. Meanwhile, American families are being hit hard at the gas
pump due to multiple market factors headlined by tight supplies, rising
global demand for oil, growing political instability in North Africa
and the Middle East, and decreasing American production.
The current national average price for a gallon of gas is $3.60-the
highest ever for this time of the year. This of course effectively
amounts to a tax increase on consumers and a drag on our economic
recovery. Accordingly, I believe we must attack the energy problem from
every angle we can, and expanding domestic oil and natural gas supply
and production absolutely must be part of this equation.
Offshore drilling holds incredible promise to help deliver on this
goal. The Federal government currently estimates the U.S. Outer
Continental Shelf holds 85 billion barrels of technically recoverable
oil (over half of which is in the Gulf of Mexico) and 420 trillion
cubic feet of natural gas.
We must pursue exploration and production of these valuable
resources. But we all realize we must do it safely and be prepared with
effective well containment and response if an accident does occur. To
this end, through this hearing we aim to examine the status of safety-
related drilling and response technologies and standards, with an
emphasis on progress made since last year's accident. We also want to
hear how best to structure and prioritize Federal programs in these
areas, particularly those at the Department of Energy but also
interagency response efforts authorized by the Oil Pollution Act of
1990.
We all know it is impossible to completely eliminate risks
associated with complex endeavors such as deepwater drilling, but we
must continually work to reduce risks and to manage them in a way that
allows our economy and American consumers to benefit from our vast
supply of domestic offshore oil and gas resources.

Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Thank you, Chairman Harris,
and on this side we also have very conscientious Members, none
of whom are here. We have seasoned Members as well as Members
with expertise in the subject matter of the Subcommittee. In
addition to me, Eddie Bernice Johnson, the Full Committee
Ranking Member, we have Ms. Woolsey, Ms. Lofgren, and Mr.
McNerney, all Californians with--and well-known champions of- a
clean energy future. Mr. Lujan represents Los Alamos National
Lab, and brings his expertise on federal research and
technology development to this Subcommittee, and Mr. Tonko
draws upon his experience as the CEO of the New York State
Energy Research and Development Authority.
Like you, Mr. Harris, we will take the jurisdiction of this
Committee very seriously and will always look for ways to push
our federal research agencies to be much more effective and
efficient drivers of innovation and economic growth. Our job is
to know the agency's capability, know what the public needs,
and create a credible and strong record on government
performance in meeting those needs. Where the agencies succeed,
we will support them, and where they fall short, we will take
corrective measures and ultimately we may support redirecting
resources.
Today, however, we are here to discuss the progress that
industry has made in meeting the public's needs for safety and
responsible oil and gas drilling. Just as we hold our agencies
accountable, we must also hold industries accountable and
expect them to acknowledge the tremendous risks, the tremendous
danger inherent in the services they provide, and the work they
do.
Before the explosion that killed 11 men, sank the Deep
Water Horizon drilling rig, and generated the ensuing oil spill
that lasted for nearly three months, offshore drilling was not
at the center of public attention. As is often the case with
energy matters outside of the public policy world, the
availability of oil was largely taken for granted, and the
environmental risks were not widely known to the general
public.
All that changed on April 20 when we got a violent and
lasting reminder of how dangerous our need for oil has become.
As the world's largest oil consumer but with less than eight
percent of technically recoverable global resources and far
less than that of economically-recoverable global reserves, our
reliance on oil has driven domestic production to ever-deeper
waters in search of more productive fields.
Chairman Hall has taught us over the years both as a
Republican and as a Democrat that this is no small feat of
engineering. Those companies have pushed the boundaries of
technological innovation in finding and extracting oil under
nearly impossible conditions.
But by almost all accounts in the race to deeper waters,
the industry's investment in advancing environmental safety has
not kept up with those increasingly dangerous conditions. To
anyone that disputes that I ask you to tell me how an explosion
killed 11 men and sank one of the most technologically-advanced
drilling rigs in the world. Why did it take three months of
failed attempts by a NASA team of government and industry
experts to stop the oil gushing from the disabled blowout
preventer thousands of feet beneath the surface, creating one
of the largest and most expensive environmental disasters in
U.S. history? It was because nobody was prepared.
President Obama has acknowledged that. He suspended new
deep water drilling permits in the Gulf until new safety
measures could be drawn up, and industry could give some
assurance that they would be prepared if that should happen
again. It would have been reckless not to do so.
I imagine that we will hear today a good deal of misplaced
blame. We will hear from some Members, perhaps from a Member,
that the President is to blame for not being more diligent in
overseeing the industry's drilling practices, that the
President did not do enough to help the oil industry and gas
industry develop new technologies, that the President was not
quick enough or prepared enough to respond to the unthinkable
disaster unfolding, and that the President's timeout on the
deep water drilling has been a catastrophe for the industry.
But from those Members we perhaps will not hear as much
about the industry's culpability. We won't hear how the owner
of Deepwater Horizon, Transocean, gave executive bonuses last
year for their exemplary safety record. We won't hear how the
most profitable industry in the history of the world did not
see fit to invest resources in assuring that disasters like the
Deepwater Horizon do not happen or that it could be cleaned up
if it did. Most important, we won't hear today the truth about
oil and gas production under President Obama.
We won't hear that production actually continued in the
Gulf during the temporary drilling suspension, that 39 shallow
water permits were granted since October, that eight new deep
water permits have been granted in just the last month and a
half. We won't hear that in 2010, outer continental shelf oil
production increased by 30 percent, that domestic oil
production is at its highest level in ten years and natural gas
is at its highest ever.
I do look forward to the witnesses' testimony today. I
acknowledge that the industry has made advances in safety in
the last year, but it is not enough. We owe it to the public to
hold this industry's feet to the fire and assure that there is
relentless innovation in worker safety and environmental
protection in the oil and gas industry.
Thank you, Chairman Harris.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller of North Carolina
follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Brad Miller
Thank you, Chairman Harris.
On this side of the aisle the Energy & Environment Subcommittee is
also stocked with seasoned professionals. In addition to me and the
full Committee Ranking Member, Eddie Bernice Johnson, we have Ms.
Woolsey, Ms. Lofgren and Mr. McNerney, all Californians and well-known
champions of a clean energy future. Mr. Lujan, representing Los Alamos
National Lab, brings his expertise on federal research and technology
development to the Subcommittee. Finally, Mr. Tonko draws upon his
experience as the CEO of the New York State Energy Research and
Development Authority.
Like you, Mr. Harris, I can assure the public that we take the
jurisdiction of this Committee very seriously, and will always look for
ways to push our federal research agencies to be more effective and
efficient drivers of innovation and economic growth. Our job is to know
the agencies' capabilities, know what the public needs, and build a
credible and strong record on government's performance in meeting those
needs. Where the agencies succeed, we will support them. Where they
fall short, we will take corrective measures and ultimately may decide
to redirect resources.
However, today we are here to discuss the progress that industry
has made in meeting the public's needs for safe and responsible oil and
gas drilling. Just as we hold our agencies accountable, we also hold
these industries accountable and expect them to acknowledge the
tremendous risk inherent in the services they provide.
Before the explosion that killed eleven men, sank the Deepwater
Horizon drilling rig, and generated the ensuing oil spill that lasted
for nearly three months, offshore drilling was not at the center of
public attention. As is often the case with energy matters, outside of
the policy world, the availability of oil was largely taken for granted
and the environmental risks were not widely known by the general
public.
That all changed on April 20th when we got a violent and lasting
reminder of how dangerous our need for oil has become.
As the world's largest oil consumer, but with less than 8% of
technically- recoverable global reserves, our reliance on oil has
driven domestic production to ever deeper waters in search of more
productive fields. As Chairman Hall has taught us over the years, this
is no small feat of engineering. These companies have pushed the
boundaries of technological innovation in finding and extracting oil
under nearly impossible conditions.
By almost all accounts, in the race to deeper waters the industry's
investment in advancing worker and environmental safety has not kept up
with these increasingly dangerous conditions.
To anyone that disputes that, I ask you to tell me how an explosion
killed eleven men and sank one of the most technologically advanced
drilling rigs in the world? Why did it take three months of failed
attempts by a massive team of government and industry experts to stop
the oil gushing from the disabled blowout preventer thousands of feet
below the surface, creating one of the largest and most expensive
environmental disasters in U.S. history? It is because nobody was
prepared.
Acknowledging this, President Obama suspended new deepwater
drilling permits in the Gulf until new safety measures could be drawn
up and industry could give some assurance that they would be prepared
when this happens again. It would have been reckless not to do so.
I imagine that what we will hear today is misplaced blame. We may
hear from some Members that the President is to blame for not being
more diligent in overseeing the industry's drilling safety practices;
that the President did not do enough to help the oil and gas industry
develop new technologies; that the President was not quick or prepared
enough to respond to the unthinkable disaster unfolding at the Macondo
well; and that the President's time-out on deepwater drilling in the
Gulf has been a catastrophe for the industry.
We won't hear much from these Members about industry culpability.
We won't hear how the owner of the Deepwater Horizon, Transocean, gave
executives bonuses for their ``exemplary'' safety record last year. We
won't hear how the most profitable industry in the history of the world
did not see fit to invest resources in assuring that disasters like the
Deepwater Horizon do not happen, or that it could be cleaned up if it
did.
Most important, in this hearing we won't hear the truth about oil
and gas production under President Obama. We won't hear that production
actually continued in the Gulf during the temporary drilling
suspension, that 39 shallow water permits were granted since October,
or that eight new deepwater permits have been granted in the last month
and a half. We won't hear that in 2010, Outer Continental Shelf oil
production increased by 30%, that domestic oil production is at its
highest levels in ten years, and natural gas is at its highest ever.
I look forward to the witness' testimony today. I acknowledge the
industry's advances in safety in the last year. But it is not enough.
We owe it to the public to hold this industry's feet to the fire, and
ensure that there is relentless innovation in worker safety and
environmental protection in the oil and gas industry.
Thank you, Chairman Harris.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Miller. I know we
are joined by the gentlelady from California, and if you would
like to submit additional opening statements, your statement
would be added to the record at this point, and if other
Members arrive, I will make the same offer.
Ms. Woolsey. That is fine, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Harris. Thank you. At this time I would like to
introduce our witness panel. Dr. Victor Der is Acting Assistant
Secretary for Fossil Energy. Dr. Der also serves as Principal
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fossil Energy where he provides
strategic direction and guidance for the program's daily
activities as well as its long-term goals and objectives. Prior
to that position he was Deputy Assistant Secretary for Clean
Coal. He holds a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering and has worked
at DOE for 37 years.
Mr. David Miller is the Director of the Standards Program
for American Petroleum Institute. He is also Chairman of the
American National Standards Institute International Policy
Committee, and a member of the Offshore Technology Conference
Board of Directors. He was elected a fellow of the American
Society of Civil Engineers in 2006.
Mr. Owen Kratz is President and Chief Executive Officer of
Helix Energy Solutions Group, Incorporated. He joined Cal Dive
International, now known as Helix, in 1984, and held various
offshore positions before serving in a number of management
positions before becoming CEO in April of 1997.
And last, Dr. Molly Macauley is Research Director and
Senior Fellow at Resources for the Future. Dr. Macauley's
research emphasizes new technology and its application to
natural and environmental resources. She serves on several
national-level committees and panels, including the National
Research Council's Space Studies Board, the NASA Earth Science
Applications Advisory Committee, and NOAA's Climate Working
Group. She has a Ph.D. in economics from Johns Hopkins
University. I know that place. And also served there as an
adjunct professor of economics.
Now as our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is
limited to five minutes each, after which the Members of the
Committee will have five minutes each to ask questions. Right
up front I apologize that we are starting late. You know, we
held a series of votes. I am going to apologize to you because
your time is valuable.
Now I would like to recognize our first witness, Dr. Victor
Der, the Acting Assistant Secretary for Fossil Energy at the
Department of Energy. Doctor.

STATEMENTS OF DR. VICTOR DER, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
FOSSIL ENERGY, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Dr. Der. Good afternoon, Chairman Harris, Ranking Member
Miller, and Members of the Committee. As Acting Assistant
Secretary for Fossil Energy I appreciate the opportunity to
present the Department of Energy's perspective on improving
offshore drilling safety and response technologies. Before I
delve into my statement I want to take a moment to recognize
and remember the 11 men that died almost a year ago while
working on the Deep Water Horizon. As we approach the one-year
anniversary of that tragedy in the Gulf, we know that there are
important challenges we must meet in order to ensure that we
never again see such a calamity on the human, ecological, and
economic scales.
Turning back to my statement, natural gas and crude oil
provide more than 60 percent of our Nation's primary energy
needs. Last week the President outlined a blueprint for a clean
energy future, and to reduce our dependency on oil we must
develop and deploy new options like advanced biofuels, vehicle
electrification, and improve vehicle efficiency.
In the meantime, petroleum and natural gas will continue to
play an important role in our economy for at least the next
several decades. As both the Chairman and the President have
said, we have domestic oil and gas resources here that we can
use, and we will. In fact, last year American oil production
reached its highest level since 2003.
But in the wake of last year's spill the President has made
it clear that we must tap into these resources safely and
responsibly. As this Committee knows, the Department of the
Interior is the agency with the regulatory authority over the
oil and gas industries' offshore drilling activities. The
Department of Energy can work with other federal agencies and
industry partners to ensure that new technologies improve the
ability to drill in ever-deeper waters with greater margins of
safety, reduce the risk of spills, and provide improved
mitigation should a spill occur.
To help meet rising demand, producers are looking to
identify and tap new oil and natural gas sources, including
many in areas that are increasingly difficult to locate and
produce such as deepwater locations. Offshore oil now accounts
for about one third of our domestic fuel production, and 80
percent of this production comes from the Gulf of Mexico
deepwater sites. Deepwater's contribution to domestic oil and
natural gas supplies is expected to increase in the years
ahead. That contribution must be accompanied by ongoing
technology solutions to production safety and environmental
challenges which will need to be developed and deployed.
As the Nation's largest funder of R&D in the physical
sciences, DOE has long had a role in oil and gas technology
development.
Again, as I noted above, DOE has no regulatory role over
the oil and gas industry, which is primarily the purview of the
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation, and Enforcement
at the Department of the Interior, as well as the National
Oceanic Atmospheric Administration and the Coast Guard.
The DOE's responsibilities regarding deepwater research are
outlined in Section 999 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005, which
established the Ultra Deepwater and Unconventional Natural Gas
and Other Petroleum Research Program. Until last year, DOE's
activities under the deepwater portion of Section 999 were
focused primarily on exploration and production-related
technologies, which we believe is more appropriately funded by
industry. DOE has since refocused the work under Section 999 on
safety and environmental protection associated with production.
Consistent with budget requests since fiscal year 2007, the
President's fiscal year 2012 budget proposes repeal of the
Ultra Deepwater and Natural Gas and Other Petroleum Research
Fund established as part of the Section 999A program. In the
absence of this program, this important work can be carried out
through investments from the private sector in coordination
with the Ocean Energy Safety Advisory Committee.
In the wake of the Deepwater Horizon accident, industry
developed new technologies to contain underwater blowouts.
However, additional work remains to ensure that deepwater
resource development is safe and environmentally sound. The
Administration believes that it is appropriate for industry to
assume the funding of these activities, and DOE stands ready to
provide technical expertise and assistance through both the
Office of Fossil Energy and our participation on the Advisory
Committee in order to integrate enhanced safety and
environmental capabilities into deep water production
technologies.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, deepwater oil and gas will be
crucial to meeting the demand as we continue to transition to a
more sustainable energy feature. At the same time, last year's
tragic oil spill serves as a stark reminder of the risks
associated with deepwater drilling. As improved extraction
technologies are developed and implemented, so, too must be
approaches for addressing potential risks, safety issues, and
environmental impacts.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I respectfully request that my
written statement be included in the official record of these
proceedings, and I will be happy to answer any questions that
you and the other Members of the Committee may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Der follows:]
Prepared Statement by Dr. Victor K. Der, Acting Assistant Secretary for
Fossil Energy, U.S. Department of Energy
Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
to discuss the Department of Energy's (DOE) perspective on research and
development (R&D) to improve oil and gas drilling in ever-deeper waters
with greater margins of safety, reduced risk of spills, and better
mitigation approaches should there be a spill.
As you know, the Office of Fossil Energy (FE) leads DOE's efforts
to ensure that we use our hydrocarbon resources--coal, oil, and natural
gas--for clean, affordable, and reliable energy. A key part of
fulfilling this mission is a commitment to cutting-edge R&D across
fossil energy technologies. In discharging this responsibility, we have
conducted significant R&D over the years to advance technology
development related to oil and natural gas supply and production,
unconventional fossil energy, and deepwater resources.
In terms of going forward in the deepwater area, we must do
everything possible to ensure that we never again face an environmental
disaster of the magnitude as last year's Gulf of Mexico oil well spill,
which not only tragically claimed 11 lives, but also caused extensive
economic and ecological damage.
We at the Department of Energy (DOE) recognize that improving
deepwater oil and gas technology is a challenge; but one that also
provides a major opportunity. The Federal Government's responsibility
is to rigorously regulate the oil and gas industry's deepwater
activities, appropriately quantify risks in offshore development, and
maximize the capability and resources to prevent and mitigate damages
of future offshore events should they occur. As this Committee knows,
the Department of the Interior is the agency with regulatory authority
over the oil and gas industry's offshore drilling activities.
Today, I will offer some DOE perspectives on the continuing
importance of deepwater resources, the challenges that lie ahead, the
role of DOE and our Federal and industry partners in moving forward,
and current R&D activities.

Moving Toward a Sustainable Future

The Obama Administration has made a strong commitment to move our
Nation toward a clean energy future, which includes reducing reliance
on oil and other fossil fuels, while developing new sources and
technologies related to renewable energy. As we make this transition,
however, oil and natural gas will continue to play a key role in our
economy for many years, particularly in the transportation sector.
Currently, oil and natural gas provide more than 60 percent of our
Nation's energy needs, and over 95 percent of the fuel that Americans
use for transportation.
According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), the
United States uses slightly more than 19 million barrels of liquid
fuels every day, about 22 percent of the world's total; this total is
projected to increase to nearly 22 million barrels by 2035 ( Annual
Energy Outlook 2011 Early Release). In 2010, U.S. domestic crude
production rose by 150,000 barrels per day to 5.51 million barrels per
day (MB/D) (STEO, March 8, 2011), the highest level since 2003. Looking
longer range, EIA projects that U.S. domestic crude oil production will
continue to increase to 5.7 million barrels by 2035. Production
increases are anticipated to come from onshore enhanced oil recovery
projects, shale oil plays, and deepwater drilling in the Gulf of
Mexico. They also project that U.S. dependence on imported liquid fuels
to continue declining over the projection period. This trend is in
keeping with President Obama's comments at a March 11, 2011, news
conference that, ``First, we need to continue to boost domestic
production of oil and gas.'' However, as the President has said, we
cannot drill our way out of this problem, which is why the
Administration has outlined a blueprint that includes measures to
reduce our consumption.
Globally, EIA projects the world's use of oil and other liquid
fuels to grow from 86.3 million barrels per day in 2007 to 110.8
million barrels per day in 2035. Global natural gas consumption is
forecasted to increase from 108 trillion cubic feet per year to 156
trillion cubic feet per year over the same period.
In this environment of increasing demand, the world's producers are
continuously endeavoring to identify and produce new sources of oil and
natural gas to replace the volumes which are being consumed by the
world's economies. While significant reserves remain, many of these are
in geologic formations that are increasingly difficult to locate and
produce, including deepwater locations.

Increasing Role of Deepwater Production

In recent years, the oil and gas industry has been discovering and
producing in increasingly deeperwater. In the Gulf of Mexico there have
been 13 major discoveries in deepwater areas over the past five years
alone. Offshore oil now accounts for about one-third of our domestic
field production, and some 80 percent of this comes from Gulf of Mexico
deepwater locations. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Source: Energy Information Administration:http://
www.eia.doe.gov/oil--gas/natural--gas/data--publications/crude--oil--
natural--gas--reserves/cr.html.

Internationally, 60 percent of the largest non-U.S. discoveries
have been offshore, and 73 percent of offshore discoveries have been in
deepwater (400 meters or deeper). Since 2007, over 70 percent by3
volume of major discoveries have occurred in deepwater, with the
outliers being onshore discoveries in Iran and Iraq. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Source: Chakhmakhchev & Rushworth, IHS, May 2010

The deepwater contribution to domestic oil and natural gas supplies
is expected to increase in theyears ahead. A key underlying assumption,
however, is that ongoing technology solutions to production safety and
environmental challenges will be developed and deployed. The industry,
both domestically and globally, is exploring in deeper water, which
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
means we mustrecognize two key points:

1) We can no longer rely on inexpensive supplies of oil that can be
produced from shallow waterregions and;
2) The technology used to extract these deepwater resources must be
much safer and more reliable than they have been in the past. This is
consistent with the Administration's determination that, prior to
drilling activity, deepwater operating practices must be consistent
with new heightened safety measures, including development of worst
case disaster projections and demonstration of capabilities to respond
to an oil spill.

DOE's Role and Perspective

The Department of Energy has long had a role in technology
development for the oil and natural gas sectors. Over decades, the
Department has amassed a depth of knowledge and expertise in such areas
as fluid flow, imaging, fire science, and subsea systems. The focus of
DOE's past R&D efforts was on reducing the cost of technologies that
increase production--an area of research more appropriately funded by
industry. However, a smaller portion of DOE's research addressed
improvements to environmental and safety technologies.
While the Department has historically conducted fundamental and
applied research to develop and improve deepwater environmental and
safety technologies, it has no regulatory role over the industry. With
regard to permitting and regulatory issues generally, offshore oil and
gas drilling is wholly within the purview of the Department of the
Interior (DOI), although activities conducted on the Outer Continental
Shelf also require permits from other agencies, such as the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Unites States Coast
Guard.
The Administration has taken steps to improve its capabilities to
conduct environmental and safety related research to support our
regulatory responsibility. Specifically, the DOI led Ocean Energy
Safety Advisory Committee (OESAC), which includes representatives from
government, industry, and academia, is tasked with identifying,
prioritizing and recommending research and development projects in the
areas of drilling and workplace safety, containment, and oil spill
response; recommending an allocation of available resources to these
projects as appropriate; and providing a venue for representatives from
industry, government, non-governmental organizations, national
laboratories, and the academic community to exchange information and
ideas, share best practices, and develop cross-organizational
expertise.
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPACT) established a mandatory
program, the Ultra-Deepwater and Unconventional Natural Gas and Other
Petroleum Research Program, funded with $50 million each year of
diverted Federal oil and gas lease revenues that would otherwise be
deposited in the Treasury to offset government-wide expenses. In the
past, the Department used the deepwater portion allocated under Section
999A of EPACT 2005 for reservoir characterization, drilling and
completion, seafloor facilities, and other exploration and production
related technologies.
As has been requested since Fiscal Year (FY) 2007, the President's
FY 2012 Budget proposes repeal of the Ultra-Deepwater and
Unconventional Natural Gas and Other Petroleum Research Fund which was
established as part of the Section 999A program. We also are requesting
no discretionary funding for R&D to increase hydrocarbon production in
the belief that these activities are more appropriately funded by
industry. Absent congressional action to repeal this program, DOE is
refocusing the work done under Section 999A of EPACT on safety and
environmental protection with the funding we continue to receive. While
the administration does not support Section 999A funding, it considers
OESAC to be an important mechanism to guide research to improve the
safety and environmental responsibility of offshore oil and gas
operations.
Industry has had success in innovating new technologies to find,
develop, and commercialize oil and gas in deepwater locations. And, in
the wake of the Deepwater Horizon accident and ensuing Gulf of Mexico
oil spill, industry developed new technologies for the containment of
underwater blowouts. Additional work remains to be done to ensure that
this development is conducted with sufficient protections for workers
and the environment, and to ensure that the communities that rely on
our ocean resources continue to thrive. The Administration believes
that it is appropriate for industry to integrate enhanced safety and
environmental capabilities into the advances in production technologies
for deepwater areas.

Summary

The tragic oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico last year is a stark
reminder of the risks associated with operating in the deepwater. Even
as we continue the transition to a more sustainable energy future,
deepwater oil and natural gas will be used to meet a significant
portion of our energy needs in the near future. As technologies for
improving the production and economic aspects of this extraction
process are developed, so too must be approaches for identifying,
quantifying, and solving potential risks, safety issues, and
environmental impacts.
Mr. Chairman, and Members of the Committee, thank you again for the
invitation to testify today. I look forward to answering any questions
that you may have.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Dr. Der, and now I
recognize our second witness, Dr. David Miller, the Director,
Standards, at the American Petroleum Institute.
Mr. Miller.

STATEMENT OF MR. DAVID MILLER, DIRECTOR, STANDARDS, AMERICAN
PETROLEUM INSTITUTE

Mr. Miller. Good afternoon, Chairman Harris, Ranking Member
Miller, and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to address offshore drilling safety and response
technology. My name is David Miller. I am the Standards
Director for the American Petroleum Institute or API.
API has more than 470 member companies that represent all
sectors of America's oil and natural gas industry. Our industry
supports 9.2 million American jobs, including 170,000 in the
Gulf of Mexico related to the offshore development business and
provides most of the energy America needs.
First, even though it has almost been a year since the
tragic accident in the Gulf, it is important that we remember
the families who lost loved ones, the workers who were injured,
and all of our neighbors in the Gulf who were affected by it.
Their losses were profound, and they remind us every single day
that the work we do to improve safety in our operations is
extremely important.
Our industry's top priority is to provide energy in a safe,
technologically-sound, and environmentally-responsible manner.
We, therefore, take seriously our responsibility to work in
cooperation with government to develop practices and equipment
that improve operational and regulatory processes across the
board.
As further proof of our commitment, API has been the leader
for nearly nine decades in developing voluntary industry
standards that promote reliability and safety through proven
engineering practices. API's standard program is accredited by
the American National Standards Institute, ANSI, the authority
on U.S. standards and the same organization that accredits
programs at several national laboratories. API standards are
developed through a collaborative effort with industry experts,
as well as the best and brightest technical experts from
government, academia, and other stakeholders.
API's Standards Program undergoes regular third-party
program audits. API maintains more than 600 standards that
cover all aspects of the industry, including 270 focused on
exploration and production. The committees that develop and
maintain these standards represent API's largest program with
4,800 volunteers working on 380 committees and task groups.
API's standards are frequently referenced in federal
regulations because they are recognized to be industry best
practices. Overall, nearly 100 API standards are referenced in
more than 270 citations by government agencies, including the
U.S. EPA, the Department of Transportation, OSHA, and in
addition 80 standards referenced by BOEMRE, and as part of our
commitment to program transparency, last year API made the
decision to provide all of our safety and incorporated by
reference standards available for free online.
We are using the incident investigation findings to
continue to improve the technologies and practices to achieve
safe and environmentally-sound operations. As part of this
process we are working to develop new API standards and
revisions of existing API standards when necessary to raise the
bar of performance to a higher level.
We have already published a new standard on isolating
potential flow zones during well construction, which has been
incorporated by BOEMRE into its offshore regulations. We plan
to complete work later this year on two new API standards; one
on deep water well design and one on well construction
interface. We are working also to update the API standards on
blowout preventer design, manufacture, and operations.
In addition, API's Board of Directors just last month
approved the formation of a Center for Offshore Safety with the
mission to promote the highest level of safety for offshore
operations through an effective program that addresses
management practices, communication, and teamwork. This
program's foundation will be API's recommended practice on
safety and environmental management programs, the API standard
most recently cited by BOEMRE.
Regarding permitting delays, the recently-lifted moratorium
and subsequent safety regulations led to some confusion and
concern in the industry. For example, the Interim Final
Drilling Safety Rule published in October of last year
contained text that summarily changed all 14,000 ``should''
statements to ``must'' requirements in the 80 referenced API
standards.
And while DOI did provide a clarification, it wasn't until
just last week. In the meantime, industry felt it had no choice
but to consider how it could possibly be in compliance with the
requirements that were often contradictory and potentially
unsafe. This uncertainty has added unnecessary delay in
developing exploration and production plans and applications
for permits to drill as industry was forced to consider the
requirement to request up to 14,000 departures simply to be in
compliance with the standards that its and the government's
technical experts had developed.
In fact, API provides extensive comments to DOI as part of
its White House mandated regulatory review. One of my items of
significant importance is compliance with the Outer Continental
Shelf Land's Act amendments of 1978, in which Congress declared
that the Outer Continental Shelf is a vital national resource
reserve held by the Federal Government for the public, which
made available for expeditious and orderly development subject
to environmental safeguards in a manner which is consistent
with the maintenance of competition and other national needs.
By statute, the leasee is entitled to a timely and fair
consideration of submitted plan and permit requests, and
exploration plans and applications permits for drill must be
acted upon within 30 days of submittal. DOI should work to meet
the statutory requirement.
Permitting delays in the moratorium have already led to the
loss of 300,000 barrels a day in oil production since May of
2010, according to EIA short-term energy outlook, and the job
loss is no less disturbing. Dr. Joseph Mason, of Louisiana
State University, who recently testified before the House
Subcommittee on Energy and Power, noted in a follow-up
interview that, ``We are already, however, pushing above the
Administration's estimate of 20,000 jobs nationally for the
deep water de facto and de jure moratoria.''
We look forward to providing constructive input as this
Committee, the Congress, and the Administration consider
changes to existing policy. Industry is ready to work, return
to work, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, and seeks clarity and
certainty in the permitting process.
This concludes my statement. I welcome any questions from
you and your colleagues. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. David Miller, Standards Director, American
Petroleum Institute
Good afternoon, Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller and Members
of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to address offshore
drilling safety and response technology.
My name is David Miller. I am the standards director for the
American Petroleum Institute. API has more than 470 member companies
that represent all sectors of America's oil and natural gas industry.
Our industry supports 9.2 million American jobs--including 170,000 in
the Gulf of Mexico related to the offshore development business--and
provides most of the energy America needs.
First, even though it's been almost a year since the tragic
accident in the Gulf, it is important that we remember the families who
lost loved ones, the workers who were injured, and all of our neighbors
in the Gulf who were affected by it. Their losses were profound and
they remind us every single day that the work we do to improve safety
in our operations is extremely important.
Our industry's top priority is to provide energy in a safe,
technologically sound and environmentally responsible manner. We
therefore take seriously our responsibility to work in cooperation with
government to develop practices and equipment that improve the
operational and regulatory process across the board.
As further proof of our commitment, API has been the leader for
nearly nine decades in developing voluntary industry standards that
promote reliability and safety through proven engineering practices.
API's Standards Program is accredited by the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI), the authority on
U.S. standards, and the same organization that accredits programs
at several national laboratories. API's standards are developed through
a collaborative effort with industry experts, as well as the best and
brightest technical experts from government, academia and other
stakeholders. API undergoes regular third-party program audits to
ensure compliance with ANSI's Essential Requirements for standards
development.
API maintains more than 600 standards--recommended practices,
specifications, codes, technical publications, reports and studies--
that cover all aspects of the industry, including 270 focused on
exploration and production activities. The standards are normally
reviewed every five years to ensure they remain current, but some are
reviewed more frequently, based on need. The committees that develop
and maintain these standards represent API's largest program, with
4,800 volunteers working on 380 committees and task groups. API
corporate membership is not a requirement to serve API's technical
standards committees.
API's standards are frequently referenced in federal regulations
because they are recognized to be industry best practices. BOEMRE, for
example, currently references 80 API standards in its offshore
regulations and has recently proposed an additional 12 API standards be
incorporated into their regulations. Overall, nearly 100 API standards
are referenced in more than 270 citations by government agencies,
including the USEPA, the Department of Transportation and OSHA, in
addition to BOEMRE. And, as part of our commitment to program
transparency, last year API made the decision to provide all of our
safety and incorporated-by-reference standards available for free on-
line. One-hundred sixty API standards are now posted on API's website
and have been viewed by close to 5,000 individuals since last fall.
We are using incident investigation findings to continue to
improve the technologies and practices to achieve safe and
environmentally sound operations. As part of this process, we are
working to develop new API standards and revisions of existing API
standards, where necessary. to raise the bar of performance to a higher
level. We have already published a new standard on isolating potential
flow zones during well construction, which has been incorporated by
BOEMRE into its offshore regulations. We plan to complete work later
this year on two new API standards--one on deepwater well design and
one on well construction interface, which will provide a systematic way
for the offshore operator and the drilling contractor to ensure that
their respective safety programs are fully aligned. We are also working
to update the API standards on blow-out preventer design, manufacture
and operations.
In addition, API's Board of Directors just last month approved the
formation of the industry Center for Offshore Safety, with the mission
to promote the highest level of safety for offshore operations through
an effective program that addresses management practices,
communication, and teamwork. This program's foundation will be API's
recommended practice on safety and environmental management programs,
the API standard most recently cited by BOEMRE.
Regarding permitting delays, the recently lifted moratorium and
subsequent safety regulations led to some confusion and concern in the
industry. For example, the interim final drilling safety rule,
published in October of last year, contained text that summarily
changed all 14,000 ``should'' statements to ``must'' requirements in
the 80 referenced API standards. This action vitiated the standards
development process by ignoring the recommendations of the some 4,800
technical experts who labored over the years to develop performance-
based standards that allow for a variety of options to ensure the most
appropriate engineering choice is made. And while DOI did provide a
clarification, it wasn't until just last week. In the meantime,
industry felt it had no choice but to consider how it could possibly be
in compliance with requirements that were often contradictory and
potentially unsafe. This uncertainty has added unnecessary delay in
developing exploration plans and application for permits to drill as
industry was forced to consider the requirement to request up to 14,000
departures simply to be in compliance with the standards that its and
the government technical experts had developed.
In fact, API provided extensive comments to DOI as part of its
White House-mandated regulatory review. One item of significant import
is compliance with the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act Amendments of
1978, in which Congress declared that ``the outer Continental Shelf is
a vital national resource reserve held by the Federal Government for
the public, which should be made available for expeditious and orderly
development, subject to environmental safeguards, in a manner which is
consistent with the maintenance of competition and other national
needs.'' By statute, the lessee is entitled to timely and fair
consideration of submitted plan and permit requests, and exploration
plans and application for permits to drill must be acted upon within 30
calendar days of submittal. DOI should work to meet this statuary
requirement.
Permitting delays and the moratorium have already led to a loss of
300,000 barrels a day in oil production since May 2010, according to
the EIA's Short Term Energy Outlook, and the jobs loss is no less
disturbing. Dr. Joseph Mason of Louisiana State University, who
recently testified before the House Subcommittee on Energy and Power
noted in a follow-up interview that:
``We are already, however, pushing above the administration's
estimate of 20,000 jobs nationally for the deepwater de facto and de
jure moratoria.''
We look forward to providing constructive input as this Committee,
the Congress and the administration consider changes to existing
policy. The industry is ready to return to work, Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member, and seeks clarity and certainty in the permitting
process.
This concludes my statement, Mr. Chairman. I welcome questions from
you and your colleagues. Thank you.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Miller.
I would now like to recognize our next witness, Mr. Owen
Kratz, the President and CEO of Helix Energy Solutions Group.

STATEMENT OF MR. OWEN KRATZ, PRESIDENT AND CEO, HELIX ENERGY
SOLUTIONS GROUP

Mr. Kratz. Mr. Chairman, Members of the Subcommittee, thank
you for the invitation to testify today. As the head of a team
called upon to respond to the Macondo incident, I believe Helix
Energy Solutions' experience can be of assistance to the
Subcommittee as it evaluates response policy going forward.
Three Helix vessels, the Q4000, the Express, and the Helix
Producer I, were instrumental in successfully bringing the Deep
Water blowout under control. At the Macondo site Helix staff
logged a total of 135 days aboard the Q4000 alone. The lessons
we learned will inform our approach to containment efforts well
into the future.
In December, 2010, Helix brought numerous independent
operators together to form the Helix Well Containment Group.
Our purpose was to develop a comprehensive, rapid, and
effective response to a deepwater well control incident in the
Gulf of Mexico. Currently, 23 leading energy companies belong
to the consortium, working in close collaboration with DOE and
RE we designed a comprehensive, 1,000-page well containment
plan that meets the agency's requirements in NTL-10.
The plan addresses multiple scenarios inclusive of specific
well information and deployment procedures, many of which were
refined during the Macondo response effort. Technical experts
and critical equipment from each of the 23 member companies
will be made available to any member during an event, providing
a fully-compliant level of capability as required by NTL-10.
The system is specifically designed for expansion and
inclusion of developing new technologies. The Helix Fast
Response System is ready to respond today. In fact, five
drilling permits have recently been granted based on our
containment system.
What does it mean to be prepared for an endeavor as complex
and time sensitive as an undersea well control incident? The
Helix Fast Response System's Interim Containment System
includes a 10,000 pounds per square inch capping stack, a riser
system, the Q4000 intervention vessel, and all necessary
equipment to complete the intervention system.
This system is capable of completely capping and closing in
a well that has the necessary mechanical integrity to do so or
allowing flow back and flaring of up to 55,000 barrels of oil a
day or 70,000 barrels of liquids per day and 95 million cubic
feet of natural gas per day in water depths up to 6,500 feet.
This system as described there stands ready today.
The next stage of readiness, which we refer to as the
complete containment system, is designed to handle more
comprehensive responses by including a 15,000 pound per square
inch capping stack and a riser system capable of operating in
8,000 feet of water. By April 11 our system will be capable of
completely capping and closing in a well that has the necessary
mechanical integrity to do so or allow flow back by a
combination of producing and flaring. By April 15 the 15,000
pound per square inch capping stack will be available.
Finally, as we look into the future, we are evaluating an
even further expanded system, having capability to 10,000 feet
of water that will allow capture and flow back of up to 105,000
barrels of oil per day and 300 million cubic feet of natural
gas per day. Approval of this expansion will take place only if
the members of our consortium decide a system with this
capacity is necessary. If they do this, then the vessel or the
system could be ready by 2012.
One of the most innovative parts of the U.S. energy
industry comes from a robust and healthy offshore independent
oil and gas sector. The diversity of upstream players has
produced countless innovations, and they are not always the
largest companies. Yet one of the most--one of the major
impediments faced in convincing the producers to dedicate the
means to provide a solution in a more timely manner is the
uncertainty surrounding the government's policy as to what
specifically will be accepted as a sufficient containment
solution.
Helix is grateful to the BOEMRE for the relationship that
we have developed. Government can greatly aid the process by
continuing, if not hastening, to resolve uncertainties inherent
in early drafting of the regulations and to address concerns of
the industry as to what may be deemed deficient in the process
of drilling that may arise in the future such as liability
caps, lease expirations, and spill response.
Additionally, the government could play a productive role
by assisting and minimizing the cost of capital through
reinvigorating programs designed to advance maritime industrial
development. The Loan Guarantee Program administered by MARAD,
for example, can help. It has a proven track record. In fact,
the Q4000 was built in Texas using the MARAD financing.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. The
industry has always developed innovative technologies and
processes, even in the fact of the toughest challenges. Now,
with the experience of Macondo behind us, we have learned how
to fashion an even more appropriate, effective containment
system. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kratz follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Owen Kratz, President and Chief Executive
Officer, Helix Energy SolutionsGroup, Inc.
Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to testify before you today
on the topic of Offshore Drilling Safety and Response Technologies. The
question of the appropriate technological response to what this nation
learned at the Macondo site in the Gulf of Mexico is central to
responsible policy. As the head of a team called upon to lead the
response to that situation, I believe Helix Energy Solutions'
experience can be of assistance to the Subcommittee as it evaluates
response policy going forward.
Helix provides life-of-field services and development solutions to
offshore energy producers worldwide, and is a leader in the provision
of containment solutions for undersea well control incidents. Since the
events that began unfolding at the Macondo well nearly one year ago
today, there has been a great deal of interest among all Americans--and
rightfully so--about how our industry can most effectively prepare
itself to respond to an undersea blow-out and oil spill as we go about
the business of harvesting our nation's critical offshore natural
resources. We are pleased to have the opportunity to share our
considerable experience on the subject at hand today.
The provision of effective oil well containment capability plays an
essential role in facilitating responsible energy development in the
deep waters of the U.S. Gulf. Helix stands ready to assist industry in
providing the benefit of its expertise and resources immediately. Helix
has participated in hundreds of deepwater well intervention efforts
around the world for more than 15 years.
Most relevant to today's discussion, Helix vessels were enlisted to
play a key on-site role in the Macondo Incident Control and Spill
Containment effort following the April 2010 blowout. Three Helix
vessels--the Q4000, the Express and the Helix Producer I--were
instrumental in successfully bringing the deepwater blowout under
control. A forth Helix vessel, the Normand Fortress, also played a
vital role in the effort.
At the Macondo response site, Helix staff logged 285,000 man-hours
aboard the Q4000 alone during the blowout response--a total of 135 days
altogether. Helix staff provided the conduit for thousands of barrels
of fluid during the static kill and cementing operation. Up to 80
barrels of kill fluid were pumped every minute through four vessels
daisy-chained to the Q4000 during the top kill operation. Helix also
provided flowback and burning of up to 10,000 barrels of oil and 15
mmcfd for approximately 30 days as well as deploying the original
cofferdam. And it was the Q4000 that eventually lifted the Deepwater
Horizon's BOP from the seafloor onto its deck--a BOP weighing 1 million
pounds. The lessons we learned during those intense days will inform
our approach to containment efforts well into the future.
Building on our unique undersea containment experience, Helix
joined together with numerous independent operators in December 2010 to
form the Helix Well Containment Group, an industry cooperative founded
under the umbrella of Clean Gulf Associates, a not-for-profit oil spill
response organization serving oil and gas exploration and production
companies in the Gulf of Mexico. Currently, 23 leading energy companies
have joined the consortium, and over 30 subcontractors have signed on
to be available to the Helix Well Containment Group to provide the core
services necessary to fully complement a deepwater response.
The mission of the Helix Well Containment Group (HWCG) was to
develop a comprehensive and rapid deepwater containment response
system, with a designated purpose to manifest an effective response to
a deepwater well control incident in the Gulf of Mexico. CGA and HWCG
members have contracted with Helix Energy Solutions for vessels,
equipment and services necessary to contain a deepwater spill. Helix is
pleased to be of assistance, and we provide emergency containment
services to the industry without regard to profit. Our goal as an
offshore service company that employs more than 1,600 people worldwide
is putting the Gulf back to work. And when the Gulf goes back to work--
realizing the full potential of this incredibly productive energy
basin--companies engaged in well intervention, drilling, field
servicing and other related tasks all are gainfully employed to the
benefit of the economy and energy security.
Working in close collaboration with the Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management, Regulation and Enforcement--including in-person meetings
with Director Bromwich and Secretary of the Interior Salazar--the HWCG
technical Committee designed a well-containment plan that meets the
agency's requirement in its notice to lessees, NTL 2010-N10. We
developed decision trees, procedures and schedules, and identified
services and equipment necessary for an effective response based upon
lessons learned from the Macondo incident. Our well containment plan
evolved into a comprehensive document addressing multiple scenarios
inclusive of specific well information and deployment procedures.
What emerged from this work is a Well Containment Plan that
encompasses over 1100 pages of comprehensive procedures, processes, and
technical detail of equipment to be employed during a subsea
containment response. Many of these processes and procedures were
refined by Helix during the Deepwater Horizon response.
The Helix Fast Response System, the key component of the HWCG, is
ready to respond to a subsea deepwater containment incident today, as
shown by the four drilling permits recently granted based on our
containment system. The Fast Response System is underpinned by a Mutual
Aid Agreement that outlines how technical experts and critical
equipment from each of the 23 member companies will be made available
to any member during an event--providing a level of capability not
required by NTL 2010-N10, but which the member companies feel adds an
additional layer of capability to protect the safety of our workers,
the environment and commerce of the Gulf of Mexico, our integrity, and
our companies' investments. The system is designed for expansion and
inclusion of developing new technologies.
We are pleased to report to the Committee that the HWCG today
stands ready to respond to the most complex scenario referenced in the
well containment plan--including an incident with the complexities of
Macondo. The technology deployed in this effort is innovative, to be
sure, but the real secret is the men and women of companies like Helix
who are fully trained on how to use equipment in a broad range of
circumstances and at a moment's notice.
What precisely does it mean to be prepared for an endeavor as
complex and time-sensitive as an undersea well control incident? The
Helix Fast Response System's Interim Containment System includes a 10
thousand pounds per square inch (psig) capping stack, a riser system
capable of operating in 6500 feet of water, the Q4000 intervention
vessel (used during the Deepwater Horizon response) and all necessary
equipment to complete the intervention system. This system is capable
of completely capping and closing in a well that has the necessary
mechanical integrity to do so, or allowing flow back and flaring of up
to 55,000 barrels of oil or 70,000 barrels of liquids per day and 95
million cubic feet of natural gas per day at water depth up to 6500
feet of water. This system stands ready now.
The next stage of readiness, which we refer to as the Complete
Containment System, is designed to handle more comprehensive responses
by including a 15 thousand pounds per square inch capping stack and a
riser system capable of operating in 8000 feet of water. By April the
11th, our system will be capable of completely capping and closing in a
well that has the necessary mechanical integrity to do so, or allowing
flow back by a combination of producing and flaring of up to 55,000
barrels of oil per day and 95 million cubic feet of natural gas per day
in 8000 feet of water. By April 15th, the 15 thousand pounds per square
inch capping stack will be available.
For the sake of context, the initial reservoir pressure at the
Macondo well face at the time of the blowout was 11,850 psig, according
to the U.S. Coast Guard. The well sat in 4,992 feet of water and,
according to final government estimates, may have disgorged up to
60,000 barrels of oil per day. It is important to note that a discharge
rate of 60,000 barrels of oil per day does not equate to the flowback
requirements. Flowback capacity required is meaningfully less than the
discharge rate due to hydrostatic head and flow restrictions through
the system. Actual flowback capacity requirements must be calculated
for each well, but our system would have completely contained the
Macondo well.
Finally, as we look into the future, the HWCG is evaluating an even
further expanded system having capability to 10,000 feet of water that
will allow capture and flow back of up to 105,000 barrels of oil per
day and 300 million cubic feet of natural gas per day. Approval of this
expansion will take place only if the Members decide a system with this
capacity is necessary. If approved by the Members, this expansion could
be made available by 2012.
You have asked for input on what role the Federal Government can
play going forward to assist with further innovation. Frankly, one of
the most innovative parts of the energy industry in the United States
comes from a robust and healthy offshore independent oil and gas
sector. Consistently, a diversity of players in upstream oil and gas
have produced innovation after innovation (not always the largest
companies), tackling technological challenges safely and effectively.
When the government fails to respond appropriately to permitting
concerns or creates significant doubt which undermines business
confidence, it saps potential investment capital necessary to innovate.
The smaller companies are more vulnerable to production delays and may
leave the market. Ironically, if production in the Gulf should fall,
the government is also denying itself access to revenue, making its own
oversight job all the more difficult. So the bottom line is that in a
world of limited resources, one of the most critical things for the
government to do is ``to do no harm.'' And that means putting the Gulf
back to work as soon as possible. I understand the charge of
responsibility the government has, but quite frankly, one of the major
impediments faced in convincing the producers to dedicate and allocate
the means to provide a solution in a more timely manner is the
uncertainty surrounding the government's policy as to what specifically
will be accepted as a sufficient solution.
Of course, the federal government has its own research and
development resources. In the Macondo situation, the private sector
worked hand in glove with the talented men and women of the U.S. Coast
Guard, including its capable Research and Development division.
Further, the research centers of the U.S. Navy were called upon to
assess technology, particularly for surface containment applications.
NOAA also has tremendous value to bring to bear. We certainly encourage
those government agencies to work closely with industry organizations
like the HWCG and the Marine Well Containment Corporation established
by some of the major integrated oil corporations. Coordination and
sharing ideas is very important to making advances.
The technology we deploy is robust, but it is not inexpensive.
Another policy the government can undertake is to assist us in
minimizing the cost of capital by reinvigorating programs specifically
designed to advance maritime industrial development. One familiar
program of this type is the loan guarantee program administered by the
U.S. Maritime Administration, or MARAD. MARAD can help responsibly and
within fiscal constraints, and has established a proven track record
for bringing innovative vessel designs to market. As we have seen, the
most innovative vessel designs will be the most useful going forward.
The Q4000, built in Texas with MARAD financing, provides an excellent
example. As I described earlier in my testimony, the Q4000 was
instrumental in bringing the blowout under control--and MARAD support
helped make the Q4000 possible.
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify. There is no doubt that the unique circumstances
faced in the Gulf last year were one of the most difficult crises faced
by our industry. But the industry has always developed innovative
technologies and processes even in the face of the toughest challenges.
Now, with the experience of Macondo behind us, we have learned how to
fashion an even more appropriate and effective containment system. It
is time to get back to work.
Thank you.

Chairman Harris. Thank you, Mr. Kratz.
I now recognize our final witness, Dr. Molly Macauley,
Research Director and Senior Fellow, Resources for the Future.
Dr. Macauley.

STATEMENT OF DR. MOLLY MACAULEY, RESEARCH DIRECTOR AND SENIOR
FELLOW, RESOURCES FOR THE FUTURE

Dr. Macauley. Good afternoon, Chairman Harris and Ranking
Member Miller, Subcommittee Members, and panelists. I am an
Economist and Research Director at Resources for the Future,
which is an economics research organization established by the
President of the United States in 1952, and my comments today
draw from work that I carried out together with colleagues at
Resources for the Future, and we undertook this work for the
National Commission on the BP Deep Water Horizon oil spill and
offshore drilling. But my comments today are my own. They do
not represent the views of the Commission nor of Resources for
the Future.
As an economist I know that jobs matter not only in the
Gulf but to this Nation. I appreciate the role of energy. It is
our Nation's lifeblood. I am aware of the concern expressed by
businesses of all stripes, government and the public, about the
need to balance the benefits of energy with the risks in
producing energy of all types, both fossil and renewable.
The public cares. We mourn when we lose coal miners, oil
riggers, nuclear plant operators, and when the environment is
harmed. I think people want government and industry to balance
that risk, and in fact, the Nation mourned the loss of those on
the rig. And then in addition perhaps the most disturbing
result of the Deepwater Horizon spill a year ago was not that
the spill could happen. Spills, small spills happen all the
time, but that the spill could not be promptly contained, and
containment is precisely what I have been asked to speak about
today.
So I will make two points. The first about containment in
the near term over the next horizon for spills similar to last
years roughly in about 5,000 or so feet of water, and this
speaks to the technology that my panel colleague has just
described.
And then the other point I will make is something near and
dear I think to this Subcommittee's reason for being, which is
research and development for containment in the future, and
this is particularly in the case of ultra-deep water. You know,
these depths are greater than 5,000 feet, and it is a very
extreme environment in which to operate pressure, temperature,
geology. It is very similar in its extremities to what we do
with our Nation's space program. It is an extreme environment.
It is very unique in that regard, and the genus of industry is
that it is drilling there. It is drilling successfully in
ultra-deep water, much like we are very successful in the
extreme environments of space.
According to the Energy Information Administration
production in ultra-deep water is really where the action is.
Production at these depths has risen sharply. In fact,
according to the EIA production there has reversed the decline
in overall Gulf of Mexico production that began in 2003.
So containment in the near term. As we have heard from
Helix, industry has stepped up and committed over $1 billion to
supply containment services for some types of spills in the
Gulf of Mexico. Helix played a major role in helping to contain
the Deep Water spill, and the newly formed Marine Well
Containment Corporation, MWCC, is also part of this industry
effort.
I understand there are some types of spills for which these
services are not optimized at the present time, but the
adequacy of containment readiness is being jointly determined,
not only what industry is willing to supply but what government
is demanding. It is a joint effort here.
I think where I lose sleep is on my second point. It is not
so much containment today because there are very strong
incentives for government and industry to make sure containment
works. Imagine the public reaction to another large spill
anytime soon.
But where I lose sleep is about the next battle. Again,
these ultra-deep water depths exceed those where MWCC and Helix
are prepared to service at the present time, although as Helix
mentioned, if your members agree, you may be prepared to go up
to 10,000 feet, and that is exactly my point.
In the event of a spill at these deeper depths, will we
have to innovate on the fly again? What new science and
engineering and state-of-the-art risk assessment do we need
now? Who has this game plan? In short, are we innovating such
that the capacity to contain keeps pace with the capacity to
drill in increasingly extreme environments?
Now, the National Commission acknowledged these questions.
It did not consider them at length, and if unanswered, these
questions point to a potentially large gap in our public
policy. And there is a reason to ask these questions. As a
Nation our industry and our government tends to under-invest in
R&D for a lot of reasons. It takes money to do R&D. Sometimes
the results aren't fully appropriable. The reward is shared
widely, and it doesn't return to the innovator, and the problem
with innovation in containment is particularly difficult
because government limits liability for a spill, and regulation
is sometimes not as effective as we would like it to be for
these blunt incentives to contain and incentives to innovate.
And if we discover new ways to contain, we want that
technology widely deployed yet proprietary innovation is not
always widely deployed. I note that the commission staff paper
points out that a few years after the Valdez oil spill efforts
to innovate in spill response had dwindled to almost nothing.
So I have three suggestions for what the Committee or other
policymakers might do. First, have some discussions, not only
with Helix but with MWCC and others supplying containment
services, ask them what their plans are for innovation.
Second, already a panelist has referenced the new permanent
federal advisory group on safety containment and response.
Federal advisory groups can do a good job, but who is going to
listen, who is going to act upon their suggestions?
And third, and this is more substantial, disadvantages and
advantages worth talking about, but we might consider changing
the liability regime to risk-based drilling fees much like
risk-based insurance premiums, risk-based liability caps for
each well, or phasing in requirements for insurance to cover
damages to third parties.
So I think a prudent approach and the best we can do is
make sure we align incentives to think about the R&D for the
next battle. It still may have to occur but at least we will
have done the in advance, long-lead kinds of research and
development that will be necessary then.
Thanks very much for asking me to join the panel today.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Macauley follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Molly K. Macauley, Senior Fellow and Research
Director, Resources for the Future, Washington, DC
The President's Oil Spill Commission has identified a series of
failures leading to last year's Deepwater Horizon (DH) spill in the
Gulf of Mexico. \1\ The spill's damage came not just from the blowout
and tragic fire, however, but was matched by the subsequent inability
to contain the spill once it began. These efforts, from junk shots to
top kills, took nearly three months before finally stopping the flow of
oil.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and
Offshore Drilling, Deep Water: The Gulf Oil Disaster and the Future of
Offshore Drilling: Report to the President (Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office), January 2011.

In my testimony today, I have been asked by the Subcommittee to
offer my views on the problem of containment, including incentives to
advance the state-of-the-art in containment to keep pace with advances
in deepwater and ultradeepwater drilling. I draw from research carried
out with several colleagues and undertaken for the National Commission
on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling (Oil Spill
Commission). \2\This research is available at the Commission's website
and on the website of my organization, Resources for the Future, at
www.rff.org/deepwaterdrilling.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  My work is coauthored with several colleagues. See Robert
Anderson, Mark A. Cohen, Molly K. Macauley, Nathan Richardson, and Adam
Stern, ``Organizational Design for Spill Containment in Deepwater
Drilling Operations in the Gulf of Mexico,'' Resources for the Future
Discussion Paper DP 10-63, January 2011, at www.rff.org/
deepwaterdrilling; and Mark A. Cohen, Molly K. Macauley, and Nathan
Richardson, ``Containing Future Major Oil Spills,'' Resources, Winter/
Spring 2011, No. 177, pgs. 44-47, at http://www.rff.org/Publications/
Resources/Pages/The-Next-Battle-Containing-Future-Major-Oil-Spills-
177.aspx.

I offer my views as an economist who has studied the use of new
technology for environmental management and the economics of
technological innovation and the environment. I have also had the
opportunity to testify before the Committee on space technology, for
which the problem of innovation and risk are also relevant and offer
some parallels. I am a senior fellow and research director at Resources
for the Future (RFF), an organization established at the request of a
presidential commission in 1952. RFF is a nonprofit and nonpartisan
think tank that conducts independent research, primarily using
economics, on environmental, energy, and other natural resource issues.
The work that my colleagues and I carried out for the Oil Spill
Commission was conducted independently of the Commission to inform its
deliberations. I emphasize that the views I present today are mine
alone. Neither the work from which I draw nor my comments today
represent the views of the Commission or RFF. RFF takes no
institutional position on legislative, regulatory, judicial, or other
public policy matters.
I summarize my main points as follows:

Adequate investment in containment R&D is essential for
limiting damages from future offshore accidents like the Deepwater
Horizon spill.

Industry and government both recognize this need and are
taking commendable steps to address it.

Over the long term, however, there is reason to be
concerned that existing incentives faced by industry are inadequate to
ensure a robust and sustained investment in containment R&D.

There is a strong argument for a government role in
supporting containment R&D, much like the role that government has had
in supporting R&D in other industries. This need not be a financial
drain on an already fiscally stressed government or an onerous burden
on industry.

The Challenge of Drilling and Containment in Deepwater

The DH spill occurred at an underwater depth of about 5000 feet-a
depth at the breakpoint between ``deep'' and ``ultradeep'' water. The
spill revealed the complexities of drilling in deepwater and at the
large depths of the well itself to reach hydrocarbon reservoirs beneath
the ocean floor (the DH was drilling some 13,000 feet under the ocean
floor). At these depths, particularly in the Gulf of Mexico, pressure
is high, temperatures are extreme, and the geology is complex. Although
industry has been drilling in deepwater for some 25 years, each well is
said to have its own ``personality'' reflecting a complicated mix of
unique conditions. \3\ Prior to the accident, the Minerals Management
Service of the Department of Interior had tracked the industry's
efforts to develop exploration and drilling operations in the
Department's periodic reports on deepwater operations in the Gulf of
Mexico.\4\  An independent analysis carried out by my colleagues since
the spill has found a statistical relationship between deepwater
drilling depth and the probability of company-reported incidents,
suggesting that drilling at increased depths seems to result in greater
technical challenges and therefore, may require novel approaches to
industry operation and government regulation. \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  National Commission, p. 52.
\4\  U.S. Department of Interior, Deepwater Gulf of Mexico 2009:
Interim Report of 2008 Highlights, OCS Report 2009-016, May 2009.
\5\ See Lucija Muelenbachs, Mark A. Cohen, and Todd Gerarden,
``Preliminary Assessment of Offshore Platforms in the Gulf of Mexico,''
Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 10-66 (Washington, DC:
Resources for the Future), January 2011. We note that company-reported
incidents do not necessarily mean the release of hydrocarbons, and in
deepwater, where more than 14,000 wells have been drilled, there had
been only minor spills until the DH accident (Anderson and coauthors
2011).

The spill further revealed the challenge of containment.
Containment is defined to include the deployment of technology, people,
and other resources to stop additional hydrocarbon release and get a
well back under control when a release occurs. (Containment differs
from prevention and response; preventive actions-such as a well-
functioning blowout preventer-keep releases from occurring at all, and
response actions deal with hydrocarbons that have escaped containment,
such as use of booms, burning, skimming, and dispersants.) The series
of failures before the well was finally capped and the spill contained
revealed an inability to deal effectively with containment of a well in
deepwater. Adequate containment capability had not appeared to keep
pace with the impressive technological accomplishments that have
enabled drilling in ever-deeper water.
For many, the most disturbing result was not that a spill could
happen, but that it could not be promptly contained. While the spill-
with the benefit of hindsight-has many lessons, one of the sharpest is
the need for improvement in ability to contain spills that may occur in
increasingly deepwater drilling operations. It is worth considering for
a moment the losses to people that would have been avoided if effective
containment technology had been in place prior to the spill.
Recognition of this need has led to quick reactions. A few months
after the spill was capped, a group of major drilling firms announced
plans to invest an initial $1 billion in creating the Marine Well
Containment Company (MWCC), a consortium to design, build, and operate
a system capable of containing future deepwater spills in the Gulf of
Mexico. Another company, Helix Energy Solutions, played a major role in
the DH containment efforts and is now providing new deepwater
containment services for some kinds of spills.
Regulators took notice as well, updating permit requirements to
include demonstration of ability to contain spills. Companies that have
been issued permits since the spill have met the new requirements by
incorporating the new containment services of Helix or MWCC. The
Secretary of Interior has proposed a new public-private safety
institute. The Secretary and the Director of the Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management, Regulation and Enforcement (BOEMRE) have established the
Ocean Energy Safety Advisory Committee, a permanent advisory group of
leading scientific, engineering, and technical experts on offshore
drilling safety, well containment, and spill response. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See http://www.doi.gov/news/pressreleases/Salazar-Proposes-
Ocean-Energy-Safety-Institute.cfm (accessed April 1 2011) and http://
www.doi.gov/news/pressreleases/Salazar-Names-Members-of-Ocean-Energy-
Safety-Advisory-Committee-to-Guide-Oil-and-Gas-Regulatory-Program-
Reform.cfm# (accessed April 1 2011).

Are these steps likely to be enough to ensure future readiness and
effectiveness in containing the next deepwater spill? Research
undertaken with my colleagues indicates that while developments so far
are positive, much more needs to be done, both in terms of government
policy and industry commitments.

Incentives to Invest in Containment and in Containment Research and
Development

It is well recognized that limited liability and sometimes-
ineffective regulatory oversight can lead people naturally to
underinvest in safety, environmental protection, and other activities
that protect parties other than themselves. To be sure, no one wants to
hurt companies, shareholders, and customers by causing harm to workers,
incurring business disruption, losing expensive equipment, or losing
revenue. The question here, and for government, is something more:
whether firms have adequate incentives to minimize additional harm to
third parties (people, other businesses, ecosystems, public health).
Liability caps and ineffective regulatory oversight limit incentives to
protect these third parties. Striking the right balance in public
policy to protect third parties is essential but not easy.
Government intervention such as this results in a situation where
government co-produces risk together with industry. In other words, by
limiting liability, government (and taxpayers) assume part of the
financial risk not covered by the firm and its shareholders. Similarly,
by regulating safety and other operating conditions, government assigns
some risk to workers and other parties, and some to industry. Measures
to enhance incentives, such as raising or eliminating liability caps,
will push firms to make greater containment investments and reduce the
burden borne by taxpayers. My colleagues and others have suggested
alternatives to eliminating the liability caps altogether, recognizing
the disproportionate burden this could impose on smaller firms and a
possible chilling effect on insurers. \7\ For example, alternatives
include a separate, risk-based liability cap for each well determined
by the estimated worst-case discharge for each well; requiring firms to
demonstrate financial responsibility up to the level of the cap;
phasing in requirements for third-party insurance to fully cover
financial responsibility; and introducing risk-based drilling fees
(much like risk-based insurance premiums).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\  Mark A. Cohen, Madeline Gottlieb, Josh Linn, and Nathan
Richardson, ``Deepwater Drilling: Law, Policy, and Economics of Firm
Organization and Safety,'' Resources for the Future Discussion Paper
10-65, January 2011.

To be sure, part of the reason for past underpreparedness to
contain large spills like the Deepwater Horizon was a widespread belief
that such spills were either extremely unlikely or impossible. Yet that
belief failed to take into account that deepwater drilling is more
complex and riskier, and that risk assessments did not adequately
account for these complications. \8\ Policy changes to take account of
these complexities and to increase financial liability will strengthen
incentives to invest in containment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\  Much like the accident of the space shuttle Columbia,
occurring 21 years after the first operational shuttle flight, or the
failure of the long-operating nuclear power plant in Japan, the DH
spill shows the consequences of a sequence of individual failures in
large-scale technology systems even when none of the individual
failures alone is by itself catastrophic.Cooke and coauthors recommend
use of an approach, known as accident sequence precursor analysis, for
assessing risks in deepwater drilling; this approach models situations
when failure can happen as a result of a sequence of individual
failures see Roger Cooke, Heather Ross, and Adam Stern, ``Precursor
Analysis for Offshore Oil and Gas Drilling,'' Resources for the Future
Discussion Paper 10-61, January 2011, at htpp://www.rff.org).

Incentives for research and development in containment are another
concern, one that is separate but related to the problem of incentives
to invest in containment alone. Even if changes in liability led firms
to perfectly internalize damages in the event of a spill, industry may
underinvest in containment R&D. Yet innovation in containment is
necessary to keep up with innovation in deepwater and ultradeepwater
drilling.
Underinvestment in R&D is one of the most-studied but, as yet,
incompletely answered questions in technology policy. Incentives to
innovate depend on several conditions being met: obviously, first the
ability of firms to fund R&D, then the ability to appropriate the
returns to invention, and at the same time, protect intellectual
property embodied in the invention. These conditions can sometimes be
hard to meet, hence the tendency of firms to underinvest in R&D.
Moreover, another problem arises in the special case of innovation
that, if widely deployed, would serve the public, not just the
individual firm carrying out the innovation. Containment to protect
third parties has this potential problem. Incentives are weakened when
damages to third parties are not fully borne by the firms
(circumstances related to the liability and regulatory problem
discussed above). The proprietary nature of innovation, the need to
deploy it widely to serve broader public interests, and the limits on
damages internalized by firms all tend to reduce incentives to invest
in containment R&D. This result calls into question whether we will be
able in the future, without making the up-front investment in R&D now,
to deploy state-of-the-art containment technology in increasingly
deeper water in the coming years.
On this point, the extent of innovation likely to be taken by
industry as a whole, or by MWCC and Helix, is not clear. The services
offered by MWCC and Helix are impressive. They appear to focus,
however, on preparing for a repeat of the Deepwater Horizon spill.
MWCC's proposed system would not, for example, be able to contain a
spill like the 1979 Ixtoc I event, in which the sinking rig came to
rest on the wellhead. It also does not appear to address un- or
underappreciated failure scenarios such as multiple simultaneous
blowouts at different wells or a leaking well casing. It is also
unclear the extent to which MWCC, Helix, or other containment suppliers
will undertake R&D today, in order to provide containment tomorrow at
future, deeper water depths.
Based on the experience that BP has documented for responding to
the DH spill, it is worth noting that, going forward, innovation in
containment requires not only innovation in engineering and new
hardware. Innovation in all of the processes, logistics, and people
that serve to deploy the hardware and make decisions in real-time and
under the duress of an emergency is also necessary. These systems,
processes, procedures, and organization of people who will be called
upon to deploy and manage containment activities are a necessary part
of containment readiness. To illustrate this point, Box 1 shows the
wide range of innovations, in addition to equipment, listed by BP as
required in responding to the DH spill.

Because incentives can be weak for investing in R&D to prepare for
future containment, it may be that industry containment suppliers,
while ready for spills similar to DH, may have less capacity to advance
the state-of-the-art in containment to keep pace with ongoing
innovation in drilling in the extreme operating environment of
increasingly deep water. It also may be that R&D in containment is not
part of the mission of these containment suppliers. If this is the
case, then ascertaining who will be responsible for leading the next
generation of containment research, prototyping, and testing is a
fundamental question with keen policy importance. This doesn't mean
that ongoing containment plans and systems won't have value, but it
will likely mean that in the event of a new catastrophic spill, these
plans will have to be adapted and updated on the fly-much as was
necessary for the recent spill.

Recommendations

My colleagues and I suggest moving beyond this rearward focus and
devoting resources toward a more comprehensive examination of future
scenarios, particularly since future drilling efforts are expected to
reach ever-increasing water depths. This recommendation is wholly
aligned with experience in other technologies under this Committee's
purview, including space transportation, for instance. Much like the
post-shuttle accidents, expert analysis and risk assessment, both by
industry and by third parties, are needed. War gaming to test
procedures and failure scenarios would inform this analysis and improve
preparedness. Creation of a center of excellence specifically to carry
out state-of-the-art research in deepwater and ultradeepwater
containment, again with third-party involvement, would be a welcome
development.
The recent history of spill response (clean-up) technology gives
some reason for concern that industry efforts to prepare for the next
spill may still fall short over the longer run. Regulatory requirements
and industry resources for response were increased following the Exxon
Valdez spill in 1989. The Marine Spill Response Corporation (MSRC) was
created as an industry collaboration with many similarities to MWCC.
But the Oil Spill Commission report found that despite claims by
industry, the evidence suggests that little investment has gone into
response and containment technologies. One of the staff papers
published by the Commission finds that ``despite industry claims that
the oil industry committed significant funds to clean-up technology R&D
in the years immediately following the Exxon Valdez spill this
commitment quickly waned. Industry funding for response R&D fell off
after the mid-1990s. Today, oil companies invest `little to no' money
in oil spill response technology.'' \9\ Private companies entered the
business, but did not significantly expand response capability. The
same series of events could occur in containment if the current focus
is not translated into an ongoing commitment to innovation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ SeeResponse/Clean-Up Technology Research & Development and the
BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill, Staff Working Paper No. 7, National
Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling,
11 January 2011, p. 3, at http://www.oilspillcommission.gov/sites/
default/files/documents/Updated%20Response%20RD%20Working%20Pa per.pdf
(accessed April 3, 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part of this commitment must come from industry. Even if permit
requirements ensure that the containment plans submitted to regulators
are grounded in sound technology and practices, and capable of
replicating the containment needs displayed during the DH spill, we
lack assurance of continued investment in R&D to go beyond current
capabilities-especially as we continue to drill into deeper waters. For
example, a governance structure for MWCC that includes either public-
interest board members or an external third-party expert panel and
transparent disclosures of expenditures might provide some assurance
that R&D is adequately funded and containment technology keeps up with
the latest drilling depths. Some direct or indirect government
oversight and support of containment R&D may be warranted-for example,
to encourage frontier academic research and its application-given the
difficulty for any individual company to fully appropriate the returns
to innovation. One route may be to link directly the recommendations of
the new safety advisory Committee with an existing energy research
partnership that was established by the Energy Policy Act of 2005. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ This partnership is the Research Partnership to Secure Energy
for America (RPSEA), a consortium of industry and academic experts. At
present, the emphasis in RPSEA's mission statement, its annual draft
plan for 2011, and current list of funded activities appears to be on
new technology and engineering but not containment per se or related
organizational and process design and risk assessment. Perhaps the
mission and activities could be realigned to include a focus on
containment R&D.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusions

Deepwater Horizon revealed a failure of spill containment. That
failure was partly technological, but it was ultimately human. The
MWCC, the Helix services, and updated permit requirements show
recognition of this and are undoubtedly positive steps. But the
opportunity created by momentary attention to containment should not be
lost. Other measures are needed as well, including attention to
incentives that are blunted by liability limits, consideration of a
wide range of failure scenarios, use of third-party review, and
commitment to ongoing innovation in spill containment to match the pace
of innovation in drilling.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Dr. Macauley, and
thanks to all the panel Members for their testimony.
Reminding Members of the Committee rules. Limit questioning
for five minutes, and the Chair at this point will open the
round of questions, and I will recognize myself for the first
five minutes.
Dr. Der, thank you very, very much for coming and
testifying before the Committee. My understanding from your
testimony is that once again the President's budget reposes
repeal of the ultra-deep water and unconventional natural gas
and other petroleum research fund, and I have got to ask that
given the fact that we are recently--it is coming to our
attention that our oil reserves, our recoverable reserves both
for oil and especially now for natural gas, are coming to be
realized that we have these reserves, why don't you think there
is a role for the government in trying to figure out how to get
to them safely, not just safety but how to, you know,
partnering with industry or, in fact, doing some of the
research.
You know, my understanding that, for instance, the research
to get to our shale natural gas, you know, is one fellow who
thought, yes, this could be done when everybody else said, no,
it couldn't be done, but--it took him years and years to figure
it out with apparently little help from the government, even
though we sit on these resources.
So, Doctor, why is it not appropriate for the government to
actually help as part of this program to do some of that
innovative research that could get to more of our oil and
natural gas given the rising price of energy, the rising cost
of gas?
Dr. Der. Thank you for the question here. I want to let you
know that this innovative person who developed and
commercialized the technology for hydrofracking, and horizontal
drilling was, in fact, a result of the early research that the
Department of Energy has engaged in. We had spent I think on
the order of something like $137 million between the 1980s and
1990s to release trillions and trillions of potential in terms
of natural gas in this country.
So the role of the government early on is there, but oil
and gas production is a fairly mature technology, and the
industry and the Administration's opinion is that industry is
well capable of investing in these types of technologies to
unlock and unleash these potential domestic resources that we
have in our country.
Continuing forward I think that we do have a role in
helping advise and assist where necessary in terms of safe and
responsible drilling in areas such as the ultra-deep regime.
But, again, the Administration's position is that the oil
companies and gas companies and the majors are very well
equipped to make these types of investments on their own with
the guidance from groups such as this advisory Committee I
spoke of in my opening statement.
Chairman Harris. Yes. Thank you. I guess the only follow up
I would say is if you think that those $137 million which we
invested in the past had something to do with leading to the
development of the new technology to unlock some of the natural
gas, it almost makes an argument for continuing for the
government to do things like that because that has yielded some
result.
Mr. Miller, let me ask you a question because, you know, it
appears that we are going to be buying oil that is found in
deep waters off Brazil, that there is a national decision that
has been made to invest billions of dollars through the Export-
Import bank to do deep water drilling off Brazil.
So I have got to ask you, what are the standards that they
are going to have? I mean, because, you know, the API is
developing all these standards. First of all, is there an
international equivalent of the API? Are they ahead of us or
behind us on these standards? I mean, you know, it begs the
question how do we make certain that when we are supporting
this drilling elsewhere in the world, how do we know that it is
going to be up to the standards that we hope to have here in
the United States?
Mr. Miller. Thank you for the question. There are really a
couple of ways to answer that, Chairman. The first way is that
API as was mentioned when you gave my bio, is very involved in
international standards development, and I am the chairman of
the ANSI International Policy Committee, and one of the things
we look at is how industries work with the International
Organization for Standardization or ISO, which is based in
Geneva and develops standards that are worldwide recognized.
And in our support of that particular set of Committees
that develop international oil and natural gas standards,
approximately 70 percent of the standards that they have
developed under that one Committee are base API standards. So
number one, we have worked with our international counterparts
to make sure that these best practices are moved around the
world and used around the world.
The second point I would make is that in a study that was
done last year by the UK-based Oil and Gas Producers'
Association, looking at 14 different producing regions around
the world, they found that API standards were the most widely
referenced by the regulators, with over 225 citations in
addition to the citations here in the United States. So the
regulatory regime is there for both the standards to have been
transferred and used through the ISO process or the
International Organization for Standards Processing in addition
to the regulators using the API standards for their regulations
as well.
Chairman Harris. So in Brazil if they are going to drill
using those standards, then your feeling would be that since
those standards roughly are going to be equivalent to the
standards we have here, then perhaps we should be doing it here
as well. I take it that you think they are roughly equivalent.
Mr. Miller. Absolutely. I would think that with the strong
records we have here we should be expanding our drilling
operations here in the states.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just
as a layman, when I hear that there is a device called a
blowout preventer on a well and the well has a blowout, my
conclusion is that the blowout preventer probably didn't work.
Mr. Miller, is there a flaw in that reasoning?
Mr. Miller. To answer your question, I know that there has
been a study that has just been released that has come out that
is looking at some of the potential problems that occurred in
the Deep Water Horizon. We have got a group of technical
experts that are looking at the standards that cover blowout
preventer design and operation, and in addition to other items
that we were already looking at, we are looking at that case
where you did have that uncontrolled kick, if you will, that
according to the study, and we haven't fully had a chance to
digest it yet because it is over 500 pages, where they
theorized that the kick, the uncontrolled release pushed the
pipe into a place where the sheer rams did not fully close.
So we are looking at those design requirements to make sure
that as we update the standard we consider those results.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Well, some scientists or some
engineers who have looked at this have said that the assumption
that the pipe would be centered at that depth with those
pressures from every direction, that those pressures were not
unusual. I mean, they are usually unusual, and some engineers
have said that if it was actually centered, it would be just
dumb luck. It would be like a stopped clock being correct. It
does happen twice a day, but it is really just dumb luck.
What are the differences between drilling or the safety
considerations, the technological challenges in safety and the
environmental protection between shallow water and deep water
drilling?
Mr. Miller. Well, I am not a drilling expert, but I can
talk a little bit about the equipment itself. It is governed by
12 separate regulations under BOEMRE. In each one of your BOP's
you are required to have at least one annular ram, which is
sort of the rubber donut that sits on top, two pipe rams, which
do help you center the pipe and also can help you close in a
blowout, and then finally a blind sheer ram that closes that.
One of the other things that we are looking at is that we
understand, and this was just announced I think earlier in this
week, that we will be seeing additional proposed regulations
from BOEMRE. We understand there will be an advanced notice of
proposed rulemaking on BOP design and manufacture and
operations. So we will have a chance to take a look at what
they are believing we need to be looking at as far as our
design requirements, those particular pieces of equipment.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Uh-huh. What role, if any,--
well, you really are not claiming any expertise in drilling or
drilling safety?
Mr. Miller. No. My expertise is in standards and standards
development and the technical standards that support drilling
operations and equipment but not as a petroleum engineer,
drilling engineer.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Okay. Well----
Mr. Kratz. Would you mind if I added something to that?
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kratz. I think it is important in any discussion, and I
am not an expert on BOPs, but any discussion about BOPs I think
it is important to understand that any technology has
operational limits, and I am not making a comment on Macondo or
not, but the BOP is actually the last barrier of defense in a
series of barriers used to control a drilling operation.
So when you say the BOP failed, what has to occur for that
to happen is several other systems have to fail as well, and I
think what Macondo has taught is that no matter how well the
system is designed, and I think the government, the BOM has it
right on this, you can't rely totally on prevention, and that
is where the missing link of the next step of containment comes
in is for the inevitable.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Okay. Well, I am in search
for a witness who seems to have expertise on a topic I want to
ask about.
Dr. Macauley, you were an economist, Ph.D., and you
mentioned liability and liability caps and the affect that had
on innovation in the safety area. I don't claim to be an
economist, but I have studied kind of the economics of
liability, the theory behind legal liability and that potential
liability is kind of the economic incentive to safety
practices.
What is the economic effect of setting a cap, a liability
cap on safety innovation?
Dr. Macauley. Yeah. It is an excellent question, because it
is so relevant to what we are discussing. A liability cap,
caps-led industry will be liable for and who foots the bill
then? The other parties, the taxpayers in this case. Liability
caps serve important purposes. They are often thought to allow
small companies to enter in, and you don't have to back the
company in order to provide a useful public service, in this
case, offshore drilling.
On the other hand, the very fact that you have a cap does
say, well, who will pay, taxpayers, but we have this tradeoff.
We are allowing small companies to participate, provide that
competition. So setting the liability cap is really important.
To the extent it can be related to the risk, then you begin
to put incentives in place to bring about the very prevention
containment and effective response that we are talking about,
though.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. I am sorry. Will the
liability--will the safety efforts match the potential
liability if there is a liability cap?
Dr. Macauley. I think that industry has an incentive to pay
attention to the liability cap to protect its shareholders.
Industry also has a reputation to uphold, though, so it may
well be that industry acts beyond the cap because reputation
really matters, what the public thinks is very critically
important as we know in the case of nuclear power plant safety.
So the role of the liability cap is a complex one.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Mr. Chairman, I see my time
has expired. There are three documents, studies of this
disaster that I would like to enter into the record. The first
is the study--and in each case I have excepted out the portions
that seem to be pertinent. If the Chair wants to add additional
chapters, that is fine, but these seem to be the ones
pertinent.
The first is a report by the Det Norske Veritas on their
forensics examination of Deep Water Horizon's blowout preventer
that they undertook for the Department of Interior. DNV
concluded that the buckled drill pipe inside the blowout
preventer obstructed the blind sheer rams that the witnesses
just described in their ability to sheer the pipe fully and
seal the well. And in addition to the introduction, Chapter 4
would be sufficient to deal with those conclusions.
And then two other documents from the Department of
Interior. One is investigation, MMS report 2001-009, and report
2004, page 21, conclusion six, and page 5. Those appear to
indicate that BOP failure similar to that depicted in the DNV
report had occurred in the past decade on two other occasions.
And Mr. Chairman, I would now move these three documents be
inserted into the record.
Chairman Harris. I thank you very much. I thank the Ranking
Member for sharing that with staff and without objection, so
ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 65490.050

Chairman Harris. With respect to the DNV report on the
blowout preventer I think it is worth noting for the record
there appears to remain a great deal of uncertainty surrounding
what actually did happen that day and the conclusions reached
in the report itself, so to that end I would like to enter into
the record an article from the New Orleans Times-Picayune that
summarizes some of the issues in question, in particular the
accuracy of DNV's computer modeling that they use in their
report of the blowout preventer. So thank you.
[The information follows:]

Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Is that the article that
really talks about the lawyers questioning of the--okay. Well,
I certainly welcome the Chairman treating lawyers as expert on
all topics on which they represent a client.
Chairman Harris. That may be unusual for this physician,
but anyway, Ms. Woolsey, you are recognized.
Ms. Woolsey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, for as
complicated as this topic is, I feel like my questions are
really basic, but I think they are necessary.
So, Mr. Kratz, when you were talking about Helix's fast
response system being ready and up and ready to go now, how
long did that take to develop, and what if we had had it in
place before the Deepwater Horizon oil spill? How much
difference would there have been in the results, and why aren't
we doing this sooner?
Mr. Kratz. I think it is important to note that Helix is a
well-intervention company, which is different from a well
service company like a Schlumberger or Halliburton. They are
the ones that actually do the work down inside the well.
Helix's expertise is actually getting onto a well and into a
well. What we do every day with our vessels is intervene into
live oil wells--and then allow the service companies to do the
work.
So getting into the well is not new technology. In fact,
the capping stack that we have we actually fabricated two years
prior to Macondo so that the technology is there. We do it
every day. It is reliable. The issue really is on readiness and
preparedness because it is a complicated operation, and it
takes an awful lot of people to be coordinated, and that is
where the consortium has spent a lot of their time on preparing
these procedures, and we have actually run two tabletop drills
now just to refine it, where you are actually simulating a
crisis and trying to------
Ms. Woolsey. Let me just interrupt a minute.
Mr. Kratz. Sure.
Ms. Woolsey. That is why we care about this and this
testimony on this subject today. So why didn't we have all that
tabletop exercise done before this all happened? I mean, were
people just taking it for granted?
Mr. Kratz. That is a good question. I think the industry's
predominant view was on prevention and probably an over-
reliance on prevention, and I think following the Valdez
incident there was a lot of focus on spill cleanup. The part
that, you know, and there was supposed to be a renewal and--but
as the industry went deeper, the missing link between the
inevitable spill and the cleanup was sort of overlooked. And
the innovation of our equipment for application onto the
blowout actually came from the fact that innovation occurs
through the commercial incentive of the well intervention
market. It just happens that the same technology is very easily
applied to blowout containment.
Ms. Woolsey. Okay, and with the idea that April 11 the new
system will be up and ready to go feels a little bit like,
well, company is coming. I am going to be a witness. I need
to--we better hustle and get this done, but whatever, whatever
the incentive was. It is good that you have that new technology
developed or system developed.
Mr. Kratz. We are actually late.
Ms. Woolsey. Well------
Mr. Kratz. We had promised it over a month ago, so we are
behind schedule.
Ms. Woolsey. Okay. Well, get on with it.
Dr. Der, last year this Committee and the full House passed
my legislation, the Oil Pollution R&D Program Reauthorization
Act, which would have doubled the federal investment in oil
spill response technologies, and unfortunately, the bill was
not taken up by the Senate.
But my question to you is in your opinion would doubling--
is it--I mean, currently do we have enough federal investment
or would it have been better to pass this and double the
investment in oil spill technologies? How much do we need, and
who should contribute?
Dr. Der. Well, as I mentioned before, and I think the
Secretary of energy has testified that the funding of oil and
gas research relating to safety and environmental mitigation
should be the responsibility of the industry since they are a
very big industry, they can afford to do that kind of work. Our
role in the Department of Energy would be to help guide some of
that activity, but I think in the end it should be funded by
industry. Our ongoing work in Section 999 has refocused the
emphasis on safety and response and environmental aspects and
sustainability.
Ms. Woolsey. So, your current budget in order to do this
oversight that you--encouragement, is it enough, or would you
prefer that we increase it?
Dr. Der. Primarily I would have to say that the response to
oil spills is primarily the responsibility of the U.S. Coast
Guard and those programs that come under its purview, but the
Department of Energy does have a lot of technical expertise
that could help in that regard.
Ms. Woolsey. That is right, and the Department of Energy is
part of the team of the Coast Guard and NOAA to keep these
systems and these programs current. I mean, we were way back in
another century virtually when we got--came forward for this
deep water protection and know how.
So okay. I just wanted to make sure you knew that we were
trying to get you more.
Dr. Der. Appreciate it. Thank you.
Chairman Harris. Thank you, and I am going to take the
opportunity to ask a few more questions and give the
opportunity to any member here to continue questioning at this
point.
Mr. Kratz, let me ask you a question--to recap part of your
testimony, obviously from your testimony had that accident
occurred after April 15 when this 15,000 pound per square inch
cap would be available, your opinion would be that could have
been contained?
Mr. Kratz. Our current depth, the 10,000 pound cap could
have contained the well.
Chairman Harris. Well, I thought the testimony was that the
measured pressure was 11,800 or something. It is in your------
Mr. Kratz. Yeah. Shut-in pressure that was within------
Chairman Harris. Okay. So that could even be done by the
system we have now. So let me ask you. Where does that stand,
that kind of pressure? Where does that stand within the range
of what is--and I got to ask. Are pressures always measured?
Are these estimated pressures? What are they?
Mr. Kratz. The shutting pressure?
Chairman Harris. Yes.
Mr. Kratz. That would be read off of a gauge.
Chairman Harris. So it is measure--all right. So what is
the range of measured pressures that you have? As we gauge
whether or not your systems would be adequate to reasonably,
very--prevent the vast, you know, virtually 99.9 percent of
these kind of problems. What is the range of pressures that are
measured?
Mr. Kratz. A majority of the systems internationally might
comment on it, but are rated at 10,000 PSI. It is only more
recently that the 15,000 PSI pressures have been encountered,
and you are seeing a greater and greater proliferation of it,
but still, 15,000 PSI is relatively rare.
Chairman Harris. That would be rare. And--let me ask you.
Do you--does your company also do bioremediation, or is that
the idea of developing something that eventually--if some oil
spills, you know, some bacteria or some organism actually just
consumes it?
Mr. Kratz. No.
Chairman Harris. Who does that?
Mr. Kratz. I believe that would come more under the purview
of spill cleanup kind of a company, which we are not involved
with.
Chairman Harris. Well, Dr. Der, let me ask you. Has your
shop done any of this? I mean, that would come right under the
purview of environmental, you know, environmental protections
against spills, and you know, that is the kind of biological
development that may fall in the cracks. I mean, you know, I
don't think the NIH is doing it, you know. Mr. Kratz is not
going to do it. Who would be doing that, and how are we
developing those other--those alternative, those thinking
outside the box techniques?
Dr. Der. Well, again, the response capability to spill
response is the U.S. Coast Guard's, but I think the
technologies that we have been working on in the laboratories
may have some bearing on that. Again, our role is to help,
assist and to advise through our program with the Safety
Advisory Committee.
Chairman Harris. But is it funded through this program?
Because, I mean, the recommendation was to eliminate this
program, and my only response is as I think Dr. Macauley
mentioned, there are some things that probably you might need,
you know, government research support in order to develop some
things to make these types of endeavors, these exploration and
production endeavors that are safe.
Dr. Der. The program that we have currently and under the
Section 999 was refocused from the efficiency and economics of
production into safety and environmental aspects, and I am not
100 percent clear that we have that funding under Section 999.
Chairman Harris. Well, but why not? I mean--why would you
want to zero out a program when there are questions that,
really some basic questions that could be answered that could
result in, in fact, even say for production and exploration.
Dr. Der. Well------
Chairman Harris. I guess I am asking--are we really sure
there is not a role for some basic research to be done to make
these techniques production, exploration safe and
environmentally sound?
Dr. Der. I think there is, but my point is that the funding
of those types of technologies should come from industry, and
they can make use of the resources that we at the Department of
Energy and our national labs have.
Chairman Harris. So that would be in contra-distinction to,
for instance, how we handle medical research where you could
say, look, you know, medical device companies, hospitals, they
all make a lot of money, but yet--we think there is a role for
some basic research in other areas of the government. So you
think we should just think about this completely differently?
Mr. Der. I am not familiar with the medical field, sir.
Chairman Harris. Well, we spend tens of billions of dollars
on research that one could make the argument that some
pharmaceutical company should fund, some medical device company
should fund, so, you know, someone who is going to make money
on the final product should fund it.
So I just ask that you consider that it is my opinion that
there may be areas like that.
And, Dr. Macauley, I was going to just ask you because you
mentioned it and perhaps there may be some errors. I mean, what
kinds of new science do you think might be under the purview of
the Federal Government to be involved in? Basic materials?
Yeah. Bioremediation. What do you think?
Dr. Macauley. Yeah. I think this discussion of what is the
basic research is an interesting one. My colleagues and I when
we were working for the--on our research project, we were
searching to find a discussion of the R&D that would be needed
to see how much of it is basic, how much of it is development,
how much is it ready to prototype. This is why I think there is
a policy gap at the moment. I am not sure we have a full
understand, and if it is really, really basic research, it
could be exactly what we need for, you know, the stem concerns,
the science, technology, et cetera.
So I would love to see that intersection, but we weren't
able to find anything, you know.
Chairman Harris. That is being done. Well, thank you very
much.
Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
think when the Chairman and I agree we should pause and
celebrate that as we did when he earlier agreed to the
expertise of lawyers on almost any topic.
But--and I am very pleased to hear you supporting research,
but we saw in H.R. 1 dramatic cuts in research funding and even
in this Committee just a couple, three weeks ago cuts to the
FAA's Authorization Bill for research into, flight safety.--
Icing, human error, cockpit fires, and smoke-- and the argument
for cutting that funding was that that it was applied as
opposed to basic research, and applied research should be paid
for by the industry, not by the government.
It certainly appears that this industry, the oil and gas
industry, is vastly more profitable than the airline industry,
and I know that there is not a bell that sounds when basic
research crosses over into applied research, but is correcting
the flaws in a blowout preventer or containment technologies
basic or applied research? Anyone? Dr. Macauley?
And do you agree with that distinction and that we
shouldn't fund applied research?
Ms. Macauley. I never argue for government intervention
unless it seems to really, really be necessary, and I comment
that industry will do the innovation on its own. Sometimes
industry does, something industry doesn't, and it is
identifying is there a market failure in R&D to ensure the
health of our offshore deep water drilling industry.
That is a gap in our understanding as policymakers at the
moment, and I do hope that we can get a better handle on where
those gaps are and what is the nature of the R&D, and who is
doing it.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Okay. Well, Dr. Macauley, you
said that there was more than just the economic consideration
of liability. There is reputation at stake. But I have seen
folks who have made a whole lot of money doing really
disreputable things be accepted into polite society, and their
acceptance seems to have been greased by how much money they
had.
Now, I know that Tony Hayward, it appeared to hurt his
feelings how much criticism he got. This industry seems to be
vastly profitable and not terribly bothered by the bad press
that they may have gotten.
Mr. Miller, what percentage of the industry's profits went
into safety research and development before this?
Mr. Miller. Well, I don't have that information with me,
but I know that we have done studies on the basic R&D that the
industry does and percentages and to different areas, and I
will be happy to get that information back to you. I just don't
have it with me.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Okay. Anyone else venture a
guess on that?
Okay. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, and I would like to
recognize the Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Hall, for any
questions.
Chairman Hall. Mr. Chairman, since like everybody up and
down the row here on both sides have other things they have
been doing all day today and the problems we have, I have been
looking for a doctor to give me an appointment tomorrow to take
my appendix out again where I won't have to cast those bad
votes tomorrow, but I haven't been able to get that.
But I won't take their time because------
Chairman Harris. I could do the anesthesia.
Chairman Hall. --I don't know what has been asked, but if I
might, I will send some questions in, and I am sure they will
answer them if you as them to properly.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. Thank you.
Chairman Harris. I am just going to follow up just one very
brief question before we close the meeting.
I guess--along the lines of what I was suggesting was, for
instance, I am going to ask Mr. Kratz and maybe Mr. Miller, you
know, when you design, for instance, you showed us all the
materials that you are going to put down under, you know,
10,000 feet of water for instance. There has to be some fairly
basic research into materials that I am sure your company
doesn't do. I mean, really basic research on materials that can
withstand that pressure.
So along the lines, and you know, the ranking member brings
up a good point. I mean, the blowout preventer appears not to
have worked, but maybe it was a materials issue on what the
material was, and you know, the Federal Government supports a
lot of materials research.
Does the industry have the ability to do that? And, Mr.
Miller, maybe you can answer. Is there something within the
industry that can do that?
Mr. Miller. Well, that is a really good question. We have
been working for a little while now on a new standard on high
pressure, high temperature equipment. In particular, we are
looking at equipment that will be rated higher than the 15K,
15,000 that Mr. Kratz mentioned.
And one of the real challenges for us in developing that
standard is the material section because what we want to
develop as many of our standards are primarily performance-
based standards. So we will set the criteria for generally
speaking what the performance of the material must be but not
make it so specific that it excludes the innovation and
industry.
And so what we ask the Members of the Committees to do is
to bring to us their broad outlines so that we can craft a
standard along those lines to allow that innovation to continue
to take place as was mentioned earlier.
But I can provide that information back to you and where we
are on that standard and when we expect to publish it.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
Mr. Miller, anything else?
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Well, Mr. Chairman, just
because you asked questions I think I should.
This--well, first of all, it is pretty clear that the
blowout preventer didn't work because there was a blowout that
was not prevented. So I think we can say conclusively the
blowout preventer didn't work, and we can argue about why, but
I don't think you can argue about whether.
We have been talking about an event at 5,000 feet below--
about a mile deep--below the surface and how extreme that is,
how extreme the pressures are, et cetera, and now we are
talking about drilling 10,000 feet.
Is that going to double how extreme, or is it more
exponential? What are the pressures going to be at 10,000 feet
as compared to 5,000?
Mr. Kratz. I will start. I think the industry is, if not
prepared, has been preparing for quite awhile for 10,000 feet.
The Q4000, for instance, there was a lot of R&D help from tax
credits on that vessel. It was the first vessel specifically
designed to work in 10,000 feet of water, funded by MARAD.
Since then, you know, we are producing out at 9,000 feet,
so there has been and there continues to be and especially with
Brazil on the horizon, there is a lot of incentive for the
industry to develop the capabilities in 10,000 feet of water.
Most robotics now are designed for 10,000 feet of water. In
fact, 10,000 feet of water is becoming pretty much of a
standard basic design parameter for any service company or
drill or doing work in the deep water.
Mr. Miller. And one thing that I could add, Ranking Member
Miller, is that as we move into some of the ultra-deep water,
some of the things that we want to look at are the idea of what
is known as a safety case approach. This is a recommendation
that our joint industry task force made to the Department of
Interior when we had those 30 days to respond right after Deep
Water Horizon, and it was included in the final White House
report that they would consider a safety case.
And what that is is a more risk-based approach so that you
are looking at your actual individual well, and you are
combining the safety approach from both the driller and the
operator to make sure that you have considered all these
different risks as you described when you move into different
environments.
So that is another area that you could sort of innovate on
how you approached safe operations and your compliance.
Mr. Miller of North Carolina. Mr. Chairman, I don't have
anymore questions unless you do.
Chairman Harris. No. Thank you very much. I want to,
listen, I want to thank the witnesses for your valuable
testimony, and the Members for questions.
Again, I want to apologize for us starting late, but I will
have you out on time because your time is valuable.
The Members of the Subcommittee, including those who
weren't here today, may have additional questions for witnesses
and would ask for you to respond to those in writing. The
record will remain open for two weeks for additional comments
from Members.
The witnesses are excused, and this hearing is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:59 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix I:

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Prepared Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson

Thank you, Chairman Harris
I appreciate the opportunity to discuss this important topic.
As a Texan I am very familiar with the oil and gas industry. Oil
derricks are as much an icon of our state as the cowboy hat and boots.
Much of the state's history and economy is built upon the enormous
profits of the industry. However, we have also seen the downside of
booms and busts in oil and gas, and have diversified the state's
economy to protect ourselves from fluctuations in the market.
My constituents also spend a lot of time in their cars, and feel
the pains of high gas prices. But, contrary to the claims of some, this
pain is not caused by President Obama's drilling policies. Instead we
should acknowledge that the price of oil is, by and large, out of our
control. Despite reducing our net oil imports by 10% in the last two
years, we cannot count on drilling our way to energy independence and
low gas prices. We simply don't have the oil. And, even if we did, we
would still be vulnerable to price volatility and manipulation in the
global marketplace. In the long-run, our only recourse is to wean
ourselves off of oil. It is an addiction we cannot afford.
As Texas has done with its economy, the Nation should be protected
from the potentially devastating effects of an unpredictable global oil
market. We must diversify in the fuels we use to power our
transportation sector, and we must do so in the most environmentally
benign way possible. From its earliest days, oil and gas drilling has
been tough and dangerous work. It is an impressive testament to human
ingenuity to move a hydrocarbon molecule from thousands of feet
underground to your car's engine, and all for a few dollars per gallon.
But it is also dirty work, and the Deepwater Horizon disaster
highlighted that pushing the technology envelope to drill in ever
deeper waters also exposes workers, the public, and the environment to
new risks.
Regardless of the contribution to our economy, no industry has a
right to neglect public health and environmental safety. Instead, the
oil and gas industry should take responsibility and devote some of its
intellectual and technological capacity to developing safer drilling
practices and advancing the technologies to respond to spills when they
happen.



