- CONTINUING OVERSIGHT OF THE NATION'S WEATHER SATELLITE PROGRAMS: AN UPDATE ON JPSS AND GOES-R

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CONTINUING OVERSIGHT OF THE

NATION'S WEATHER SATELLITE PROGRAMS:

AN UPDATE ON JPSS AND GOES-R
=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS AND

OVERSIGHT
JOINT WITH THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 27, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-94

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-731                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              PAUL D. TONKO, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Tennessee                        VACANCY
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight

HON. PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         PAUL D. TONKO, New York
Wisconsin                        ZOE LOFGREN, California
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             JERRY McNERNEY, California
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, June 27, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Paul C. Broun, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................    22
Written Statement............................................    24

Statement by Representative Paul D. Tonko, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    25
Written Statement............................................    26

Statement by Representative Andy Harris, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    26
Written Statement............................................    27

Statement by Representative Brad Miller, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    28
Written Statement............................................    29

Witnesses:

Hon. Kathryn Sullivan, Ph.D., Assistant Secretary of Commerce for
Environmental Observation and Prediction, and Deputy
Administrator, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    30
Written Statement............................................    33

Mr. Marcus Watkins, Director, Joint Agency Satellite Division,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    42
Written Statement............................................    44

Mr. David A. Powner, Director, Information Technology Management
Issues, Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    47
Written Statement............................................    50

Discussion                                                           72

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Hon. Kathryn Sullivan, Ph.D., Assistant Secretary of Commerce for
Environmental Observation and Prediction, and Deputy
Administrator, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.    93

Mr. Marcus Watkins, Director, Joint Agency Satellite Division,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration..................    97

Mr. David A. Powner, Director, Information Technology Management
Issues, Government Accountability Office.......................   103

Appendix 2: Additional Material for the Record

Weather-X Blog by Cliff Mass: Submitted by Representative Andy
Harris, Chairman, Subcommittee on Energy and Environment.......   110

CONTINUING OVERSIGHT OF THE

NATION'S WEATHER SATELLITE PROGRAMS:

AN UPDATE ON JPSS AND GOES-R

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 27, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 2:08 p.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Paul Broun
[Chairman of the Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight]
presiding.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.020

Chairman Broun. This joint hearing of the Subcommittee on
Investigations and Oversight on the Committee of Science will
come to order. This Joint Committee meeting with Subcommittee
on Energy and Environment.
Good afternoon. First, I apologize for running late. I was
on the floor, and please forgive me, my colleagues as well as
all our witnesses, for running late, and I appreciate you all's
patience.
Welcome to today's joint hearing entitled, ``Continuing
Oversight of the Nation's Weather Satellite Programs: An Update
on JPSS and GOES-R.''
In front of you are packets containing the written
testimony, biographies, and truth in testimony disclosures for
today's witnesses. Before we get started, since this is a joint
hearing involving two Subcommittees, I want to explain how we
will operate procedurally, so that all Members will understand
how the question-and-answer period will be handled.
As always, we will alternate between the majority and
minority and allow all Members the opportunity for questions
before recognizing a Member for a second round of questions. We
will recognize those Members that were present here at the
gavel in order of seniority on the full Committee and those
coming in after the gavel will be recognized in their order of
arrival.
I now recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement.
This is the ninth hearing this Committee has held on either
the National Polar-Orbiting Environmental Satellite System,
NPOESS, Program, or its successor, the JPSS Program, since
2003. That does not even include hearings related to
Geostationary Observational Environmental Satellite and weather
satellites in general. This level of oversight, continued under
both Republican and Democratic administrations as well as
Congresses, is indicative of how important weather satellites
are to our society and to Members of Congress. Without both
polar and geostationary satellites, our weather forecasting
ability would be severely compromised.
Because of the importance of these programs, it is
frustrating to watch them struggle. The original polar
satellite program, NPOESS, was supposed to cost taxpayers $6.5
billion. That was supposed to get the taxpayers six satellites
operating in three separate orbits, carrying 13 instruments
which would launch around 2010. Instead, we now have a program
that will only purchase three satellites and will operate in
only one orbit and cost twice as much.
To make matters worse, one of those satellites is a
research satellite that was never intended to serve
operationally. NOAA is now dependent upon European partners for
data from the mid-morning orbit, and it is anyone's guess what
data the Department of Defense will supply from the early
morning orbit.
Even more frustrating is the fact that this program still
does not have a baseline cost or a schedule. I understand that
NOAA is working towards developing this, but as they point out,
the ground segment has already passed its critical design
review, all of its contracts are signed, JPSS-1's instruments
are 60 to 95 percent complete, and the spacecraft will
essentially be a clone of the NPP bus, all indications of a
mature program.
To quote the GAO report, not having a baseline, ``makes it
more difficult for program officials to make informed decisions
and for program overseers to understand if the program is on
track to successfully delivering expected functionality on cost
and schedule.''
I understand that NOAA has committed to developing a
program under a lifecycle cost cap of $12.9 billion, but with
an impending gap in coverage that limits schedule flexibility,
the only option that NOAA may have to manage program risk is to
diminish capability. I am also concerned that this $12.9
billion cap is $1.7 billion lower than the independent cost
estimate conducted just last year.
I look forward to monitoring how NOAA decides to cover that
shortfall and any future challenges. Just since our hearing
last fall, the program has grown by $1 billion as a result of
extending the program by four years, the addition of free
flyers, contract transitions, and a work slowdown because of
the 2011 budget. Also, the schedule has slipped approximately
three months. One of the most concerning findings from the GAO
report on JPSS pertains not to cost increases or schedule gaps
in NOAA's afternoon orbit, but to the health of the entire
polar orbiting constellation.
GAO points out that because of uncertainties in DOD's early
morning orbit, as well as the European's mid-morning orbit,
there is a risk of a data gap in each orbit, not just NOAA's.
After the 2010 decision to split up the program, NOAA was only
given responsibility for the afternoon orbit, but it is clear
that the parties need to coordinate to identify synergies and
to mitigate risks to the entire constellation.
GOES-R, on the other hand, seems to be making progress
toward delivering its spacecraft and ground system within cost
and schedule. This wasn't always the case, as the program was
significantly de-scoped in 2007 in order to prevent cost growth
and schedule slips. Still, there are some findings in the GAO
report that require monitoring, such as the rate at which the
program is burning through reserves and the fidelity of its
schedules. Most concerning, however, is the GAO finding that
there is only a 48 percent chance that the program will meet
its 2015 launch date, and that there is a 37 percent chance
that there will be a gap in the availability of two operational
GOES-series satellites.
A gap in one program is bad enough. A gap in both programs
would and could be--could and would be catastrophic.
I would be remiss if I did not at least mention the Senate
Appropriations proposal to transfer the weather satellite
programs from NOAA to NASA. I hope NOAA and NASA can provide
their thoughts on this proposal, specifically how it would
impact the current programs as well as the rest of their
agencies.
I know these oversight hearings can sometimes be tough, but
considering NOAA's current position, the House may be one of
the agency's few friends, maybe the last friend. I hope not.
The Administration has proposed moving NOAA into the
Department of Interior, and the Senate has proposed gutting the
satellite program from NOAA, effectively removing $2 billion of
NOAA's $5 billion budget. The Committee has a positive working
relationship with the satellite sector of NOAA, which is
typically forthcoming with information. Unfortunately, this was
not the case with questions the Committee posed to NOAA last
fall after the last hearing. Although we sent questions on
October 17, we did not receive a response until June 7, eight
months later. I certainly hope NOAA will be more responsive to
the questions that we will have after this hearing.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Broun follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight
Chairman Paul C. Broun

I want to extend a warm welcome to our witnesses and thank them for
appearing today.
This is the ninth hearing this Committee has held on either the
National Polar-Orbiting Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) program
or its successor, the JPSS program, since 2003. That does not even
include hearings related to the Geostationary Observational
Environmental Satellite (GOES) and weather satellites in general. This
level of oversight, continued under both Republican and Democratic
administrations and Congresses, is indicative of how important weather
satellites are to our society. Without both polar and geostationary
satellites, our weather forecasting ability would be severely
compromised.
Because of the importance of these programs, it is frustrating to
watch them struggle. The original polar satellite program, NPOESS, was
supposed to cost $6.5 billion. That was supposed to get the taxpayers
six satellites, operating in three separate orbits, carrying 13
instruments, which would launch around 2010. Instead, we now have a
program that will only purchase three satellites; that will operate in
only one orbit; and cost twice as much. To make matters worse, one of
those satellites is a research satellite that was never intended to
serve operationally; NOAA is now dependent on European partners for
data from the midmorning orbit, and it's anyone's guess what data the
Department of Defense (DOD) will supply from the early morning orbit.
Even more frustrating is the fact that this program still does not
have a baseline for cost and schedule. I understand that NOAA is
working towards developing this, but as they point out, the ground
segment has already passed its critical design review, all of its
contracts are signed, JPSS-1's instruments are 60 to 95 percent
complete, and the spacecraft will essentially be a clone of the NPP
bus--all indicators of a mature program. To quote the GAO report, not
having a baseline ``makes it more difficult for program officials to
make informed decisions and for program overseers to understand if the
program is on track to successfully deliver expected functionality on
cost and schedule.''
I understand that NOAA has committed to developing the program
under a life cycle cost cap of $12.9 billion, but with an impending gap
in coverage that limits schedule flexibility, the only option that NOAA
may have to manage program risk is to diminish capability. I am also
concerned that this $12.9 billion cap is $1.7 billion lower than the
independent cost estimate conducted last year. I look forward to
monitoring how NOAA decides to cover that shortfall and any future
challenges. Just since our hearing last fall, the program has grown by
$1 billion as a result of extending the program by four years, the
addition of free flyers, contract transitions, and work slowdown
because of the 2011 budget. Also, the schedule has slipped
approximately three months.
One of the most concerning findings from the GAO report on JPSS
pertains not to cost increases or schedule gaps in NOAA's afternoon
orbit, but to the health of the entire polar-orbiting constellation.
GAO points out that because of uncertainties in DOD's early morning
orbit, as well as the Europeans' midmorning orbit, there is a risk of a
data gap in each orbit, not just NOAA's. After the 2010 decision to
split up the program, NOAA was only given responsibility for the
afternoon orbit, but it is clear that the parties need to coordinate to
identify synergies and mitigate risks to the entire constellation.
GOES-R, on the other hand, seems to be making progress toward
delivering its spacecraft and ground system within cost and schedule.
This wasn't always the case, as the program was significantly descoped
in 2007 in order to prevent cost growth and schedule slips. Still,
there are some findings in the GAO report that require monitoring, such
as the rate at which the program is burning through reserves, and the
fidelity of its schedules. Most concerning, however, is the GAO finding
that there is only a 48 percent chance that the program will meet its
2015 launch date, and that there is a 37 percent chance that there will
be a gap in the availability of two operational GOES-series satellites.
A gap in one program is bad enough. A gap in both programs would be
catastrophic.
I would be remiss if I did not at least mention the Senate
Appropriations proposal to transfer the weather satellite programs from
NOAA to NASA. I hope NOAA and NASA can provide thier thoughts on this
proposal, specifically how it would impact the current programs as well
as the rest of their agencies.
I know these oversight hearings can sometimes be tough, but
considering NOAA's current position, the House may be one of the
agency's few friends. The Administration has proposed moving NOAA into
the Department of Interior, and the Senate has proposed gutting the
satellite program from NOAA, effectively removing $2 billion of NOAA's
$5 billion budget. The Committee has a positive working relationship
with the satellite sector of NOAA, which is typically forthcoming with
information. Unfortunately, this was not the case with questions the
Committee posed to NOAA last fall after the last hearing. Although we
sent questions on October 17, we did not receive a resonse until June
7--eight months later. I certainly hope NOAA will be more responsive to
the questions we will have after this hearing.

Chairman Broun. Now, I recognize Mr. Tonko, my good friend
from New York, for his opening statement.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to our
witnesses.
This Committee has been holding hearings to ask critical
questions of the satellite programs since at least 2003. We
have seen cycles of disaster as when we witnessed the JPSS, in
its prior imposed guise, double in cost before the entire
enterprise was redesigned and rebaselined.
We have witnessed Herculean efforts to restructure
acquisition plans to get problems under control. Frankly,
despite these efforts, we have not had much to cheer about with
JPSS, and even GOES-R has been a source of concern.
However, my sense is that both of these programs are on
sustainable paths. That said, it appears that an auditor at GAO
could build a pretty good 20-year career out of simply tracking
the weather satellite program, and that is a sorry state of
affairs.
The group that sits before us today is not responsible for
the mess. Rather, we are counting on them to get us out of a
mess they inherited. It is our job to probe the answers they
offer, assess whether the programs appear robust, and offer
whatever advice and support we can to get these satellites
launched and operating. Believe me, if we could have altered
these acquisitions, we could have--would have, but these
satellites and the instruments that are to fly on them are too
important to our Nation to abandon this program.
I want to come away from this hearing with an understanding
that there is solid planning going on to fill any data gaps, I
want a firmer grasp of where remaining risks lie in each of
these programs, and I want to know there are reasonable
strategies for dealing with those risks.
In short, I want to leave with confidence that the
management teams running the JPSS and GOES-R satellite programs
are, indeed, up to the challenges.
In closing, Mr. Chair, I want to express my hope that we
not leap to conclusions, either good or bad, about either of
these programs. We should be cautious about these programs, but
it appears that nothing staff learned in preparing for this
hearing and nothing in GAO's testimony leads us to condemn
either program or to conclude that things are off the tracks
again.
I thank our witnesses for being here today and sharing
information and providing the sort of in-depth discussion that
is absolutely required, and I look forward to their testimony
today.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I yield.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonko follows:]

Prepared Statement of Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee Ranking
Member Paul D. Tonko

This Committee has been holding hearings to ask critical questions
of these satellite programs since at least 2003. We have seen cycles of
disaster, as when we witnessed the JPSS--in its prior NPOESS guise--
double in cost before the entire enterprise was redesigned and
rebaselined. We have witnessed Herculean efforts to restructure
acquisition plans to get problems under control. Frankly, despite those
efforts, we have not had much to cheer about with JPSS, and even GOES-R
has been a source of concern. However, my sense is that both of these
programs are on sustainable paths. That said, it appears that an
auditor at GAO could build a pretty good 20-year career out of simply
tracking the weather satellite program, and that is a sorry state of
affairs.
The group that sits before us today is not responsible for the
mess. Rather, we are counting on them to get us out of a mess they
inherited. It is our job to probe the answers they offer, assess
whether the programs appear robust, and offer whatever advice and
support we can to get these satellites launched and operating. Believe
me, if we could have halted these acquisitions, we would have. But
these satellites, and the instruments that are to fly on them, are too
important to our Nation to abandon this program.
I want to come away from this hearing with an understanding that
there is solid planning going on to fill any data gaps. I want a firmer
grasp of where remaining risks lie in each of these programs, and I
want to know there are reasonable strategies for dealing with those
risks. In short, I want to leave with confidence that the manangement
teams runnning the JPSS and GOES-R satellite programs are up to the
challenge.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, I want to express my hope that we not
leap to conclusions--either good or bad--about either of these
programs. We should be cautious about these programs, but it appears
that nothing staff learned in preparing for this hearing and nothing in
GAO's testimony leads us to condemn either program or to conclude that
things are off the tracks again. I thank the witnesses for being here
today, and I look forward to your testimony.

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Tonko. Appreciate that, and
I agree with you. I am not sure if we are off track. I sure
hope not, and I think we--it is one of the most bipartisan
Committees in this very bipartisan overall Full Committee, and
I appreciate that. I just want to get some information. I think
both sides want to do just the same.
Just as we are going to do with the question-and-answer
period, we will recognize not only the Chairs and Ranking
Members of both Subcommittees before we go to the rest of the
Members of the Committees, as I mentioned earlier we will--I
will now recognize Dr. Andy Harris from Maryland for his
statement.
Mr. Harris. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon. I
would like to thank the witnesses for joining us to discuss
NOAA's environmental satellite issues.
This is the second hearing we have had on NOAA's satellites
in this Congress alone, and I understand this Committee has had
many more over the past several Congresses. With this much
oversight, we typically hope to see some improvement, and in
some areas we have. However, with every step forward it seems
we are taking two steps back.
The launch of the NPP satellite last October was certainly
an achievement, and NOAA and NASA are to be applauded for the
successful launch. But the satellite was five years late, and
some of the instruments are not working as well as they should
be. The contracts for the Joint Polar Satellite System, JPSS,
have finally been transferred from its predecessor program, and
NASA and NOAA are making progress. But the threat of a data gap
remains, the cost of the program has increased by $1 billion,
squeezing funds available for important ground- and air-based
weather systems.
The Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite or
GOES Program moves along, but NOAA is burning through its
funding reserves quicker than anticipated, and risk has still
not been reduced. Today we will be told that there is a
possibility of a GOES gap right around the same time as the
possibility of a JPSS gap. As we learned in an Energy and
Environment Subcommittee hearing several months ago, the
majority of the data used in weather prediction models by the
National Weather Service comes from satellite data. The
prospects of a JPSS coverage gap is troubling enough in itself,
but the possibility of a concurrent gap in GOES coverage
represents a truly scary scenario that significantly threatens
U.S. lives and property.
Given these difficulties, perhaps it is time for us to seek
a new paradigm for procuring data for weather forecasting. The
current procurement process may simply not be working, and time
is running out, but to date there appears little interest in
pursuing alternative solutions. While there are no easy answers
to this dilemma and the choices we make will require a
significant effort and evaluation, we must accept that the
status quo cannot continue.
Again, I thank the witnesses for being here with us today.
I look forward to an informative discussion, and I yield back
the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harris follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee on Energy and Environment Chairman
Andy Harris

Good afternoon. I would like to thank the witnesses for joining us
to discuss NOAA's environmental satellite issues.
This is the second hearing we have had on NOAA satellites in this
Congress alone, and I understand this Committee has had many more over
the past several Congresses. With this much oversight, we would
typically hope to see some improvement. And in some areas, we have.
However, with every step forward, it seems we are taking two steps
back.
The launch of the NPP satellite last October was certainly an
achievement, and NOAA and NASA are to be applauded for the successful
launch. But the satellite was five years late, and some of the
instruments are not working as well as they should be.
The contracts for the Joint Polar Satellite System (JPSS) have
finally been transferred from its predecessor program, and NASA and
NOAA are making progress. But the threat of a data gap remains, and the
cost of the program has increased by $1 billion, squeezing funds
available for important ground- and air-based weather systems.
The Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite, or GOES,
program, is moving along, but NOAA is burning through its funding
reserves quicker than anticipated, and risk has still not been reduced.
Today we will be told that there is a possibility of a GOES gap,
right around the same time as the possibility of a JPSS gap. As we
learned in an Energy and Environment Subcommittee hearing several
months ago, the majority of the data used in weather prediction models
by the Nationl Weather Service comes from satellite data. The prospect
of a JPSS coverage gap is troubling enough in itself, but the
possibility of a concurrent gap in GOES coverage presents a truly scary
scenario that significantly threatens U.S. lives and property.
Given these difficulties, perhaps it is time for us to seek a new
paradigm when procuring data for weather forecasting. The current
procurement process is simply not working, and time is running out, but
to date there appears to be little interest in pursuing alternative
solutions. While there are no easy answers to this dilemma, and the
choices we make will require significant effort and evaluation, we must
accept that the status quo cannot continue.
Again, I thank the witnesses for being here with us today, and I
look forward to an informative discussion.

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Dr. Harris.
The Chair now recognizes my good friend from North
Carolina, Mr. Miller, for five minutes.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Chairman Broun. I want to thank both
Chairs of the Subcommittees for holding the hearing today on
two satellite programs; JPSS and GOES-R, that have
unfortunately been a central part of this committee's oversight
responsibility for years. I say unfortunately because the
attention of oversight does not gravitate to programs that are
running smoothly. It gravitates to programs that are a problem,
and these programs had been a problem. Although they need to
work. Though seldom the headline grabber, it is hard to
overstate the importance of satellite programs for the lives of
Americans. The daily life.
Satellite-based weather, inclement forecasts tell us
whether to carry an umbrella on any given day, where to fly
planes, what crops to plant, whether to run our power plant,
how to plan military missions, when to take cover from deadly
storms. When they work, when we get timely and accurate
information, we are safer and more prosperous, but when
satellite programs falter, we find that lives, property,
infrastructure, and economic health are at risk.
During my tenure as Chairman of the Investigation Oversight
Subcommittee of the Science Committee, we kept a very close eye
on these two programs, particularly the Joint Polar Satellite
System, or JPSS, recognizing that poor management and wasteful
spending put more than federal jobs and money at stake. Until
recently we have been profoundly disappointed, and even now the
data gap that threatens our forecasting capabilities is just
inexcusable.
But today I am cautiously optimistic that we are finally on
the right path, that the Administration has put into--the work
that the Administration has put into reorganizing and rescoping
JPSS has put that program on a new path to mission success.
Time will tell, but until then, until time does tell us, we
will focus on the real and viable options we will need to use
in order to get us through a difficult period.
At the same time, we have to keep a watchful eye on NOAA's
progress on the Geostationary Operational Environmental
Satellite System, R Series, or GOES-R, from their stations
above the Equator that GOES satellite tracks weather across the
western hemisphere. While the GOES program has not suffered
from the same mismanagement and mistakes that have plagued the
Polar Satellite Program, we have seen that preliminary cost
estimates for these satellites have doubled, and as a result,
NOAA has found it necessary to cut in half the number of
satellites that are--that they have ordered.
Even so, we remain cautious to ensure that this program
remains within budget and on schedule. And I don't claim to
know how much a weather satellite should cost. I don't, in my
normal life, buy satellites.
As with JPSS, we need to take a hard look at the necessary
funding levels and reserves required to keep overall costs down
and the project online.
I look forward to hearing our witnesses from GAO again,
NOAA, and NASA, to discuss how these relevant agencies can keep
these programs on track and in the process fulfill the promise
of keeping Americans safer and our economy more efficient and
productive.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee on Energy and Environment Ranking
Member Brad Miller

I want to thank both Chairs of the Subcommittees for holding
today's hearing on two satellite programs--JPSS and GOES-R--that have
been central to our Committee's oversight responsibilities for years.
Though seldom the headline grabber, it is hard to overstate the
effect that satellite programs have on the life of Americans. For
instance, satellite-based weather and climate forecasts tell us not
only how to dress for the day, but also where to fly airplanes, what
crops to plant, when to run our power plants, how to plan military
missions, and when to take cover from deadly storms. When they are more
timely and accurate, we are more prosperous and safer. When satellite
programs falter, we put lives, property, infrastructure, and our
economic health at risk.
But today, I am cautiously optimistic that the work the
Administration put into reorganizing and rescoping JPSS has put the
project on a new path to mission success. Time will tell. But until
then, we should focus on the real and viable options we will need to
use in order to get us through a difficult period.
At the same time, we have to keep a watchful eye on NOAA's progress
on the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite System-R
series, or GOES-R. From their stations above the Equator, the GOES
system tracks weather across the western hemisphere.
While the GOES program has not suffered from the same mismanagement
and mistakes that have plagued the polar satellite program, we have
seen the preliminary cost estimate for these satellites double and, as
a result, NOAA found it necessary to cut in half the number of
satellites to be ordered. Even so, we remain cautious to ensure this
program remains within budget and on schedule.
As with JPSS, we need to take a hard look at the necessary funding
levels and reserves required to keep overall costs down and the project
on time.
I look forward to hearing our witnesses from GAO, NOAA, and NASA
discuss how the relevant agencies can keep these programs on track and,
in the process, fulfill their promise of keeping Americans safer and
our economy more efficient and productive.

Chairman Broun. Thank you very much, Mr. Miller. I thought
you went out and bought satellites every week or so.
Mr. Miller. That was just bread and milk.
Chairman Broun. Oh. Okay. Well, I just was confused, I
guess.
At this time, I would like to introduce our first panel of
witnesses. The first witness is the Honorable Kathryn Sullivan,
Dr. Sullivan, Ph.D., the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for
Environmental Observation and Prediction and the Deputy
Administrator at NOAA. Our second witness is Mr. Marcus
Watkins, the Director of the Joint Agency Satellite Division at
NASA, and our final witness is Mr. David A. Powner, the
Director of Information Technology Management Issues for the
GAO. I thank you all for being here.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each, after which Members of the Committee have
five minutes each to ask questions. Your written testimony will
be included in the record of the hearing. Because of the
importance and the complexity of the issues before us today, I
will allow you to go over five minutes if you need to. If you
can make it within five minutes, please do so, and I am very
proud of my colleagues for keeping theirs under five minutes. I
was slightly over, I think.
It is the practice of the Subcommittee on Investigations
and Oversight to receive testimony under oath, and we will use
that practice today as well.
Do any of you have an objection to taking an oath?
Okay. Let the record reflect that the witnesses were all
willing to take the oath by saying no and shaking their head
from side to side, indicating such also.
You also may be represented by counsel. Do any of you have
counsel here today?
All three, again, indicated shaking their head and saying
no, so let the record reflect such, that the witnesses do not
have counsel.
Now, if you would please stand and raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm to tell the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, so help you God?
You may be seated. Let the record reflect that all the
witnesses have taken the oath.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Kathryn Sullivan of
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Dr.
Sullivan, you have five minutes. Thank you, ma'am.

STATEMENT OF DR. KATHRYN SULLIVAN, PH.D.,

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR

ENVIRONMENTAL OBSERVATION AND PREDICTION,

AND DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR,

NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION

Dr. Sullivan. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairmen Broun and
Harris, Ranking Members Tonko, Miller, and Members of the
Subcommittees. You have my written statement. It gives you much
more detail. I would like this afternoon just to highlight a
few key points.
First, significant progress has been made in both the GOES-
R and JPSS Programs. GOES-R remains on schedule for launch in
the first quarter of fiscal year 2016. The Joint NOAA-NASA team
has a history of working extremely well together and
effectively. This has led to the completion of key program
milestones and substantial demonstrable progress towards that
launch date.
For JPSS substantial progress has also been made since I
last testified before this Committee, most notably as cited the
successful launch of the Suomi NPP Satellite. While there is
more work that needs to be done to reach comparable maturity to
the GOES-R Program, JPSS has come a long way.
Second, NOAA's priority is to maintain and improve the
accuracy and reliability of the life- and property-saving
weather forecasts, watches, and warnings that our Nation
depends upon. To do this we must maintain schedule and costs so
that each satellite is ready for launch as close to the end of
its predecessor's life as possible, ideally before. Meeting
this priority requires established and stable requirements,
strong, effective management with rigorous and dependent
checks, and stable funding. We have achieved the stable
requirements. We are committed to strong, effective management.
We have independent checks in place, and we are working hand in
hand with this Committee to assure the funding remains as
stable as possible in this challenging fiscal environment.
Nobody cares about the products these satellites provide
and the services they support more than NOAA. They are
essential to our own mission performance and important to a
very long list of government, private sector, and academic
customers. As every successful business owner knows, it is
essential to understand your customer in order to assure that
you are meeting their needs. NOAA is the critical link between
operational satellite observations and our users, and
continuity of service is the most important thing we can do.
I would like to just illustrate briefly, if I may, some of
the progress that the systems we are bringing online will
support. One of our GOES satellites is currently watching
Tropical Depression Debby, monitoring her every move and
helping our forecasters predict where she will go next so they,
in turn, can help emergency managers prepare.
I have brought some images along, and staff will provide
them to you in hard copy, from relevant current events that
demonstrates some of the advances that Suomi NPP is already
providing to our forecasters and their emergency management
partners. These are specifically some images from the Visible/
Infrared Radiometer Suite or VIIRS. We have one that shows
fires that are currently active in Colorado, Wyoming, and
demonstrate the capability of VIIRS to not only see
temperatures associated with wildfires far more intense than
those that we could do before but also locate them more
accurately on the ground to aid responders.
We also have some images of Hurricane Debby or Tropical
Storm Debby that show the sort of detail on storm intensity
that, again, the higher resolution and greater bands in the
VIIRS imager will provide.
Turning now to some highlights of the progress in each of
the programs, the GOES-R Series Program is on schedule and on
budget for launching its first satellite in the first quarter
of fiscal '16. Over the last year, some of the notable
milestones achieved include successful completion of the
mission and preliminary design review, passage of the key
decision point approval to move toward mission critical design,
successful completion of the instrument, spacecraft, and core
ground segment critical design reviews. Good progress on
construction of the ground antenna and our command and data
acquisition sites, the selection of the launch service
provider, which was completed this past April.
GOES-R remains within a solid lifecycle cost, and we are
committed to maintaining that $10.8 billion figure. This
includes development, launch, operations, and sustainment for
four GOES Series spacecraft R, S, T, and U, plus the
instruments and running them through 2036, as well as
development of the ground system and procurement of the launch.
Last year, when I appeared before you to discuss the JPSS
Program, we were still in the formulation phase. The transition
from NPOESS, I believe, is now behind us. We have the proper
program management in place, and the teams are working well
together.
Again, major milestones have been achieved this past year,
the launch and successful operations of Suomi NPP have been
noted. We are already using Suomi NPP data operationally today
at seven months post-launch, three times faster than has been
achieved before. We have, we believe, a sound program office
estimate for lifecycle costs and independent reviews,
independent review teams in place, and we are proceeding
towards the first key decision point in July of next year. This
is the point in which, according to formal NASA practice, we
will have a full detailed baseline for you.
I am confident the cost and schedule presented in the
President's FY 2013 budget are sound, and they will support a
successful program. This $12.9 billion figure retains the same
instrument suite as was outlined in the February 2010,
restructure decision. It includes over $4.3 billion in sunk
costs that covered NOAA's contributions to NPP and the
development of the instruments and ground systems, and the
remaining will fund instruments to support two JPSS spacecraft,
free flyer accommodations for instruments that cannot fit on
that footprint, launch vehicles, the development of an updated
ground system, and sustainment and operations through 2028.
As GAO points out and you all have noted, despite this
progress we still face a gap in coverage. We agree with the
GAO's recommendation to formally document our long-hailed and
well-defined practices of using all available assets that can
help mitigate such a gap and being ready to ingest the data
from these sources. Our prime strategy remains to leverage any
remaining capabilities of existing on-orbit assets from NOAA
and to use our partnerships with international nations.
Finally, I would like to thank your Committees for their
continued interest and support of NOAA satellite programs. With
NASA as our acquisition agent and partner in these programs, we
are on track and headed for success. We have strong and
seasoned managers at the helm. They are supported by a
dedicated and talented team of technical professionals. We have
reaffirmed our international partnerships for the JPSS Program,
and all parties are moving forward to meet their commitments.
We take our life and property protecting mission very, very
seriously. Our commitment to you to ensure that the progress we
have seen in this past year continues, that these programs stay
on schedule and on budget to deliver for our Nation, is rooted
in our commitment to NOAA's mission for the country.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify to you here today.
I look forward to our discussion, and I appreciate the extra
time, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Sullivan follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.029

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Dr. Sullivan. Appreciate your
testimony.
Now I recognize our next witness, Mr. Marcus Watkins of
NASA. Mr. Watkins, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. MARCUS WATKINS, DIRECTOR,

JOINT AGENCY SATELLITE DIVISION,

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Watkins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear here today to share information regarding the NASA role
in and commitment to NOAA's Joint Polar Satellite System (JPSS)
and NOAA's Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite R
Series (GOES-R ) Program.
JPSS----
Chairman Broun. Could you pull your microphone slightly
closer?
Mr. Watkins. Is that better, sir? Okay. JPSS and GOES-R are
critical to the Nation's weather forecasting system, climate
monitoring, and research activities. NASA and NOAA have been
partners for over 40 years in developing the Nation's polar and
geosynchronous weather satellites. With the President's
direction in 2010, NASA and NOAA returned to the successful
partnership for JPSS. Since that time the NASA Program
Management Office was established, and it is nearly fully
staffed.
In addition, NOAA and NASA have established joint program
management counsels to oversee the NOAA portfolio of satellites
and have integrated their decision-making processes to
efficiently and effectively manage this cooperative activity.
Over the last two years, the NASA and NOAA teams have
strengthened their working relationship.
I am pleased to report that the NASA and NOAA team
completed development of National Polar-Orbiting Partership
(NPP), and it was successfully launched on October 28, 2011.
Activation and initial checkout are now complete, and the JPSS
Program has assumed operational control of the satellite, now
renamed the Suomi National Polar-Orbiting Partnership. While
Suomi NPP was not intended to be used as an operational asset,
NOAA will be using Suomi NPP data in its operational weather
forecasting models.
As a measure of how well the Suomi NPP mission is
progressing, NOAA meteorologists are already using data
products from the ATMS instrument in their weather forecasts,
and we are getting excellent performance from the VIIRS
instrument as well.
NASA, as NOAA's acquisition agent, now controls all of the
JPSS instrument, spacecraft, and ground system contracts. The
first JPSS satellite, JPSS-1, will essentially be a copy of
Suomi NPP with upgrades to meet the JPSS level one
requirements. Assuming full funding of the President's FY 2013
budget request for NOAA, it is anticipated that JPSS-1 will be
ready to launch before the end of the second quarter of FY
2017, close to five years after the October launch of Suomi
NPP.
In addition, the GOES-R Series Program of four
geosynchronous satellites, continues to make progress towards
launching GOES-R, the first satellite of the series in the
first quarter of FY 2016. Again, assuming full funding the
President's budget, the program completed its preliminary
design review phase, and the GOES-R Series flight project
conducted a successful critical design review for the
spacecraft and awarded launch vehicle task orders to United
Launch Services for the GOES-R and GOES-S missions, which will
be launched on Atlas V-41 series launch vehicles.
Additionally, all flight instruments' critical design
reviews are complete, and all of the flight instruments are in
flight hardware, fabrication, integration, or tests.
Once again, thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
I appreciate the support of this Committee and the Congress for
these critical programs and would be pleased to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Watkins follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.032

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Watkins. Appreciate your
testimony.
And now our final witness is Mr. David Powner of the
Government Accountability Office. Mr. Powner, you have five
minutes. Thank you, sir.

STATEMENT OF MR. DAVID A. POWNER, DIRECTOR,

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT ISSUES,

GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Powner. Chairman Broun, Chairman Harris, Ranking
Members Tonko, Ranking Member Miller, and Members of the
Subcommittees, we appreciate the opportunity to testify this
afternoon on the JPSS and GOES-R Programs.
Starting with JPSS, this nearly $13 billion acquisition is
proceeding along with a planned launch date of the first
satellite by March 2017. This afternoon I would like to provide
an overview of progress to date, the program's current cost
estimate, key risks to the program, and potential gaps in data
satellite continuity.
Starting with progress. NPP, the planned demonstration
satellite now used for operations, was successfully launched in
October 2011, and the instruments were commissioned by March
2012. NOAA has made good progress transferring management and
contracting responsibilities from the old NPOESS Program. Also,
solid development has occurred on all five sensors associated
with the first satellite. Specifically, all five are at least
60 percent complete, and two are 85 percent complete.
Last September when I testified before you, the overall
program cost was $11.9 billion. After recent reconciliations of
various cost estimates, the program determined that the new
cost estimate should be about $14.6 billion, an increase of
$2.7 billion from last year's hearing. In working with OMB,
NOAA officials told us that they expect the program to be
funded at roughly $900 million a year, but that OMB placed a
lifecycle cap on the program at $12.9 billion.
Therefore, the program faced a funding gap of $1.7 billion,
and our report being released today highlights options NOAA was
considering to address this nearly $2 billion funding gap,
which included removing certain sensors.
To its credit, NOAA has recently made some tough decisions
to address this funding gap. At a high level, their plan is to
take a more effective approach to the operations and
maintenance phase and to fly three sensors on other satellites.
This approach to a ride-share arrangement with the three
sensors clearly helps reduce program costs but, like most
options, has tradeoffs. In this case, this approach raises
schedule risks since the launch dates are no longer in the
hands of the JPSS Program.
Other risks to the program reside with the launch vehicle.
No decision has yet been made on which launch vehicle will be
used.
Finally, turning to potential gaps in satellite data, we
continue to be concerned about the afternoon orbit and
highlight a potential 17-month gap if NPP lasts five years and
the JPSS hits its March 2017 launch date. In our opinion, this
is the best-case scenario. If NPP lasts less than five years
and if JPSS launch date slip, this gap could be greater.
We also highlight continuity concerns for the first time
regarding DOD's early morning orbit and the European midmorning
orbit. For example, the follow-on European satellite may no
longer be supported with NOAA-funded sensors due to constrained
budgets. Given these concerns, we have recommended that NOAA
establish mitigation plans for pending satellite gaps for all
three orbits. NOAA plans to issue a report by August to address
this recommendation.
In summary, NOAA and NASA continue to make progress on
JPSS. However, three areas deserve Congressional oversight.
First, how NOAA and NASA operate within the $12.9 cap, how the
ride-share arrangement proceeds with certain sensors since
significant cost savings is associated with this approach, and
third, how the satellite constellation, all three orbits, will
be effectively managed to ensure critical weather and climate
data.
Next, I would like to turn to the GOES-R Program. This
nearly $11 billion acquisition is proceeding toward an October
15 launch date for its first satellite. What I would like to do
is highlight progress to date on GOES, the program's cost
profile, including use of management reserves, and observations
on the program's schedule and launch dates.
Before I get into these specifics, I would like to clarify
the scope of the GOES-R Program. Originally it was a four-
satellite program in 2006 that was to cost about $11 billion.
So the program eliminated a key sensor and dropped two
satellites, among other things, to keep the cost around $7.7
billion.
So, for about five years, we had a fairly stable program,
two satellites at $7.7 billion. As part of the fiscal year 2012
budget request, NOAA added the two satellites back and
increased the lifecycle cost to $10.9 billion, so we are back
to where we were in 2006; four satellites costing about $11
billion.
Starting with progress, the program has completed
preliminary design reviews for the flight and ground segments
and for the program overall. The program is to have its
critical design review in August, meaning that all designs are
complete and that the program overall is ready for full-scale
development.
Regarding costs, the program continues to operate within
the $7.7 billion lifecycle cost for the first two satellites.
This is the case despite the fact that in our report, we
highlight cost increases associated with sensors, the
spacecraft, and the ground components over the last two years
that tally about $750 million. Most notably the Advanced
Baseline Imager (ABI) grew $148 million, and the ground segment
grew nearly $300 million.
Despite this contractor cost growth, the program has been
able to operate within the $7.7 billion overall estimate by
using management reserves. Initially the bucket tallied $1.7
billion, and it is now down to about $1.2 billion.
A few points here on management reserves. Thirty percent
have recently been used and significant development remains.
Two-thirds of the development for the spacecraft and the ground
segments remains. In addition, during the course of our review,
we found that the transparency associated with the use of and
the remaining balance of the reserves was not where it needed
to be, and we made associated recommendations to address that.
Turning to schedule and launch dates, first, some of the
key design reviews were late. We also performed a detailed
review of the spacecraft, ground segment, and two sensors. Our
review exposed some questions with the current schedules and
raised some questions ultimately about the October 2015, launch
date.
In addition, NOAA risk logs identify schedule risks
associated with the key sensor and also with the flight and
ground segments, and finally, NOAA's own assessment claims that
there is only a 48 percent confidence level that the program
will meet its October 2015, launch date. We made
recommendations to address these concerns, Mr. Chairman.
In summary, to date the GOES-R Program has been able to
operate within the cost estimate of $7.7 billion and the
current schedule by effectively using cost and schedule
reserves. More transparency is needed on the use of the
reserves. In addition, questions about the reliability of the
program schedule and their own assessment show that the October
2015, launch date could slip.
This concludes my statement. I would be pleased to respond
to questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Powner follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.054

Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Powner, and I thank the
whole panel for your testimony.
Reminding Members the Committee rules limit questioning to
five minutes each. Ordinarily, the Chair would open the first
round of questions, but I am going to defer to the Full
Committee Chair, Mr. Hall, to begin the first round of
questions.
Mr. Hall, you are recognized for five minutes.
Chairman Hall. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
I, you know, the Senate proposed--I think the Senate
Commerce, Justice, and Science Appropriations Subcommittee
proposed--in some report language to transfer funding for
weather satellite acquisition from NOAA to NASA, and I am as
bad as Mr. Miller about not knowing what a satellite might
cost. I remember one time when I left the Texas Judge's seat in
my little hometown to go to Austin to take on a job as a state
senator; our kids had to change schools, and my wife and I both
assured them we would help them with their schoolwork, and the
first week they studied how much was the national debt. And it
got my little kid in trouble because he gave them the answer I
gave him; a hell of a lot, he said. That wasn't what the
teacher was looking for, but maybe Mr. Miller and I might know
that a satellite costs a hell of a lot.
But the Senate proposed to transfer the weather satellite
from NOAA to NASA. I guess my question is, is this going to
result in cost savings? I ask Dr. Sullivan that. She might have
one answer and maybe Mr. Watkins might have another, and I
might have another, but--and you don't have to answer that now
but in a minute--will this result in any efficiencies, or will
it streamline management? Will it increase the likelihood of
the program's success by meeting mission requirements on
schedule and within budget?
Would you like to answer that, Dr. Sullivan? Do you have an
opinion on that, probably?
Dr. Sullivan. The Administration is taking the Senate's
proposal very seriously, Mr. Hall, and is analyzing potential
impacts in all of those areas and the points that the Senate
highlighted in their proposal. We don't have an official
position from the Administration yet, so I can't give you
details of those considerations.
We share the Senate's concerns about growth in the program
costs and the consequences that this has had on other elements
of NOAA's budget, so we certainly appreciate where they are
coming from on this and are working very diligently to look at
the possible impacts, assess the places where they assert there
will be savings, and look at the things we hold as priorities:
mission assurance, management stability and effectiveness, and
maximum continuity of data.
Chairman Hall. That is the sound of a good soldier. What is
your real opinion? If you want to give it. If you don't, I
understand.
Dr. Sullivan. Well, I have highlighted the areas where I
would focus my analysis on, and I'm a scientist, so, you know,
I would go with the analysis of what we think impacts in those
areas might be, and we were sharing those with the
appropriators and with the Administration.
Chairman Hall. Mr. Watkins.
Mr. Watkins. Yes, sir. We have been working with the
Administration, again, to assess the Senate's proposal. At this
point in time that continues to go on. Again, we, too, would
want to make sure that we are able to maintain overall
schedules and the concerns of getting these critical space
assets in space as soon as possible.
Chairman Hall. Okay. I guess--your answer is not no, and it
is not yes. I guess can we expect the Administration to take
any position on this, on a change like this, and if so, when
would it happen?
Mr. Watkins. Sir, I don't know the answer to that question.
It's my understanding that the Administration has taken this
under advisement, and their process is ongoing.
Chairman Hall. Once again I give an illustration in my own
life. I went before a big company to borrow a lot of money one
time, and they said, Mr. Hall, we will listen to your ignorant
proposal with an open mind, and that is kind of what I am
getting here. You must have an opinion, both of you, on that.
You work for NOAA, you work for NASA, you are high up there.
The proposed transfer is not a trivial thing, and I just
got about 40 more seconds. I guess my question is why hasn't
the Administration, why have they been silent, and can we
expect them to take a position? The proposal is not trivial.
The satellite program represents a significant portion of
NOAA's overall budget. Let's also not forget that NASA also has
its hands full already with its own acquisition problems as the
GAO listed on its high-risk series. In the decision also the
program of such a domestic fashion should be fully reviewed by
the authorizing committees. While I share the Senate's
frustrations in these programs, I hope that this decision is
not made in the backroom as always, and I am committed to
working with the Administration some, as much as I possibly
can, and the Senate and my House colleagues to ensure that our
Nation maintains its critical weather forecasting capabilities.
It is very important.
My time is up, and I yield back.
Chairman Broun. Thank you, Chairman Hall. I now recognize
my Ranking Member, Mr. Tonko from New York, for five minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. The odds are extremely
high that there will be a gap in data between the end of NPP's
productive life and the time that JPSS-1 can be launched and
data brought online. In fact, the NPP may not even last the
projected five years for which we are looking. As a result, we
need a clear plan for how to cope with the data gap, so to
speak, a gap that may start sooner rather than later.
Dr. Sullivan, what is NOAA's plan for filling that gap, and
who have you assigned to manage the effort to identify other
data sources and ensure that the data we can get will work
seamlessly in our weather prediction models?
Dr. Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Tonko, for that question. Our
mission to deliver accurate and life and property protecting
forecasts is one that we take extremely seriously, and so I can
assure you that no one is more concerned about and working
harder on this gap than my colleagues and I at NOAA do.
You have asked the single most common question we receive
from Congress, from our weather enterprise stakeholders, that I
ask myself, and if I had a silver-bullet answer to magically
fix it, I assure you I would give it to you. There is no easy
direct substitute on orbit, just go get it, for the data of the
precision and the accuracy and the compatibility that JPSS is
designed to provide.
What we are doing and we are working very hard at this, we
have been renewing and reconfirming written and firm
commitments with international partners for mutual aid. These
are arrangements akin to utility companies mutual aid
arrangements in the time of a storm. We have used such
arrangements in the past in instances where we had temporary
outages of a GOES satellite back in March of 2010 I believe it
was and years prior when other nations have had more extended
gaps in their geostationary coverage.
So we are working those, we are ensuring they are in place.
We have good understanding of the technical characteristics of
many of those data streams. Many of them we use as
complementary data to improve the forecasts off of our core
data streams today.
We have begun the efforts with our modeling centers and our
weather service to look at what technical changes would be
needed if we did need to and wish to take data streams in that
we don't commonly. I would cite one there. The Defense
Department's satellite has a microwave imager sounder, the data
from which we don't commonly use. It has noise characteristics
and bias that are not suitable for our normal weather models.
We have worked hard over the last year to whittle those down
and understand how we could accommodate those. That has
shortened the time frame, the runway it would take to
incorporate those data. We will continue such efforts.
The GAO rightfully, we believe, points out that these plans
should be better documented. That is a fair comment. We will
deliver on that. They rightly point out that it is not enough
just to list out a roster of things one might do. We really
need to take the positive steps as your question is
suggesting----
Mr. Tonko. Uh-huh.
Dr. Sullivan [continuing]. To be sure that we are
technically ready as well, and we are beginning on that work
and will document it appropriately.
Mr. Tonko. And who is leading that, who is taking that
effort up?
Dr. Sullivan. Our international partnership work and the
overall effort for gap assessment is being led by our Associate
Administrator for NESDIS, Mary Kicza, and we have as I alluded
to, colleagues within both our algorithm shops and the National
Weather Service engaged as well. And I assure you I keep a
close eye on it.
Mr. Tonko. Uh-huh, and Mr. Powner, do you have any comment
or views on this matter?
Mr. Powner. Well, clearly we would like to see those plans
documented. A couple thoughts here, though. One is the one
thing that NOAA and NASA do control is keeping JPSS launch date
where it currently is. You need to keep that on track, because
if that slips more, the gap becomes even greater. So that is
one thing you need to really focus on keenly.
The other thing is with NPP over the next year as you look
at calibration and validation activities, there might be a
greater indication on how long NPP will last. So the key is to
try to get NPP to last as long as you can, and that picture
should become clearer when you go through calibration and
validation, but you really need to keep that first JPSS-1 on
track.
Mr. Tonko. Uh-huh.
Dr. Sullivan. Mr. Tonko, I would just add, we completely
agree with that. I thought your question was directed more
towards alternative data streams. I endorse my colleague's
comments.
Mr. Tonko. Okay. Thank you, and Mr. Powner, you have seen a
lot of program teams come and go, and do you have a view on the
current JPSS Program Manager and team that you would be willing
to share?
Mr. Powner. Yeah. I think there is strong program
management there. We have seen many program managers over the
years testifying before this Committee, and clearly when you
look at where the program is now, it is in a much better
position than where it has been in the past, and when you look
at the aggressive mitigation of risk, one of the key things to
highlight, the $1.7 million--billion funding gap to get down to
the cap on the program is being aggressively worked by the
program. Those plans make sense right now. Obviously we need to
see more details, but I think the aggressive management of risk
has been where we want it.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Chairman Broun. Thank you, Mr. Tonko. Now I recognize my
colleague from Maryland, Dr. Harris.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Broun. You have five minutes.
Mr. Harris. As I indicated in my opening statement, you
know, the status quo with respect to weather satellite programs
may simply not be a sustainable option, and a question we
should be asking and exploring is to what alternative options
we have.
To that end, I would like to enter into the record a piece
by University of Washington Atmospheric Scientist Cliff Mass,
entitled, ``Weather-X.''
Chairman Broun. And without objection.
[The information may be found in Appendix 2.]
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much. Dr. Mass makes the
argument that NOAA should consider pursuing a model similar to
that which NASA pursued with SpaceX. Mass argues that the
weather data necessary for forecasts could be provided by a
private company that could build, launch, and maintain the
satellites.
Dr. Sullivan, what is NOAA's philosophy towards the type of
alternative private model that Dr. Mass has suggested?
Dr. Sullivan. Well, I would say I have not read the blog
post in detail, Dr. Harris, so I can't comment on the
particulars that are sited there. In general, my posture would
be that innovative ideas deserve careful exploration.
My administrator just testified before another committee at
this chamber last week about the desirability and the
importance of the Weather Service, as indeed all of NOAA, being
resilient and adaptable for the changes that are coming ahead
and the changes in our customer base and the demands for our
products and services, the changes of our challenges of our
fiscal times. So those are important attributes for any
organization to have.
Mr. Harris. Sure, and I understand there are private sector
models of this type currently being proposed to NOAA. At a
hearing earlier this year, we heard from a company proposing to
launch a hyperspectral sounder that would provide dramatically
improved severe storm forecasting capability, and with that in
mind, could you be specific about how NOAA is evaluating these
proposals? I mean, who is in charge of these evaluations, and
how specifically they would go forward if they could?
Dr. Sullivan. Well, I think there are two different
characteristics there. The proposal that I understand was
brought to us with respect to that hyperspectral instrument was
that we procure the instrument or the data from it as a
substitute for current data. Our environmental satellite
service organization in concert with the National Weather
Service evaluate those proposals to determine the suitability
of data and the judged reliability, feasibility of the proposal
in terms of technical maturity and cost reliability and the
estimates. All satellites and all instruments are very easy in
Power Point. Most are much harder in actuality, so we look for
some evidence that we have got a viable path.
To my mind, the SpaceX type model is an altogether
different thing. If the proposal is that a third party actually
set their standards, set their targets, and decide to go do
something and open a new market, which is, in a nutshell, my
understanding of the SpaceX proposal, and as I think we have
seen NASA do, one applies a very different posture to a
proposal like that. We have not had such a one come before us
at NOAA. I think we would take a similar kind of posture.
Weather forecasting to protect the lives and livelihoods of
Americans is not the same commodity as tickets to ride. So the
details might well turn out differently.
Mr. Harris. Okay, but there is some method. I mean, is
someone, for instance, is there someone actively pursuing the--
or investigating this Weather-X proposal? I mean, is there any
discussion at NOAA at all about the potential for
commercialization as NASA has done with SpaceX?
Dr. Sullivan. I am not aware that----
Mr. Harris. Not as an individual effort. You are waiting to
be reactive, not proactive about it.
Dr. Sullivan. I wouldn't characterize it that way, Dr.
Harris. We interrogate and interact with the private sector
abundantly. As you know, there is a very vibrant private sector
weather enterprise that has privatized the dissemination
portion of the enterprise. It used to be, once upon a time,
government as well. We engage with potential providers of
launch services and instruments quite frequently. We put an RFQ
out in 2008, prior to letting instrument contracts for JPSS to
take extra care and be sure there were not candidate providers
we had overlooked.
So I think we are more active than your question suggests.
I just don't know if anyone yet has seen the Weather-X blog. It
had not been brought to my attention until your question.
Mr. Harris. Well, it will be in the record so they can see
if they--I would hope that someone would be, you know, watching
something, again, by university scientists being published.
Even if it is in a blog.
At the same prior hearing on NOAA weather data, a panel of
outside experts all recommended that NOAA undertake an
observing system simulation experiment, an OSSE, which I hope
you are familiar with the concept, which would quantitatively
evaluate different capabilities and options to determine the
best mix of systems that NOAA should pursue.
Now, absent one--an OSSE--NOAA is basing its weather data
planning mostly on subjective opinions.
So, Dr. Sullivan, when will NOAA finally undertake an OSSE
on these systems?
Dr. Sullivan. We agree with the characterization of OSSEs
as a highly rigorous and very good way to assess total
ensembles of observing systems. We do use them, and we have
used them periodically in the past. We have neither the high-
performance computing capacity nor the manpower, frankly, to
devote to a standing large effort to run multiple OSSEs. That--
we are sort of rate limited in that step.
We did, as you know, I believe, conduct an OSSE or more
appropriately, an observing simulation experiment, to evaluate
the potential loss of data of weather forecasting in the
midlatitudes like the Snowmageddon example that I think we
spoke about at this hearing last year.
So we do them selectively. I am sure they will come into
play as we look at some of the gap mitigation strategies that
may lie before us. We would love to do, have the capacity to
do, more of them. They are an important and rigorous tool.
Mr. Harris. Well, thank you very much.
Chairman Broun. The Chairman's time has expired.
Mr. Miller, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I mentioned before we had many hearings in this Committee
on--or these Subcommittees on these programs but particularly
the JPSS Program and its predecessor program, the late
unlamented NPOESS Program. The hearings seem to have a familiar
pattern to them. We have someone from NOAA or NASA or other
government agencies saying these programs have been a big
problem, they have been messed up, but we are fixing it now,
things are on track now, and then we had Mr. Powner say, no,
no, they are still messing up, and he has always been right.
But I have heard, Mr. Powner, in your testimony today, I
heard terms I have never heard come from your mouth. Good
progress, solid development. Do you think that particularly the
JPSS is on track, and what are the remaining issues and risks?
What else can go wrong? In the past it has been true that
everything that could go wrong has, but do you think, what do
you think could still go wrong, and how much under control is
that?
Mr. Powner. Well, clearly it is a much better picture than
we testified on in the past, Ranking Member Miller. I think the
challenge, the couple of challenges that we see with JPSS is
operating within the $12.9 billion gap cap because the program
when you reconcile cost estimates, it was somewhere around
$14.6. So operating within that cap there is still that $1.7
billion delta. There is a plan to address that, but I think
that will be a challenge going forward.
In addition, associated with addressing that $1.7 billion
gap, this arrangement where you have a ride-share arrangement
with certain sensors, and you are flying them outside of the
JPSS Program, there is some big cost savings associated with
that, and I think it is important to keep an eye on that,
because that is where you are likely going to get the savings
is the way I see the current plan.
Mr. Miller. Okay. Dr. Sullivan, that may have sounded
mildly critical, but if you had been here before, you know that
was lavish praise.
How confident are you in that $12.9 billion figure for
lifecycle cost analysis? What are the risks of that not being
the right number or something going wrong?
Dr. Sullivan. Mr. Miller, I don't buy satellites every day,
either, but I have been around space systems a good bit. I
think that sounded right on the mark. These are complex
programs. They always need carefully watched. I never rested
easy until the wheels stopped on the runway after a mission,
and I don't intend to rest easy until we have got these systems
in orbit now as well.
So I think Mr. Powner has characterized things quite fairly
and quite properly. We will stay right on the bubble.
Having said that, I am confident that we have a solid
figure in the $12.9 billion number. The elements of work that
were done to move from the $14.6 down to the $12.9 I think were
solidly done. They capitalized on experience with NPP, as has
been mentioned earlier in questioning. They took some
conservative estimates that were based on unknowns and unproven
capabilities and performance, modified those downward. They
dove into remaining elements that were heritage legacy from the
ill-fated and never lamented NPOESS and scrubbed those back.
With respect to the ground system, as Mr. Powner has noted,
moved the ground system to a different set of architectures
that are less proprietary, more commercial, off the shelf,
modern network protocols.
So a lot of substantive technical things were done to stack
up that new estimate, and I have a strong confidence in it and
also very high and continued scrutiny.
Mr. Miller. Okay. Mr. Watkins, your testimony was also very
optimistic about the GOES-R Program, and it does sound like it
is on track, but it is the instruments that still have a ways
to go and developing them and integrating them, and we know
that that has frequently been a stage at which things can go
wrong.
What confidence do you have that the instruments included
like the lightning mapper, I have never bought a lightning
mapper either, will succeed and it will be on time and on
budget?
Mr. Watkins. I think one of the things that is critical is
that NOAA and NASA got started very early on with the
instrument developments, and the instruments, when you look
across satellite programs are usually the place where you begin
to run into the problems. And so I think the fact that they
started the instrument developments very early, the fact that
they had developed instrument prototypes, the instruments are
on the path to being completed on time. You mentioned the
lightning mapper. That is going to be the first time that we
actually will fly that instrument, and it, too, is progressing
along very well.
So we are confident in the approach that was taken with the
instrument developments and the ways in which they are
currently being managed.
Mr. Miller. Okay. My time has expired, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Harris. [Presiding] Thank you very much. I now
recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Rohrabacher, for
five minutes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Watkins and maybe Dr. Sullivan may have some insight on
this as well, how much money has just evaporated from the
NPOESS Program? What do we have? We have some things that are
left from this debacle that are worth something, but how much
can you say is an actual total loss of value for the American
taxpayer?
Mr. Watkins. Do you want me to--so where we are today, tied
to the NPOESS Program, approximately $4.3 billion has been
spent to date. Now, out of those resources we had the
development of instruments that are ultimately going to be
flying on----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay.
Mr. Watkins [continuing]. JPSS-1----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right.
Mr. Watkins [continuing]. Instruments that were, that are
flying on Suomi NPP, the fact that we had developed a ground
system that is actually being utilized today in order to
operate the Suomi NPP mission, and instrument developments
across the board, again, for JPSS-1.
So a lot of the costs that have been spent to date are
actually being utilized as part of the overall JPSS-1 Program.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right. That is the basis of my question.
How much have we lost? How much, I mean, it is not--there is no
loss at all? It is not really a debacle? It's an ideal program
or----
Mr. Watkins. No. Sir----
Mr. Rohrabacher. We have been told just the opposite, that
we are representing at least hundreds of millions of dollars,
if not billions of dollars of actual evaporation of wealth.
Mr. Watkins. Sir, we would have to take that under
advisement and get back to you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. That would be nice. Thank you very much.
Mr. Watkins. Okay. We will take that action.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Because I do recognize as you were
pointing out and people should understand while evaluating this
program, it is--of the $4 billion it is not all gone.
Mr. Watkins. No.
Mr. Rohrabacher. There is a large chunk of it which we will
use eventually, however, that doesn't necessarily make up for
the cost overrun concept here where it started at such a low
level and ended up escalating, I mean, over double was--as it
stands now when it could go up more.
Just a little bit about this Senate recommendation that
Chairman Hall brought up in terms of procurement of weather
satellites from going from NOAA to NASA rather than being this
joint system that created so much havoc with NPOESS. The
suggestion is is that we take this procurement decision-making
process out of the hands of NOAA and NASA and give it to NASA,
and that is what you didn't want to comment on until we got the
Administration come down with our policy, and it is perfectly
understandable. That is what you have to do.
But let me just ask about common sense here. NOAA is the
agency that utilizes this technology. NOAA is the one that is
going to utilize it, and doesn't it make sense that NOAA and
other agencies such as the Geological Survey, to assume a
greater role in actually procuring the equipment they need
rather than NASA, who is basically aimed at exploration and--of
space? Wouldn't it make sense to actually go the other
direction, that we are giving more rights to NOAA to make those
decisions rather than sharing it with NASA, which is not going
to be necessarily utilizing the equipment after it has already
been procured?
Dr. Sullivan. I think the logic you enunciate, Mr.
Rohrabacher, was some of the logic that drove the decision to
unwind the NPOESS Program to get end-mission responsibility
aligned as tightly as possible with fiscal resources and
program management. My colleagues at NASA appreciate the
importance of this mission to the country as well as we do. I
am confident that Congress in its wisdom does direct this
change.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I would think, I would hope that people
start looking at that because if we are going to transfer it
to, we are going to transfer authority and put some--and focus
authority, it should be on the people who are going to use the
system that they are ordering, and also it would again go to
the heart of the matter of let's have NASA focus on what it
does, which is space exploration, and let's have NOAA and
Geological Survey and others focus on their mission, which is
to look at the Earth. NASA's mission is not that.
One last thing, Mr. Chairman, with your permission, the--
another issue as brought up Chairman Harris during his
questions dealt with the privatization and looking at SpaceX as
a model, which will save the taxpayer enormous amounts of money
in the long run because it has proven successful or at least
now if it keeps proving itself successful. We--there are
equivalents in NOAA to this, and there are equivalent things in
most major agencies. If we are going to bring down this $1.5
trillion worth of deficit spending that we have every year, we
have got to find ways of making those type of savings as
represented by SpaceX.
And let me just note that NOAA has a fleet of ships in
order to transport their various programs and their various
missions around and determining what the weather is like. I
would see there would be an equivalency of SpaceX transporting
things into space and does a better job than just leaving it to
a government agency. I would say that there is also an
equivalency in NOAA that instead of maintaining a fleet, that
could be contracted out, and we would probably save money. I
know we looked at that several years ago, and we didn't have
the political will to move forward on that, but maybe the fact
that we are about ready to go under because of deficit spending
will encourage us to look at those type of alternatives.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much, and now I recognize the
gentlelady from California, Ms. Lofgren, for five minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I was very
interested in listening to Mr. Rohrabacher's questioning about
responsibility and NOAA versus NASA, and Mr. Rohrabacher and I
don't always agree on things, but I think his line of
questioning is one that I have as well, which is if we are
going to look at NOAA to be our lead in the science of all of
this, you know, maybe we ought to think about vesting more
completely the responsibility with you instead of having you
ask your brother agency. And I am sure that is going to lead to
what we really want. I guess that would be my statement rather
than a question. I won't put you on the spot.
You know, when you think about the history of what is going
on, I mean, it was really in 2005, I think, that the cost
overruns were so outrageous that they really, they triggered
the Nunn-McCurdy Program breach review, and at the time, we had
a Republican President and a Republican committee, and even the
leadership of this Committee couldn't get the attention of the
President at that time. And when you think about that to where
we are today, we have made tremendous progress. It doesn't mean
we have to be satisfied with where we are. I don't think anyone
is. I am not hearing that from any of the witnesses. But we
have made tremendous progress, and we have got to make more.
Here is the question. It is easy for us in the Congress to
look at the Administration whether--of either party and
complain, but sometimes we need to turn the attention on
ourselves, and so this is the question for you if you can
answer. We have not had stable funding because of our inability
to appropriate in the normal course of business.
How would a continuing resolution, if that is what we end
up with again this year, impact your programs? Dr. Sullivan and
Mr. Watkins, if you could answer that, it would be very
helpful.
Dr. Sullivan. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren. I appreciate your
remarks and your question. With respect to continuing
resolution, one big item that would concern me there is FY 2013
is when GOES-R has a scheduled budget bump in order to
accommodate purchase of a launch vehicle. So if we are unable
to proceed with the launch vehicle scheduling and acquisition,
that could compromise schedule.
With respect to JPSS, if we were held on a continuing
resolution at the appropriated level of the FY '12, plan, that
is in line with what we would, what we have come forward for in
the President's budget, so I would forecast with the same
caveats of forecast. Less impact on JPSS but an impact of
concern on GOES-R.
Mr. Watkins. The only thing that I would add to that is
that with respect to the GOES-R Program, currently we are at a
budget in this fiscal year at 615. We plan to be increased to
803, and so if we were actually under a continuing resolution
that went beyond the first quarter of the fiscal year, it would
begin to have severe negative impacts to the cost and the
schedule of specifically the GOES-R mission.
And so the continuing resolution hurts us a lot more in the
GOES-R Program.
Ms. Lofgren. So if we do that, what I am hearing is it
could end up costing us more, assuming we continue with both
program efforts down the line. And if we didn't, I mean, this
is a lot of money. I mean, where I come from this sounds like a
lot of money, and yet when you think about what is going on in
terms of very severe weather impacts, what was there, $60
billion in fiscal year 2011 on dramatic events, and I guess my
questions maybe you can't answer.
If you can get a 10 or 15 percent increase in damage for
lack of warning, I mean, have you done an analysis of what kind
of warning leads to what kind of decrease in damage on the
ground if it is a hurricane or if it is a tornado or if it is
whatever kind of event?
Dr. Sullivan. Ms. Lofgren, we have not seen any rigorously
evaluated economic studies that make that trace all the way
through improvement of a warning, improvement of a forecast,
improvement of a warning, to improvement of the human response
to that warning. So I can't give you a well-vetted figure.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, maybe that is something we ought to ask
the post-docs of the world to take a look at, but we do know,
just anecdotally, that adequate warning in tornado alley made a
huge difference in terms of loss of life, and it would be good
to have some analysis, because if we are talking, you know, a
10 or 15 percent reduction in loss on a $60 billion figure,
that is way more than we are talking about to create the
warning, and with that I think my time has expired, and I move
to yield back.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much, and now I recognize the
gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Palazzo, for five minutes.
Mr. Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As the Chairman of
the Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee, I would like to echo
Chairman Hall's concerns regarding the Senate's proposal to
transfer $1.6 billion from NOAA to NASA for the procurement of
weather satellites. From my perspective, Mr. Hall raised the
most important point when he said NASA has its hands full. We
are hearing about cancelled Mars and astronomy missions,
delayed testing for SLS, continuing issues with the James Webb
Space Telescope, and the list goes on and on.
If this Senate proposal goes through, NASA will now own
these troubled weather satellites also. Just based on their
history, I would say there is a good chance we will have
additional cost overruns, and now NASA, not NOAA, will have to
cover in the NASA budget.
So with that, Mr. Watkins, the devil is always--the detail
is always--the devil is always in the details. Can you--it
feels like a late afternoon. Has NASA done anything to analyze
this switch from NOAA to NASA?
Mr. Watkins. Again, sir, we have been working with the
Administration as they are taking this Senate proposal under
advisement, and that is continuing as we speak today. They were
looking across critical assets of satellite programs, they are
looking at the overall budget, they are looking at the overall
schedule, as well as the critical need to get these data
products into weather prediction.
And so it is a very complicated thing to evaluate, and they
are in the process of evaluating the Senate proposal.
Mr. Palazzo. So then, basically, you will take your
analysis, and you will provide that to the Administration, and
is that where his statement of administration policy comes
from, that Chairman Hall requested and no one was able to tell
him when they may receive that?
Mr. Watkins. I don't know the answer to that question, sir.
We will have to get back to you.
Mr. Palazzo. Okay. Say when there are cost overruns just
based on the history of this program, what missions is NASA
going to have to reduce their funding for or eliminate such as
earth sciences or----
Mr. Watkins. At the current time, again, the NASA role in
the weather satellite programs on behalf of NOAA is one of an
acquisition agent, and we implement these critical products on
behalf of NOAA. All of the funding that currently is tied in
with this program is NOAA funding. It comes to NASA, and we
build their satellites and launch them, and then, you know,
commission them and bring back the critical data.
And so at this point there are zero NASA dollars involved.
Mr. Palazzo. So the $1.6 billion transfer, if it ends up
costing $2 billion, NOAA will basically pick up that extra $400
billion, I mean, $400 million and transfer that to NASA?
Mr. Watkins. Sir, I was only speaking of the existing
relationship. I wasn't speaking of the Senate proposal. Again,
I think all of that would have to be evaluated.
Mr. Palazzo. Okay. Thank you. Dr. Sullivan, the
recommendation to sever the NPOESS Program came from an
independent review team chaired by Mr. Tom Young. It is our
understanding that Mr. Young is engaged in another review for
NOAA, and I have got several questions related to that.
What has NOAA charged him to look at? Will this review
address the funding shortfall identified by GAO? Will this
review provide recommendations or just findings? Will this
review be available to Congress, and also, will the findings be
reviewed, vetted, and edited by the Administration prior to
sharing with Congress?
Dr. Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Palazzo, for your question.
Tom Young does, indeed, chair our Independent Review Team that
is charged with looking across the entire NOAA satellite
portfolio. It is a late afternoon. His co-chair is a retired
Air Force General, Tom Moorman. The rest of the panel, we can
provide you the names, are very experienced space
professionals.
Their charge is to look at any and all aspects of budget
management, technical formulation that contribute to or detract
to mission assurance in our satellite programs, assess them and
provide both findings and recommendations. It is--they brief me
directly, they write their report, their reports are not
redacted by someone before reaching the NOAA Administrator and,
nor as I understand at least, are they in any way redacted
before they come to this Committee or other committees of this
chamber and your colleagues on the other side of the Hill,
whether verbally or written.
Mr. Palazzo. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much. I recognize the gentleman
from California, Mr. McNerney, for five minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Sullivan, I can imagine what things were like when the
budget reduction became known and uncertainty in what your
funding was going to be like. It must have been a sense of
panic and scramble.
Let me ask you, has that passed now, or are things still in
a scramble mode to try and figure out what is going to happen
or how you are going to deal with this shortfall?
Dr. Sullivan. May I just clarify, Mr. McNerney, that you
are referring to the continuing resolution in FY 2011, or did
you have some other budget issue in mind?
Mr. McNerney. Yes, the continuing resolution.
Dr. Sullivan. That--FY 2011 was a very difficult year with
a final appropriation not in hand until some time, I forget the
exact calendar date of the enactment and then we had spend plan
negotiations with various chambers to get alignment on the use
of those funds. So it was very late in the year. It was less
than 30 days before the end of the fiscal year before we had
full agreement from all parties on the Hill about how to spend
our resources.
That is, as you suggested, extremely difficult to manage.
While it is difficult to manage a federal agency itself, it is
extremely difficult to maintain continuity and performance for
contractors, for our university colleagues who were subject to
that uncertainly
For JPSS in particular, the level of the CR, the level of
spending that we were held at because of the CR, even when
supplemented by the better part of $90 million by reprograming
that the Administration requested and the Congress approved,
still was far below. It was hundreds of millions below the
target level for the ramp-up of JPSS.
So with that backdrop I would say a few things. I would say
that rather like the ripple on a carpet or a bedspread, when
you give it a good shake, some of that is still moving through
the system in terms of delays that were incurred that don't
just go instantly away when a funding stream is restored, and
we are still seeing some of that consequence. It definitely did
strain the team. It strained in terms of professionalism and
acuminated desire to keep moving. Of course, it creates
tensions within a team. I think largely the team is past that.
The trust and battle rhythm of the NOAA and NASA team around
JPSS has improved notably in the 12, 13 months since I have
been aboard.
The final thing I would say, though, is, you know, the
general climate of uncertainty certainly is a tension that we
all have to bear, and we certainly hear about it also from our
contractors as perhaps you do as well. They have got a battle
rhythm and a certain headcount running on the factory floors
that are building these spacecraft, and to be assured of being
able to continue them, will they have to think about moving
those workforces around? One of the things that I think we all
worry about is, across all federal programs, if the funding is
that uncertain, can the Federal Government have confidence of
getting the A-Team on these programs if there are steadier
income streams from commercial context in the case of this
business sector? Might we be concerned about having lesser
quality of talent applied to our work and doing the public's
good?
Mr. McNerney. We are all concerned about the data gap, if
it is going to be bad enough for the public to notice, if it is
going to be bad enough to cause additional damage due to poor
forecasting and so on. I am a mathematician for my background,
and I did a lot of time modeling. Do you think the modeling,
the mathematical modeling is going to pick up a lot of that
slack, given the data from other sources and the older
satellites?
Dr. Sullivan. So I am a geologist, Mr. McNerney. I don't
think I will attempt the same estimate that you will.
Mr. McNerney. Okay.
Dr. Sullivan. But that is an important and open question
that we will be looking at. I think the prospect is certainly
there. The other forms of data, proxy data, if you will, might
be able to substitute and lessen the degradation of forecasts.
The afternoon orbit specifically as almost a piece of real
estate is an important point here in terms of sampling the
atmosphere at the peak of midday heating when it is, you know,
the dynamics are fully active. So there is a question of, can
you get some other sounding data from a different instrument,
and then there is the added question of, and does it give you
that same time coverage in terms of the daily cycle of the
Earth, and then how old are the data by the time you get them
into your models? All of those would be factors in how much we
could mitigate the forecast degradation.
Mr. McNerney. Well, there is certainly--with the current
capabilities, and we would see a significant dropoff if that,
if the dropoff happened today, if the data gap happened today.
We would see a significant dropoff. Is that correct?
Dr. Sullivan. We have run a number of studies to assess
that about a year and a half ago, I think, they were completed.
Statistically they scatter, of course, a little bit as you
would expect. The most notable outcome in that was a simulation
without polar-orbiting data, without afternoon polar data for
the big snowstorm called Snowmageddon. And in that case, we had
substantial forecasters in both the track of the storm and the
total precipitation fell in the storm. The three or four other
cases that we studied showed a varying sensitivity. Generally
some degradation, not all as severe as the Snowmageddon case.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you. My time has expired.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much, and we have a few more--I
have a few more questions, so we will do a second round. I
recognize myself for the five minutes, first five minutes.
Dr. Sullivan, one of the most troubling findings from GAO's
JPSS report is that the entire polar-orbiting constellation,
not just the afternoon orbit, appears to be at risk. DOD still
has DMSP satellites available for the early morning orbit, but
they may not operate as expected because they have been in
storage for so long.
DOD also hasn't figured out what is it going to do after
the DMSP program. The Europeans are experiencing their own
financial problems, and NOAA has indicated that it will not
supply sensors to the Next Generation Program for the mid-
morning orbit.
Since its inception the NPOESS Program has always intended
on operating satellites in three separate orbits that would
ensure that no observations were more than six hours old.
Now, understanding that your shop, NOAA, is only
responsible for the afternoon orbit, do you have any idea what
the Administration as a whole is doing to protect the entire
constellation?
Dr. Sullivan. Dr. Harris, I know the Administration has
convened a National Earth Observations Task Force to look
across all of the civilian agencies and try to get a better
handle and greater coordination across those assets and their
capabilities. I am not aware of an active interagency group. It
may just be my ignorance that is looking more at the White
House levels, specifically at the DMSP or DWSS and NOAA
constellations.
I would say that our own program managers are maintaining
very active liaison with both Air Force weather and space and
missiles command out in Los Angeles. So we are interacting
closely with them. We have a very long history of collaboration
and mutual support with the Defense Department. I believe both
parties recognize and appreciate the other's equities quite
well and try to maintain high levels of mutual awareness and
information so that we can do--we can do what we can do with
the resources and latitude available to us to complement and
support each other.
Mr. Harris. But does the--do you know, does the
Administration plan to mitigate the risks or how are they going
to mitigate the risk of a gap in those other orbits, not NOAA's
afternoon orbit but the other orbits, which inform you and the
National Weather Service for your forecasts and models?
Dr. Sullivan. I know of no specific plan for those
mitigations at this time, Dr. Harris.
Mr. Harris. Now, the GAO's testimony indicates that NOAA
will have to shed some capability in order to live within the
Administration's cost cap. Options listed by the GAO include
the loss of climate sensors, which would cause a break in the
over-30-year record of some measurements, the loss of ground-
based reception stations that would degrade the timeliness of
data from 30 minutes to 80 minutes, or the loss of data
processing systems at two Navy locations that would impact the
data used by warfighters.
What, if anything, does NOAA plan to remove? I mean, what--
have you prioritized what will be removed?
Dr. Sullivan. I can assure you we have very clear
prioritization of the factors that make the greatest
contributions to our primary weather forecasting mission, and
the decisions we have made to date and any that are driven by
circumstances we face in the future will be made in accordance
with those priorities.
Having said that, as I believe Mr. Powner pointed out in
his testimony, the options that we have worked on, the
reanalysis that we have worked on, since their first look gives
us confidence that the sensors can, in fact, be accommodated
inside the $12.9 billion lifecycle cost cap. We did decide, and
we think it is a prudent action, to drop the number of ground
stations from the very high number that was contained in the
old NPOESS so-called distributed receptor network and rely more
critically on one at each pole. So two stations that see lots
of every polar pass, Svalbard and McMurdo, with a backup at
high latitudes in our own Fairbanks site. Those give us very
good coverage for all polar-orbiting birds.
Yes, the initial target of a 30-minute time delay or
latency for JPSS data has been relaxed to 80. Our current
performance, however, is 120, so that is still a substantial
improvement over current performance and should make a notable
improvement to forecasting.
With respect to the data centrals, I think that reflects,
in part, an evolution of ground system structure from very
tailored, very unique, to each service and each provider
towards more common, unified ground stations. We certainly can
take on the development of tailored interfaces for NOAA
satellite data for the Air Force or the Navy if they wish, but
at this point, with our budget constraints, we have let those
partners know that would have to be on a reimbursable basis.
The Air Force is assessing its own ground system options, both
for current DMSP fly operations and for DWSS or whatever that
will be, and I am not aware of any detailed plans from them
yet.
Mr. Harris. Now, with regards to the GAO report, this
controversy about whether the cap is, whether the shortfall is
$1.7 or $2.7 billion, because the GAO report states that NOAA
validated the cost of the full set of JPSS functions would be
$11.3 billion from FY 2012 to 2028. After adding the agency's
cost of $3.3, the program's lifecycle cost estimate total,
$14.6, which is $2.7 billion higher than that $11.9 billion
estimate for JPSS when NPOESS was disbanded in 2010.
So according to NOAA officials this increase is primarily
due to a four-year extension of the program, the addition of
previously unbudgeted items such as free flyers, costs
associated with transitioning contracts from DOD to NOAA, and
the program's decision to slow down work on lower-priority
elements because of the budget constraints of 2011.
The GAO then states that in working with OMB to establish
the President's FY 2013 budget request NOAA officials stated
that they agreed to fund JPSS at roughly $900 million per year
through 2017, merge funding for the two climate sensors into
the JPSS budget, and to cap the JPSS lifecycle cost at $12.9
billion through 2028.
Because this cap is $1.7 billion below the $14.6 lifecycle
cost, NOAA decided to remove selected elements from the
satellite program.
Now, so do you--is a shortfall of $1.7 or $2.7 below the
expected lifecycle cost? Mr. Powner, maybe you can--what is
your finding?
Mr. Powner. So the gap is $1.7 billion. It is from $14.6,
that was the cost when you reconciled the various cost
estimates, but the program, just to keep it simple, the program
was capped at $12.9, so there was this $1.7 that the program
was trying to get down to. And, again, I think their approach
as we understand it is there are two primary ways in which they
are going to reduce--address the $1.7 million gap. One is they
found a more efficient way to operate and maintain the
satellites which Dr. Sullivan referred to and then also, too,
there is this savings through this ride-share arrangement with
the free flyers where the climate sensors are still included,
but they are going to fly them outside of the JPSS Program.
There are still some details we want to see about both
those things and how that tallies up to $1.7. That is why I
made the comments, the question, still questions about
operating within the $12.9 cap.
Mr. Harris. Dr. Sullivan, is that an accurate assessment of
where the $1.7 is going to be made up?
Dr. Sullivan. It is, sir.
Mr. Harris. Okay. Thank you very much.
I recognize Mr. McNerney for five minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Powner, one thing that really stuck out about your oral
testimony here was the 48 percent confidence level that NASA
will meet the 2015 launch date. Is that in your mind the
biggest threat, is that, not making that launch date?
Mr. Powner. Yeah. So a couple things. We did some very
detailed schedule analysis, and so there were things we went
into great detail on, two of the sensor schedules as well as
the spacecraft and ground, and we had some questions about how
the schedules were being managed and the rigor you want with
that. Ultimately what that all means is it calls into question
whether you can hit key milestones. So these milestones all
need to be hit to ultimately reach the launch date.
That coupled with the fact that their own internal
assessment showed that there was only a 48 percent confidence
level that they were going to hit the October, 2015, date
raised questions about whether they will be able to do that. I
think, and we are under the impression that if you raised it to
70 percent confidence level, which is, I think, what the
program ultimately likes to operate under, that does push that
launch date into early 2016. I think there is a 4- or 5-month
slip roughly there, but those are the questions that, you know,
need to be considered going forward, how solid is that October
2015. There are question marks there clearly.
Mr. McNerney. Can you be as specific as you can in giving
us recommendations on how we can reach that October 2015 launch
date or achieve that date?
Mr. Powner. Well, one of the things we did do in our report
is we had very detailed recommendations on how the program
could be more rigorous in managing their schedules. So, for
instance, we found things like not all subcontractor activities
were included in schedules, critical paths weren't identified.
That is very important so you can identify the long pole in the
tent, those types of things.
And those are the recommendations we have, so hopefully
that will be helpful in ultimately achieving that launch date.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Watkins. The one thing I would like to add is----
Mr. McNerney. Sure.
Mr. Watkins [continuing]. As David pointed out, Mr. Powner
pointed out, clearly we have listened to and taken seriously
the recommendations from GAO. We have already implemented a lot
of the changes or improvements that he identified with respect
to scheduling and reporting.
The other thing that I would say is I think the largest
risk to that October 2015 launch date right now is, again, with
stability associated with funding, again, because of where we
are today at 615 and needing to go to 803. In the next fiscal
year if we are under a continuing resolution, it is going to
have a negative impact on our ability to maintain the October
2015 launch readiness date in addition to the items that he
pointed out.
Mr. McNerney. That makes sense. It was gratifying to hear
about your partnership with NOAA on the Joint Polar Satellite.
I want to get a good feel for how much benefit has been
achieved by that. Are the roles for each of your agencies and
the responsibilities, decision-making authority, governance and
program oversight clear? In other words, are these clear
between your two agencies?
Mr. Watkins. Yes, they are, and in fact, I mean, I think
one of--since the separation between the Defense and the
civilian side for weather satellites, if you look at the
overall performance that we, NOAA and NASA, have been able to
achieve, first and foremost with maintaining that we would
launch Suomi NPP on time in the October 2011 time period, we
maintained that schedule. When you look across the schedules
associated with the JPSS-1, we are currently on track. We share
meetings together, the key decision points are jointly chaired
between our respective agencies, and our programs are fully
integrated at a Green Tech facility, which is outside of
Goddard Space Flight Center. The teams are working extremely
well, and it is a very good partnership.
Dr. Sullivan. If I may, Mr. McNerney, I just, I would
endorse Marcus's comments. There is a 40-year-long partnership
between NASA and NOAA in providing the Nation with weather
satellites. We came back to that model in essence with the
unwinding of the NPOESS Program, and if I could use the
analogy, since JPSS moved out of the dysfunctional household of
NPOESS, we have got a new team aboard. They have set fresh
marks. They have, and, again, the 13 months I have been around
they have been very consistently meeting those marks. We see
great value, great productivity in the partnership and great
value for the taxpayer, not duplicating a top-notch space
acquisition function within that--within NOAA when we have an
outstanding one in the partner agency.
Mr. McNerney. Okay. I have one more question, Mr. Chairman.
Has there been analysis of the anticipated operational period
of the NPP satellite? What are we looking at here in terms of
what confidence we have in that continued performance of that
instrument?
Mr. Watkins. I will take the beginning of that. Again, the
NPP spacecraft was developed for a five-year life, and you
know, we have launched it last October. The calibration
validation period is going along as planned. In fact, we are a
little ahead of schedule with some of the products that have
already been received well by the National Weather Service and
implemented into their algorithms that has led towards
additional forecasting capabilities. The checkout across all of
the instruments is looking good. The satellite is operating
well.
Again, you know, there are issues that you have the first
time you are flying a spacecraft, and this one wasn't to be
operational initially, but we haven't seen anything that is
outside of the ordinary with launching of a new satellite.
Dr. Sullivan. And the ground system is performing well. We
are making progress towards adding, again, the redundancy and
IT security robustness that we will need to have in place when
JPSS-1 comes along to meet the criticality one requirements
that NOAA has.
It was remarked, and I forget by whom earlier in the
hearing that none of the instruments on NPP are performing as
they should. I ask Mr. Watkins to correct me if I misstate
anything, but my tracking of the technical data is that all of
them are, in fact, performing at or above spec with some
anomalies that are needed to be worked out, but the technical
team has shown a very good acumen of jumping on top of those
and digging down and understanding the root causes and
developing corrective actions, which is what you do with space
systems.
Mr. McNerney. Okay. Thank you. My time is up.
Mr. Harris. Thank you very much. I want to thank the
witnesses for your valuable testimony and the Members for their
questions. The Members of either Subcommittee may have
additional questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to
respond to those in writing.
The record will remain open for two weeks for additional
comments from Members. The witnesses are excused. The hearing
is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:47 p.m., the Subcommittees were
adjourned.]

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74731.069

Appendix 2

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Weather-X Blog by Cliff Mass: Submitted by Representative Andy Harris,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Energy and Environment



