- WHAT MAKES FOR SUCCESSFUL K-12 STEM EDUCATION: A CLOSER LOOK AT EFFECTIVE STEM EDUCATION APPROACHES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

WHAT MAKES FOR SUCCESSFUL K-12
STEM EDUCATION: A CLOSER LOOK AT EFFECTIVE STEM EDUCATION APPROACHES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 12, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-42

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

70-588PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
Tennessee                        FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Research and Science Education

HON. MO BROOKS, Alabama, Chair
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       PAUL D. TONKO, New York
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, October 12, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Mo Brooks, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Research and Science Education, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................     8
Written Statement............................................     8

Statement by Representative Daniel Lipinski, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Research and Science Education,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Witnesses:

Dr. Adam Gamoran, Director, Wisconsin Center for Education
Research, University of Wisconsin
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15

Mr. Mark Heffron, Director, Denver School for Science and
Technology: Stapleton High School
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    25

Dr. Suzanne Wilson, Chair, Department of Teacher Education,
Division of Science and Math, Education, Michigan State
University
Oral Statement...............................................    26
Written Statement............................................    28

Dr. Elaine Allensworth, Senior Director and Chief Research
Officer, Consortium on Chicago School Research, University of
Chicago
Oral Statement...............................................    34
Written Statement............................................    36

Dr. Barbara Means, Director, Center for Technology in Learning,
SRI International
Oral Statement...............................................    49
Written Statement............................................    50

Discussion
...............................................................    47

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Adam Gamoran, Director, Wisconsin Center for Education
Research, University of Wisconsin..............................    74

Mr. Mark Heffron, Director, Denver School for Science and
Technology: Stapleton High School..............................    76

Dr. Suzanne Wilson, Chair, Department of Teacher Education,
Division of Science and Math, Education, Michigan State
University............................................. ***MISSING***

Dr. Elaine Allensworth, Senior Director and Chief Research
Officer, Consortium on Chicago School Research, University of
Chicago........................................................    78

Dr. Barbara Means, Director, Center for Technology in Learning,
SRI International..............................................    80

WHAT MAKES FOR SUCCESSFUL K-12
STEM EDUCATION: A CLOSER LOOK AT EFFECTIVE STEM EDUCATION APPROACHES

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 12, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Science Education,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mo Brooks
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION

What Makes for Successful K-12 STEM Education:

A Closer Look at Effective STEM Education Approaches

wednesday, october 12, 2011
10:00 a.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

1. Purpose

On Wednesday, October 12, 2011, at 10:00 a.m., the Subcommittee on
Research and Science Education will hold a hearing to review and
examine the findings of the National Research Council Report,
Successful K-12 STEM Education: Identifying Effective Approaches in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics, as requested by
Congress in 2009 to identify highly successful K-12 schools and
programs in STEM.

2. Witnesses

Dr. Adam Gamoran, Director, Wisconsin Center for
Education Research, University of Wisconsin

Mr. Mark Heffron, Director, Denver School for Science and
Technology: Stapleton High School

Dr. Suzanne Wilson, Chair, Department of Teacher
Education, Division of Science and Math, Education, Michigan State
University

Dr. Elaine Allensworth, Senior Director and Chief
Research Officer, Consortium on Chicago School Research, University of
Chicago

Dr. Barbara Means, Director, Center for Technology in
Learning, SRI International

3. Overview

In the U.S, student mastery of STEM subjects is essential
to thrive in the 21st century economy. As other nations continue to
gain ground in preparing their students in these critical fields, the
U.S. must continue to explore a variety of ways to inspire future
generations.

The 2007 Rising Above the Gathering Storm report called
for an increased emphasis on recruiting, educating, training, and
increasing the skills of K-12 STEM education teachers and increasing
the pipeline of American students who are prepared to enter college and
graduate with a degree in STEM.

In 2009, Congress directed the National Science
Foundation (NSF) to survey highly successful K-12 STEM schools and
``report recommendations on how their STEM practices might be more
broadly replicated in the U.S. public school system.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Report to Accompany the Commerce, Justice, Science and Related
Agencies Appropriations Act for FY 2010 (House Report 111-149).

In June 2011, the National Research Council released the
NSF-sponsored report, Successful K-12 STEM Education: Identifying
Effective Approaches in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mathematics.

4. Background

STEM Education and the Federal Government

A consensus exists that improving STEM education throughout the
Nation is a necessary condition for preserving our capacity for
innovation and discovery and for ensuring U.S. economic strength and
competitiveness in the international marketplace of the 21st century.
The National Academies' Rising Above the Gathering Storm report placed
major emphasis on the need to improve STEM education and made its top
priority increasing the number of highly qualified STEM teachers. This
recommendation was embraced by the House Science, Space, and Technology
Committee following the issuance of the report and was included in the
2007 America COMPETES Act. The 2010 America COMPETES Reauthorization
Act continues this priority.
Beyond activities authorized in America COMPETES, President Obama
has called for a new effort to prepare 100,000 science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) teachers with strong teaching skills and
deep content knowledge over the next decade. As a component of
achieving this goal, the FY 12 Budget Request proposes an investment of
$100 million through the Department of Education and the National
Science Foundation (NSF) to prepare effective STEM teachers for
classrooms across America. This proposal also responds to a
recommendation by the President's Council of Advisors on Science and
Technology (PCAST) to prepare and inspire America's students in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, Winning
the Race to Educate Our Children, STEM Education in the 2012 Budget,
p.1
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, the FY12 Budget Request proposes $90 million for the
creation of an Advanced Research Projects Agency--Education (ARPA-ED)
with the mission of driving transformational improvements in education
technology. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, Winning
the Race to Educate Our Children, STEM Education in the 2012 Budget,
p.1
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The President's new ``Educate to Innovate'' campaign leverages
federal resources with over $700 million in private-sector resources.
The goals of the program are to increase STEM literacy so that all
students can learn deeply and think critically in science, math,
engineering, and technology; move American students from the middle of
the pack to top in the next decade; and expand STEM education and
career opportunities for underrepresented groups, including women and
girls.
With specific regard to K-12 STEM education funding beyond what has
already been identified, the FY 12 Budget Request calls for $206
million for the Department of Education's proposed Effective Teaching
and Learning in STEM program; a $60 million (28 percent) increase for
NASA's K-12 education programs; $300 million for an ``Investing in
Innovation'' program (expansion of a Department of Education American
Reinvestment and Recovery Act program); and $185 million for a new
Presidential Teaching Fellowship program.
In total, the FY 12 Budget Request devotes $3.4 billion to STEM
education programs across the Federal government. \4\ The 2010 America
COMPETES Reauthorization Act called for the creation of a National
Science Technology Council (NSTC) Committee on STEM Education to
coordinate federal STEM investments. The first-year tasks of the
Committee are to create an inventory of federal STEM education
activities and develop a five-year strategic Federal STEM education
plan. The inventory, as well as a similar Government Accountability
Office (GAO) survey requested by the Committee on Education and
Workforce, is currently underway and results are expected in early
2012.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ White House Office of Science and Technology Policy,
Innovation, Education, and Infrastructure: Science, Technology, STEM
Education, and 21st Century Infrastructure in the 2012 Budget, p. 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the 112th Congress, the Science, Space, and Technology Committee
will continue to hold oversight hearings and briefings on STEM
education activities across the federal government and will closely
monitor the scope and findings of both the NSTC and the GAO federal
STEM education inventories.

The ``Successful K-12 STEM Education'' Report

In 2009, Congress directed the National Science Foundation (NSF) to
survey highly successful K-12 STEM schools and ``report recommendations
on how their STEM practices might be more broadly replicated in the
U.S. public school system.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Report to Accompany the Commerce, Justice, Science and Related
Agencies Appropriations Act for FY 2010 (House Report 111-149).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In October 2010, the National Research Council brought together a
group of experts to explore the issue. This Committee of experts was
charged with ``outlining criteria for identifying effective STEM
schools and programs and identifying which of those criteria could be
addressed with available data and research, and those where further
work is needed to develop appropriate data sources.'' \6\ In addition,
a public workshop was held in May 2011 to ``refine criteria for
success, explore models of `best practice,' and analyze factors that
evidence indicates lead to success'' in highly successful K-12 schools.
In late June 2011, they released the NSF-sponsored report, Successful
K-12 STEM Education: Identifying Effective Approaches in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Successful K-12 STEM Education: Identifying Effective
Approaches in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics,
National Research Council, 2011. (http://www.nap.edu/
catalog.php?record_id=13158) p. 1.

The report identifies three goals for successful STEM education in the
United States \7\:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Ibid, p. 4.

1.  Expand the number of students who ultimately pursue advanced
degrees and careers in STEM fields and broaden the participation of
women and minorities in those fields. A number of reports directly link
the Nation's economic competitiveness to the ability of K-12 STEM
education to produce the next generation of scientists, engineers, and
innovators. Given changing demographics in the U.S. and the need to
produce more STEM-career prepared students, increasing the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
participation of underrepresented groups in the sciences is important.

2.  Expand the STEM-capable workforce and broaden the participation
of women and minorities in that workforce. In addition to preparing
those students for advanced degrees, it is also necessary to prepare
students for STEM-related careers, such as medical assistants and
computer technicians. ``Sixteen of the 20 occupations with the largest
projected growth in the next decade are STEM related, but only four of
them require an advanced degree.'' \8\ Typically, these careers require
vocational certification, an associate's degree, or a bachelor's
degree.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Ibid, p. 5.

3.  Increase STEM literacy for all students, including those who do
not pursue STEM-related careers or additional study in the STEM
disciplines. The challenges of the science- and technology-driven 21st
century increasingly dictates that everyone have knowledge and
understanding of STEM concepts for personal decision making,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
participation in civic and cultural affairs, and economic productivity.

In order to identify what makes a successful school able to achieve one
or all of the broad goals, the report establishes three criteria for
success \9\:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Ibid, p. 6.

1.  Student STEM Outcomes. Since achievement test data are widely
available and used for accountability purposes, they are most commonly
used to gauge student and school success, but test scores do not always
tell the whole story. It is difficult to measure interest, motivation,
and creativity, all important for success in STEM. Likewise, utilizing
STEM content knowledge is required in numerous settings other than
tests, like navigating financial aid forms or working in teams, but
currently these are not measures of success. The same can be said for
participating in after school programs or internships, as they could
indicate a student's engagement in a STEM activity, but they are not
factored in as a measurement of success. Research gaps exist on student
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
outcomes.

2.  STEM-Focused School Types. The report acknowledges the
difficulty in identifying schools and programs that are the most
successful in STEM because ``success is defined in many ways and can
occur in many different types of schools and settings, with many
different populations of students.'' \10\ As such, three broad
categories of STEM-focused schools are identified that have the
potential to meet the overarching goals for U.S. STEM education:
selective schools, inclusive schools, and schools with STEM-focused
career and technical education (CTE).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\  Ibid. p. 8.

Selective STEM schools tend to be focused around one or more
STEM disciplines and have selective admissions criteria with highly
talented and motivated students, expert teachers, and advanced
curricula. They can be state residential schools, stand-alone schools,
schools-within-a-school or regional centers with half-day courses.
Research gaps exist on the contributions of these schools over regular
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
schools.

Inclusive STEM schools are similar to selective STEM schools but
have no selective admissions criteria, thereby serving a broader
population. Many work under the auspices that ``math and science
competencies can be developed, and that students from traditionally
underrepresented subpopulations need access to opportunities to develop
these competencies to become full participants in areas of economic
growth and prosperity.'' \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Ibid, p. 11.

Schools and programs with STEM-focused CTE allow students to
explore STEM-related career options by learning practical applications
of STEM subject areas and are intended ``to prepare students for STEM-
related careers, often with the broader goal of increasing engagement
to prevent students from dropping out of school.'' \12\ Many CTE
programs and schools are highly regarded, but research gaps exist on
their effectiveness.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\  Ibid, p. 13.

The report recognizes the contribution of comprehensive schools
in STEM education as well, as ``much of the available research
knowledge of effective practices comes from comprehensive schools,
which educate the vast majority of the nation's students--including
many talented and aspiring scientists mathematicians, and engineers who
might not have access to selective or inclusive STEM-focused schools.''
\13\hese schools are not focused specifically on STEM, but cover all
disciplines. Advanced Placement (AP) and International Baccalaureate
(IB) programs provide advanced STEM programs in these schools.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\  Ibid, p. 15.

3.  STEM Instruction and School Practices. Looking at outcomes and
focusing on practices provide schools with guidance on improving STEM
instruction. Two themes tend to be found in successful schools,
``instruction that captures students' interest and involves them in
STEM practices and school conditions that support effective STEM
instruction.'' \14\ Imperative to instruction are a coherent set of
standards and curriculum, teachers with high capacity to teach in their
discipline, a supportive system of assessment and accountability,
adequate instruction time, and equal access to high-quality STEM
learning opportunities. \15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Ibid. p. 18.
\15\ Ibid. p. 19-22.

At the same time, while teacher qualifications are important,
school conditions and cultures that support learning are just as, if
not more, important. Specifically, a successful school should have: 1)
school leadership as the driver for change, a strategic, focused
principal; 2) professional capacity, with quality professional
development and an ability for faculty to work together; 3) active
parent-community ties, to engage parents in supporting their children's
success; 4) student-centered learning climate that is safe, welcoming,
stimulating, and nurturing; and 5) instructional guidance when it comes
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
to curriculum organization and instructional materials.

A number of research gaps are identified throughout the report.
Much research is underway, but not yet conclusive. Broadening research
on measuring success beyond student test scores, graduation rates, and
data on effective STEM practices could allow for a more comprehensive
analysis of schools and K-12 STEM education. \16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Ibid, p. 26.

The report concludes with recommendations for what schools and
districts and state and national policy makers can do to support
effective K-12 education \17\:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Ibid, p. 27.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schools and Districts:

Consider all three models of STEM-focused schools if
seeking to improve STEM outcomes beyond comprehensive schools;

Devote adequate instructional time and resources to
science in grades K-5;

Ensure STEM curricula are focused on the most important
topics in each discipline, are rigorous, and are articulated as a
sequence of topics and performances;

Enhance the capacity of K-12 teachers; and

Provide instructional leaders with professional
development that helps to create the school conditions that appear to
support student achievement.

State and Local Policy Makers

Elevate science to the same level of importance as
reading and mathematics and develop effective systems of assessment;

Invest in a coherent, focused, and sustained set of
support for STEM teachers; and

Support key areas for future research.

Chairman Brooks. The Subcommittee on Research and Science
Education will come to order.
Good morning. Welcome to today's hearing entitled, ``What
Makes for Successful K-12 STEM Education: A Closer Look at
Effective STEM Education Approaches. The purpose of today's
hearing is to review and examine the findings of the National
Academies' report, ``Successful K-12 STEM Education:
Identifying Effective Approaches in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics,'' as requested in 2009 by then
Commerce, Justice, and Science Appropriations Subcommittee
Ranking Member Frank Wolf to identify highly successful K-12
schools and programs in STEM. He is now the Chairman, and I am
pleased to have him join us today and look forward to working
with him on STEM education and other areas of the federal
science budget that our Subcommittees share.
At this point I would move for unanimous consent for
Chairman Wolf to sit and participate. Having heard no
objection, Chairman Wolf, you are permitted to sit and
participate.
At this point, the Chairman will give his opening
statement. I plan to yield some of my opening statement time to
Chairman Wolf, but before I do, let me reiterate a point from
today's charter. Student mastery of STEM subjects is essential
to thrive in the 21st century economy. As other nations
continue to gain ground in preparing their students in these
critical fields, the United States must continue to explore a
variety of ways to inspire future generations. This report
explores some of those ways.
I believe the findings of this report reveal many things
that we already know about what it takes to have a successful
K-12 STEM school. And while research gaps continue to exist,
getting this helpful information into the hands of state
education departments and local school districts is important,
because that is where real change takes place. Whether we are
preparing students for advanced degrees in STEM or ensuring
that young adults have the scientific and mathematic literacy
to strive and thrive in a 21st century technology-based
economy, the foundation for both of these begins in our K-12
schools.
I look forward to hearing from all of our witnesses today
about their contributions to this report as well as their
contributions for improving K-12 STEM education in the United
States.
With that, I yield the remainder of my time to Chairman
Wolf.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brooks follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Mo Brooks
Good morning, and welcome to each of our witnesses. The purpose of
today's hearing is to review and examine the findings of the National
Academies report, Successful K-12 STEM Education: Identifying Effective
Approaches in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics, as
requested in 2009 by then Commerce, Justice, and Science Appropriations
Subcommittee Ranking Member Frank Wolf to identify highly successful K-
12 schools and programs in STEM. He is now the Chairman, and I am
pleased to have him join us today and look forward to working with him
on STEM education and other areas of the federal science budget that
our Subcommittees share.
I plan to yield some of my opening statement time to Chairman Wolf,
but before I do, let me reiterate a point from today's charter,
``student mastery of STEM subjects is essential to thrive in the 21st
century economy. As other nations continue to gain ground in preparing
their students in these critical fields, the U.S. must continue to
explore a variety of ways to inspire future generations.'' This report
explores some of those ways. I believe the findings of this report
reveal many things that we already know about what it takes to have a
successful K-12 STEM school. And while research gaps continue to exist,
getting this helpful information into the hands of state education
departments and local school districts is important, because that is
where real change takes place. Whether we are preparing students for
advanced degrees in STEM or ensuring that young adults have the
scientific and mathematic literacy to thrive in a 21st century
technology-based economy, the foundation for both of these begins in
our K-12 schools. I look forward to hearing from all of witnesses today
about their contributions to this report as well as their contributions
for improving K-12 STEM education in the United States.
With that, I yield the remainder of my time to Chairman Wolf.

Mr. Wolf. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that. I
will be very, very brief, and I will just be here briefly to
listen to the panel as much as I can.
This is important. A couple of years ago I became very
concerned as to why young people at age fifth grade were going
in law or whatever and not into sciences. So we put this in
directing the National Science Foundation to do this. It really
is an issue of the future of the country and also jobs. To give
you some example, for instance, if you were to go outside this
room and ask the average person what country is number one in
space, most people would say America. But the reality is that
China is catching up. And China has 200,000 people working on
their space program, and we in the United States only have
about 90 or 95,000 counting NASA employees and outside.
And we are falling behind so dramatically, and I think if
you can get more young people to be involved in math and
science and physics and chemistry and biology--and if you all
take a look at the rising storm of Norm Augustine, the report
that we work with him--you can see that it literally is jobs,
it is will the 21st century be the American century or will the
21st century be the Chinese century? If it is the Chinese
century--and keep in mind, the People's Liberation Army that
runs the Chinese space program is the same group in China that
executes people for their organs and sells them for 50 to
$55,000 for a kidney, you can see--if you want to see what the
world would be like if China is number one, the number one
supporter of the genocide in Darfur--genocide is taking place
in Darfur. I was the first Member to go to Darfur with Sam
Brownback. The number one supporter is China. China is pushing,
helping the Khartoum government with regard to genocide.
So in order for this to be the 21st century, the American
century, the more we have the math and science and physics and
chemistry and biology in the STEM is very important.
The last issue--and I would urge the Chairman and Mr.
Lipinski to take a look at this--when the FBI comes before my
Committee, we have gone out--and I would urge both of you to do
it, too, to look at the briefings to see the Chinese are
stealing so much technology. In fact, as--I think it was Mike
Rogers the other day said there are only two kind of companies
in America: those who have been hit with cyber attacks by the
Chinese where they are stealing of technology, stealing jobs--
and the American companies who have been hit by the Chinese who
don't know that they have been hit.
And so as we are putting all of this in the top of the
basket to create jobs and economic opportunity and math and
science and physics and chemistry, we also have to look at how
they are stealing from us below and taking away much of their
gains in science have come because not--their scientific
efforts. They are making them, but also what they have taken.
They are hitting the Patent and Trademark Office websites. They
are doing different things. So I would urge the Committee--I
appreciate you doing this hearing. I would hope maybe both of
you could take a look at this briefing where the FBI can show
you the companies that they are hitting and that we can then
stop this stealing by the Chinese and do what we can to make
sure the 21st century is not the Chinese century but it is the
American Century.
But thank you for having these hearings.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Chairman Wolf.
At this point, the Chair recognizes Mr. Lipinski of
Illinois for an opening statement.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Chairman Brooks. I want to thank
you for holding this hearing, thank our witnesses for being
here today, and especially thank Chairman Wolf for requesting
this report. I've worked with Chairman Wolf on a number of
issues. I share his great concern about what is happening in
America with STEM education and echo many of his concerns about
what China is doing right now in threatening the United States
and our economy.
As an engineer and an educator, STEM education is of
particular importance and interest to me and it is one of the
reasons I was eager to join this Committee and Subcommittee. As
a college professor, I saw firsthand how poorly some of our
students are prepared, especially in math. I also know how my
own career was shaped by my early exposure to engineering
concepts and how much I benefitted from the emphasis put on
math and science by my teachers and parents.
I am also focused on improving STEM education because I am
keenly aware that our future economic competitiveness and
prosperity depend on it. Time and again we hear about how
poorly our students are doing on math and science tests. On the
last National Assessment of Educational Progress, the so-called
Nation's Report Card, nearly 80 percent of 12th graders fell
short on science proficiency. The World Economic Forum ranked
the U.S. 48th in math and science. Not surprisingly, this poor
performance has resulted in fewer scientists and engineers.
Only one-third of the undergraduate degrees earned by American
students are in a STEM field, compared with 63 percent in Japan
and 53 percent in China. In a global economy where so many jobs
are based on math, science, and technology, these numbers are
frightening.
But there are many examples of schools and programs that
are having great success increasing student interest and
performance in STEM. That is why I am excited about this
hearing and the recent NRC report on K through 12 STEM
education. There are exemplary STEM schools like the Illinois
Math and Science Academy and I want to learn why and how they
work and what aspects of their success can be replicated
broadly.
I hope to hear from our witnesses about what we can do
better to give students from all backgrounds access to high-
quality education and the opportunities that come with it. One
of the most important lessons I have learned about STEM
education policy is that one successful model is not enough to
achieve systemic change. For one, there still remains a lot we
don't know about what components of successful schools or
programs have been most critical to their success. We also know
from experience that simply copying successful schools doesn't
work. We live in a large and diverse country and our approach
needs to reflect that.
I also think that is why it remains critical that we
continue investing in education research that accounts for
tremendous diversity of environments, infrastructure, cultures,
laws, student populations, family situations, and other factors
that together describe a community and a school. As I
mentioned, one of the most important factors in my educational
success was the involvement of my parents, especially my
mother, so I was glad to hear that this report looked beyond
the classroom.
I hope to hear from our witnesses about the current state
of research in education and about where gaps remain. The
National Science Foundation is not represented on the panel
today, but as some of the witnesses pointed out in their
testimony, NSF is the premier STEM education research
organization in the country. Along with the Institute of
Education Sciences at the Department of Education, the NSF has
been a leader in improving our collective understanding of how
students learn.
In her testimony, Dr. Means very convincingly describes why
this is a unique federal role and she is not the only one to
make this point. It is important that we continue to support
this research, especially projects that focus on sustainability
and large-scale implementation of successful education
programs.
Especially in these tight budget times, it is critical that
we are spending our tax dollars on programs that work, and only
through investing in education research will we know what
works, what doesn't, and where we should target our limited
resources. We know there is no silver bullet when it comes to
addressing the STEM education challenge we face in our country.
At the same time, with so many examples of successful models
and programs, we have much we can look to for guidance.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here this morning
and I look forward to your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lipinski follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski
Thank you Chairman Brooks for holding this hearing, and our
witnesses for being here today. STEM education is of particular
importance and interest to me, and is one of the reasons I was eager to
join this Committee and Subcommittee. As a former college professor I
saw first-hand how poorly some of our students are prepared, especially
in math. I also know how my own career was shaped by my early exposure
to concepts like engineering and how much I benefited from the emphasis
put on math and science by my parents and teachers.But I am also
focused on improving STEM education because I am keenly aware that our
future economic competitiveness and prosperity depend on it.
Time and time again we hear about how poorly our students are doing
on math and science tests. On the last National Assessment of
Educational Progress, the so-called ``nation's report card,'' nearly 80
percent of 12th graders fell short of science proficiency. The World
Economic Forum ranks the U.S. 48th in math and science. Not
surprisingly, this poor performance has resulted in fewer scientists
and engineers. Only one third of the undergraduate degrees earned by
American students are in a STEM field, compared with 63 percent in
Japan and 53 percent in China. In a global economy where nearly
everything we do is based on math, science, and technology, these
numbers are frightening.
But there are many examples of schools and programs that are having
great success increasing student interest and performance in STEM.
That's why I'm excited about this hearing and the recent NRC report on
K-12 STEM Education. There are exemplary STEM schools, like the
Illinois Math and Science Academy, and I want to learn why and how they
work and what aspects of their success can be replicated broadly. I
hope to hear from our witnesses about what we can do better to give
students from all backgrounds access to a high-quality education and
the opportunities that come with it.
One of the most important lessons I've learned about STEM education
policy is that one successful model is not enough to achieve systemic
change. For one, there still remains a lot we don't know about what
components of successful schools or programs have been most critical to
their success. We also know from experience that simply copying
successful schools doesn't always work. We live in a large and diverse
country, and our approach needs to reflect that.
I also think that is why it remains critical that we continue
investing in education research that accounts for the tremendous
diversity of environments, infrastructure, cultures, laws, student
populations, and other factors that together describe a community and a
school. As I mentioned, one of the most important factors in my
educational success was the involvement of my parents, especially my
mother, so I was glad to hear that this report looked beyond the
classroom. I hope to hear from our witnesses about the current state of
research in education, and about where gaps remain.
The National Science Foundation is not represented on the panel
today, but as some of the witnesses pointed out in their testimony, NSF
is the premier STEM education research organization in the country.
Along with the Institute of Education Sciences at the Department of
Education, the NSF has been a leader in improving our collective
understanding of how students learn. In her testimony, Dr. Means very
convincingly describes why this is a unique federal role, and she is
not the only one to make this point. It is important that we continue
to support this research, especially projects that focus on
sustainability and large scale implementation of successful education
programs. Especially in these budget times, it is critical that we are
spending our tax dollars on programs that work, and only through
investing in education research will we know what works, what doesn't,
and where we should target our limited resources.
We know there is no silver bullet when it comes to addressing the
STEM education challenge we face in our country. At the same time, with
so many examples of successful models and programs, we have much we can
look to for guidance. I want to thank the witnesses for being here this
morning and I look forward to your testimony.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
If there are members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time, I would like to introduce our witnesses for
today's hearing.
Dr. Adam Gamoran is the Director of the Wisconsin Center
for Education Research at the University of Wisconsin- Madison.
Dr. Gamoran chaired the National Research Council's Committee
on Highly Successful Schools or Programs in K through 12 STEM
Education, which produced the report we are considering today.
Next, we have Mr. Mark Heffron. He is the Director of
Stapleton High School at the Denver School for Science and
Technology and includes the school featured in the report.
After working as a structural engineer, Mr. Heffron left
engineering to pursue a career as a math teacher. In 2010, Mr.
Heffron became the High School Director of DSST, Stapleton
Campus, and he is currently the Stapleton Campus Director
leading Culture, Instruction, and Assessment of the high school
and overseeing the operations of six through eight, Stapleton
Middle School.
Dr. Suzanne Wilson serves as Chair and Professor in the
Department of Teacher Education at Michigan State University.
Prior to joining the faculty at MSU, Dr. Wilson was the first
Director of the Teacher Assessment Project. Dr. Wilson has
served on several National Research Council Committees,
including the Teacher Preparation Study and participated in the
workshop for the report we are reviewing today.
Next, we have Dr. Elaine Allensworth. She is Senior
Director and Chief Research Officer at the Consortium on
Chicago School Research at the University of Chicago. She has
served on a number of committees for the National Academies, is
a standing member of the Scientific Review Panel of the United
States Department of Education, and was on the Board of the
Illinois Education Research Council. She, too, participated in
the workshop for this report.
And then finally, we will have Dr. Barbara Means. She is
the Director for the Center for Technology in Learning at SRI
International, a Fellow of the American Educational Research
Association. Dr. Means serves on the National Academy of
Engineering, National Research Council Committee on Integrated
STEM Education, and on the National Research Council's working
Committee on Highly Successful Schools or Programs for K
through 12 STEM Education.
As all of our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is
limited to five minutes each, after which the members of the
committee will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Adam Gamoran. Dr.
Gamoran, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. ADAM GAMORAN, DIRECTOR,

WISCONSIN CENTER FOR EDUCATION RESEARCH, UNIVERSITY OF
WISCONSIN

Dr. Gamoran. Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski,
Chairman Wolf, and other Members of the Subcommittee, thank you
for the opportunity to discuss this report. As you indicated,
my name is Adam Gamoran, and I chaired the committee that
produced this report. Although I am speaking on my own behalf,
my written statement has been endorsed by the other members of
the committee. I am here to discuss the report and its
implications for the federal role in K-12 STEM education.
Both Chairman Brooks and Chairman Wolf, as well as Ranking
Member Lipinski have already stated more eloquently than I
could the importance of the federal role in leveraging
excellence and fostering equity in K-12 STEM education.
Our committee faced two major challenges. First, there has
been little research about engineering and technology
education. As a result, the report's findings and
recommendations about K-12 STEM education are largely based on
research on mathematics and science education. Second, only a
small portion of the research addresses impact questions.
Because students and teachers are rarely assigned at random,
what appears to be a successful program may be one that started
with students who were already advanced. The Committee took
such suggestive evidence into account but took as evidence of
success only that which distinguished between program effects
and effects of participant selection.
The Committee identified three goals: expanding and
broadening participation in STEM careers, expanding and
broadening participation in a STEM-capable workforce, and
increasing STEM literacy for all students. We examined success
in three areas: student outcomes, specialized STEM-focused
schools, and the quality of STEM teaching. We found that while
achievement tests are the most common indicator of student
outcomes, they do not tell the whole story.
We found that high-quality teaching and learning can occur
in all types of schools, including specialized STEM schools and
regular public schools. However, most research addresses
classroom instruction. Here, there is more to say. STEM
learning gets a boost from a coherent, focused, and rigorous
curriculum, from teachers who are knowledgeable in their
fields, from supportive systems of assessment, from adequate
time for learning, and from equal access to learning
opportunities. School conditions such as teacher learning
communities and leadership focused on learning help support
effective instruction.

The Committee identified four areas that urgently require
new research--research that links organizational and
instructional practices to longitudinal data on student
outcomes; research on student outcomes other than achievement;
research on STEM programs that distinguishes program effects
from selection effects, that identifies distinctive aspects of
educational practices, and that measures long-term
effectiveness; and research on effects of professional
development for STEM teachers on student learning.
No other entity can fill the Federal Government's role in
supporting research on STEM education. Much of the research
reviewed in this successful STEM report was supported by
federal funding, mainly through the National Science Foundation
and the U.S. Department of Education's Institute of Education
Sciences. Funding for STEM education research should remain a
priority despite the fiscal challenges of our times.
Like the authors of another NRC report, ``Rising Above the
Gathering Storm,'' I believe our Nation cannot afford to back
away from investments in STEM education. New investments in
research are needed to help fill critical gaps. As the primary
sponsors of K-12 STEM education research, NSF and IES are
staffed by professionals who rely on scientific peer review for
funding decisions, so they are well placed for this role.
Interagency collaboration can help ensure that ongoing research
covers the continuum from basic insights about STEM teaching,
learning, and leading to rigorous research on applications as
they are tested, replicated, and implemented at scale.
In addition to NSF and IES, numerous federal agencies have
small roles in education research and programming. This
scattershot approach should be reconsidered as the more
concentrated investments at agencies where education research
is the primary mission are likely to have higher yield.
The Committee identified two negative consequences of the
No Child Left Behind Act that could be addressed in new federal
legislation. First, assessments used for accountability tend to
be inadequate to promote deep understanding in the STEM
domains. A system of assessments that spans the range from
basic concepts to deep understanding could be equally well tied
to standards and more supportive of instruction. Efforts to
develop better math and reading assessments are currently
underway. Similar efforts are needed in science.
Second, NCLB's emphasis on reading and mathematics is
squeezing out time for science instruction. Particularly at the
elementary level, studies show that less time is being devoted
to science perhaps because schools are not held accountable for
science learning. Yet other research points to the importance
of capturing students' interest at an early age. This may be
particularly important for disadvantaged youth who have few
opportunities for science learning in their homes and
neighborhoods. The Committee thus recommended that science
should be elevated to the same level of importance as
mathematics and reading in state and federal accountability
systems.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gamoran follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Adam Gamoran, Wisconsin Center for Education
Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski, and other Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss with you the
findings of the recent National Research Council (NRC) report on
Successful K-12 STEM Education: Identifying Effective Approaches in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics. \1\ My name is Adam
Gamoran, and I chaired the committee that produced this report.
Although I am speaking on my own behalf, my written statement has been
endorsed by the other members of the committee. My goals today are to
recount and respond to questions about the findings of the report and
the research that lies behind it, to identify gaps in our knowledge
that limited the findings, and to discuss implications for enhancing
the federal role in K-12 STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) education.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Research Council. (2011). Successful K-12 STEM
education: Identifying effective approaches in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics. Committee on Highly Successful Science
Schools or Programs for K-12 STEM Education. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press. Available at: http://www.nap.edu/
catalog.php?record_id=13158
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My testimony is based not only on my role as chair of this
committee, but also on my experience in education research over a
career of 27 years at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, in which I
have focused on efforts to improve performance and reduce learning gaps
in U.S. schools from early education to the postsecondary level. I have
served on a variety of national panels and am currently a member of the
NRC Board on Science Education. I also chair the Independent Advisory
Panel of the National Assessment of Career and Technical Education for
the U.S. Department of Education, and I am an appointed member of the
National Board for Education Sciences.
Although education in the U.S. is primarily a state and local
responsibility, the quality of K-12 STEM education is a matter of
pressing national interest; indeed it is a national security issue, as
expressed a decade ago by the U.S. Commission on National Security in
the 21st Century. \2\ Consequently it is both appropriate and necessary
that the federal government play a role in leveraging excellence and
fostering equity in K-12 STEM education across the country.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ United States Commission on National Security in the 21st
Century. (2001). Road map for national security: Imperative for change.
Washington, DC: U.S. Commission on National Security in the 21st
Century. Available at: http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/nssg/
PhaseIIIFR.pdf

Challenges Faced by the Committee

The Committee on Highly Successful Schools or Programs for K-12
STEM Education faced two major challenges as we pursued our work over a
very short and intensive time frame (October 2010 to June 2011). First,
we quickly learned that knowledge about successful K-12 STEM education
is unevenly distributed across the STEM domains: research on
mathematics education is more extensive than that on science education,
particularly when addressing the effects of particular schools and
programs, and there has simply been very little research about K-12
education in engineering and technology, because these subjects are
less often taught at the K-12 level. Regarding the effects of K-12
engineering education on learning, another NRC panel concluded in 2009
that ``the limited amount of reliable data does not provide a basis for
unqualified claims of impact.'' \3\ That is still the case. As a
result, our Committee's findings and recommendations about K-12 STEM
education are largely based on research on mathematics and science
education. Moreover, as I will note below, the research on school and
program success focuses mainly on a narrow set of achievement outcomes
and yields little evidence on other types of outcomes such as interest,
motivation, and participation. This, too, constrained the ability of
the Committee to identify areas of success.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Katehi, L., Pearson, G., & Feder, M., Editors. (2009).
Engineering in K-12 education: Understanding the status and improving
the prospects. Committee on K-12 Engineering Education. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press, p. 154.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The second major challenge was that a relatively small portion of
the research on K-12 STEM education addresses questions about the
impact of STEM-focused schools and programs. Commonly, studies do not
use designs that allow them to distinguish the effects of schools or
programs from the effects of who participates and who does not. Because
students and teachers are rarely assigned at random, what appears to be
a successful program may be one that started with students who were
already advanced before they enrolled. (Similarly, if a program appears
ineffective, the lack of apparent effects may also reflect selection
patterns.) This is the fundamental challenge of all research on school,
program, and teacher effects. Research designs to address this
challenge are available--experimental or rigorous quasi-experimental
designs--but they have only recently begun to be widely employed. Using
an experimental design in some of my own research, I recently
identified a professional development program in elementary science
education that was unsuccessful at raising student achievement. \4\
Without a rigorous design, we might have been misled about the effects
of the program. While negative findings are hardly glamorous, they are
a crucial part of advancing knowledge.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Borman, G. D., Gamoran, A., & Bowdon, J. (2008). A randomized
trial of teacher development in elementary science: First-year effects.
Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 1, 237-264.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Because of this challenge, the Committee considered evidence to be
merely suggestive if it pointed to conditions associated with success,
but did not reveal whether success resulted from the qualities of the
program or the characteristics of participants. We took as evidence of
success only findings that ``resulted from research studies that were
designed to support causal conclusions by distinguishing the
effectiveness of schools from the characteristics of students attending
them'' (p.1).

Background to Findings of the Successful STEM Report:

Goals of K-12 STEM Education

Our Committee was charged with ``outlining criteria for identifying
effective STEM schools and programs and identifying which of those
criteria could be addressed with available data and research, and those
where further work is needed to develop appropriate data sources''
(p.1). It was immediately clear that the charge could be met only if we
first answered the question, ``Effective for what?'' Before answering
questions about criteria of success, we first needed to identify the
goals against which success could be measured. We focused on three
goals:

Goal 1: Expand the number of students who ultimately
pursue advanced degrees and careers in STEM fields, and broaden the
participation of women and minorities in those fields.

This goal is about nurturing our top talent to advance scientific
discovery and leadership. It is also about ensuring that persons from
underrepresented groups have the opportunity to take advantage of their
talents to make scientific contributions.

Goal 2: Expand the STEM-capable workforce and broaden the
participation of women and minorities in that workforce.

A growing number of jobs--not just those in professional science--
require knowledge of STEM fields. Schools and programs are needed that
prepare young people for a wide range of careers that benefit from such
expertise.

Goal 3: Increase STEM literacy for all students,
including those who do not pursue STEM-related careers or additional
study in the STEM disciplines.

As a nation, our goals extend beyond having a capable and
competitive work force. We also need to help all students become
scientifically literate. Our citizens are increasingly facing decisions
related to science and technology, from understanding a medical
diagnosis to weighing competing claims about the environment, and
successful STEM education must address this aim as well.
With these goals in mind, the Committee examined success in three
areas: (1) student outcomes; (2) specialized STEM schools and programs;
and (3) effective classroom instruction in STEM fields. We also
assessed the research on school conditions that support effective
instruction.

Findings about Student Outcomes

Student achievement test scores are the measures most commonly used
to gauge success, regardless of the goals of a particular school or
program. But test scores do not reveal all we need to know about
success. For example, the Committee learned about the Thomas Jefferson
High School of Science and Technology, a highly selective magnet school
in Alexandria, VA. This school's mission is to ``provide students a
challenging learning environment focused on math, science, and
technology, to inspire joy at the prospect of discovery, and to foster
a culture of innovation based on ethical behavior and the shared
interests of humanity'' (p. 6). A narrow focus on test scores does not
begin to tell the story of whether such schools are successful.
Assessing a school's success relative to its full set of goals
requires using additional criteria. For example, entry into STEM-
related majors and careers and making good choices as citizens and
consumers also require applying and using STEM content knowledge. Other
indicators of student engagement include participation in formal STEM
courses in middle and high school, and other kinds of STEM educational
activities such as visits to museums, participation in after-school
clubs or programs, internships, and research experiences.

Findings about Specialized STEM Schools and Programs

A major question for the Committee was whether certain types of
specialized STEM-focused schools are especially successful at advancing
the goals of U.S. STEM education. We identified three type of STEM-
focused schools: selective STEM schools, inclusive STEM schools, and
schools with STEM-focused career and technical education (CTE). Each
type of school has strengths and weaknesses and poses a unique set of
challenges associated with implementation.
As I explained at the outset, identifying schools and programs that
are most successful in the STEM disciplines is not a simple matter,
because it is difficult to determine the extent to which a school's
success results from any actions the school takes, or the extent to
which it is related to which students are enrolled in the school.
Moreover, specialized models of STEM schools are difficult to replicate
on a larger scale. That's because the context in which a school is
located may facilitate or constrain its success. Specialized STEM
schools often benefit from a high level of resources, a highly
motivated student body, and freedom from state testing requirements.
Selective STEM schools are organized around one or more of the STEM
disciplines and have selective admissions criteria. Typically, these
are high schools that enroll relatively small numbers of highly
talented and motivated students with a demonstrated interest in and
aptitude for STEM. The Committee identified four types of selective
STEM schools: state residential schools; stand-alone schools; schools-
within-schools; and regional centers with specialized half-day courses.
All of these selective STEM schools seek to provide a high-quality
education that prepares students to earn STEM degrees and succeed in
professional STEM careers.
There are approximately 90 selective STEM specialty high schools in
the United States. Examples include Thomas Jefferson High School of
Science and Technology, a stand-alone school in Virginia; the North
Carolina School of Science and Mathematics, a residential school for
grades 11-12; the Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy, a
residential high school; and Brooklyn Technical High School, a stand-
alone school. At the time of the report, no completed study provided a
rigorous analysis of the contributions that selective schools make over
and above regular schools. The Committee identified one such study that
was, and still is, under way. \5\ Preliminary results from that study
show that when compared with national samples of high school graduates
with ability and interest in STEM subjects, the research experiences of
students who graduate from selective schools appear to be associated
with their choice to pursue and complete a STEM major.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Subotnik, R. F., & Tai, R. H. (2011). Successful education in
the STEM disciplines: An examination of selective specialized science,
mathematics, and technology-focused high schools. Background paper
presented at the NRC Workshop on Successful STEM Education in K-12
Schools. Washington, DC: National Research Council.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since the Successful STEM report was completed, another research
study has used a rigorous quasi-experimental design to assess the
impact of three selective STEM-focused schools in New York City. \6\
Students enrolled in the selective STEM schools took more advanced
courses and were more likely to graduate from high school. One of the
three schools produced higher SAT mathematics scores compared to non-
specialized, non-selective high schools, but the other two did not, and
there were no benefits for rates of college enrollment or graduation.
It should be clear that research on this topic is just beginning to
emerge with designs that allow one to distinguish the effects of
selective STEM-focused schools from the effects of who attends such
schools.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Dobbie, W., & Fryer, W. G. (2011). Exam high schools and
academic achievement: Evidence from New York City. NBER Working Paper
17286. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inclusive STEM schools emphasize one or more of the STEM
disciplines but do not have selective admissions criteria. These
schools seek to provide experiences that are similar to those at
selective STEM schools, while serving a broader population. Examples
include High Tech High, a set of schools in southern California; Manor
New Technology High School in Texas; the Denver School for Science and
Technology in Colorado for grades 6-12; and Oakcliff Elementary School
in Georgia.
Insights from inclusive STEM schools come from an ongoing study of
high school reform in Texas. \7\ Early findings suggest that students
in that state's 51 inclusive STEM schools score slightly higher on the
state mathematics and science achievement tests, are less likely to be
absent from school, and take more advanced courses than their peers in
comparison schools. The schools in the Texas study are new, having
opened in 2006-2007 or later. They have achieved these gains within
their first three years of operation. Five factors that appear to have
helped the schools include (1) a STEM school blueprint that helps to
guide school planning and implementation, (2) a college preparatory
curriculum and an explicit focus on college readiness for all students,
(3) strong academic supports, (4) small school size, and (5) strong
support from their district or charter management organization.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Young, V. M., House, A., Wang, H., Singleton, C., &
Klopfenstein, K. (2011). Inclusive STEM schools: Early promise in Texas
and unanswered questions. Background paper presented at the NRC
Workshop on Successful STEM Education in K-12 Schools. Washington, DC:
National Research Council.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
STEM-related career and technical education (CTE) serves mainly
high school students. It can take place in regional centers, CTE-
focused high schools, programs in comprehensive high schools, and
career academies. An important goal of STEM-focused CTE is to prepare
students for STEM-related careers, often with the broader goal of
increasing engagement to prevent students from dropping out of school.
Students explore STEM-related career options and learn the practical
applications of STEM subjects through the wide range of CTE delivery
mechanisms. Examples include Loudoun Governor's Career and Technical
Academy, a high school in Virginia; Sussex Technical High School in
Delaware; and Los Altos Academy of Engineering, a high school in
California. There are many examples of highly regarded CTE schools and
programs, but there is little research that would support conclusions
about the effectiveness of the programs. One rigorous study of
instruction that integrated mathematics content into CTE found benefits
for student mathematics achievement, suggesting that CTE and academic
achievement need not be in conflict. \8\ A similar study is under way
to examine the integration of science content into CTE.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Stone, J. R., III, Alfeld, C., & Pearson, D. (2008). Rigor and
relevance: Testing a model of enhanced math learning in career and
technical education. American Educational Research Journal, 45, 767-
795.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The limited research base on these three school types hampered the
Committee's ability to compare their effectiveness relative to each
other, and for different student populations, or to identify the value
these schools add, over and above non-STEM focused schools. However,
the available studies suggest some potentially promising--if
preliminary and qualified--findings associated for each school type.
The Committee further noted that high levels of STEM learning can
also occur in non-STEM focused schools. Much of what we know from
research about effective practices comes from comprehensive public
schools, which educate the vast majority of our students including many
talented students aspiring to STEM careers. At the high school level,
Advanced Placement and International Baccalaureate are the most widely
recognized programs of advanced study in science and mathematics.

Findings about Effective Classroom Instruction in STEM Fields

One way to think about the Committee's charge is that a successful
school is one in which effective instructional practices are
implemented widely throughout the school. An advantage to a focus on
practices is that it provides schools with concrete guidance for
improving the quality of STEM instruction and, presumably, of STEM
learning. Another reason for reporting on instruction is that the
evidence on effective practices tends to be stronger than the evidence
on school types. The Committee examined two key aspects of practice
that are likely to be found in successful schools: instruction that
captures students' interest and involves them in STEM activities, and
school conditions that support effective STEM instruction.
Effective STEM instruction capitalizes on students' early interest
and experiences, identifies and builds on what students already know,
and provides students with experiences to engage them in the practices
of science and sustain their interest. Effective teachers use what they
know about students' understanding to help students apply these
practices. In this way, students successively deepen their
understanding both of core ideas in the STEM fields and of concepts
that are shared across areas of science, mathematics, and engineering.
Students also engage with fundamental questions about the material and
natural worlds and gain experience in the ways in which scientists have
investigated and found answers to those questions.
For this type of K-12 STEM instruction to become the norm, further
transformation is needed at the national, state, and local levels. The
Committee identified five key elements that may guide educators and
policy makers in that direction.

Key element 1: A coherent set of standards and curriculum. The
research shows a clear link between what students are expected to learn
and mathematics achievement: At a given grade level, greater
achievement is associated with covering fewer topics in greater depth.
Some evidence suggests that adopting rigorous standards and aligning
curriculum and assessments to those standards can lead to gains in
student achievement.
The data support the hypothesis that there is a relationship
between standards and achievement-- that content coverage led by
coherent, focused, and rigorous standards, and properly implemented by
teachers, can improve student outcomes in mathematics. My own research
has supported this claim in the area of mathematics instruction. \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Gamoran, A., Porter, A. C., Smithson, J., & White, P. A.
(1997). Upgrading high school mathematics instruction: Improving
learning opportunities for low-income, low-achieving youth. Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 19, 325-338; Gamoran, A. (2001). Beyond
curriculum wars: Content and understanding in mathematics. Pp. 134-162
in T. Loveless (Ed.), The great curriculum debate: How should we teach
reading and math? Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Key element 2: Teachers with high capacity to teach in their
discipline. To be effective, teachers need content knowledge and they
need expertise in teaching that content. But the research suggests that
many science and mathematics teachers are underprepared for these
demands. For example, in both middle and high schools, many teachers
who teach science and mathematics courses are not certified in those
subjects and did not major in a related field in college. Estimates of
the number of out-of-field science and mathematics teachers in
secondary school are between 10 and 20 percent. Moreover, a recent
survey of university teacher preparation programs found that future
elementary teachers were required to take, on average, only two
mathematics courses.
Professional development for teachers in STEM is often short,
fragmented, ineffective, and not designed to address the specific need
of individual teachers. Instead, teacher development should occur
across a continuum that ranges from initial preparation to induction
into the practice of teaching, and then to systematic, needs-based
professional development, including on-site professional support that
allows for interaction and collaboration with colleagues.

Key element 3: A supportive system of assessment and
accountability. Current assessments limit teachers' ability to teach in
ways that are known to promote learning of scientific and mathematical
content and practices. For example, since implementation of the No
Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, surveys of teachers indicate a shift in
mathematics instruction away from complex performance assessments
toward multiple-choice items, and researchers have argued that this
shift leads teachers to teach a narrow curriculum focused on basic
skills.
In a supportive system of standards-based science assessment,
curriculum, instruction, and assessment are aligned with the standards,
target the same goals for learning, and work together to support
students' developing science literacy. The classroom, school, school
district, and state all share a vision of the goals for science
education, the purposes and uses of assessment, and of what constitutes
competent performance. The system takes into account how students'
science understanding develops over time and the scientific content
knowledge, abilities, and understanding that are needed for learning to
progress at each stage of the process. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ For more on this vision of science assessment, see: National
Research Council. (2006). Systems for state science assessment.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A supportive accountability system focuses on teacher practices as
well as on student outcomes. For example at the Illinois Mathematics
and Science Academy, teachers' use of science inquiry practices are
monitored with student surveys, classroom observations, and external
reviews.

Key element 4: Adequate instructional time. The NCLB Act has also
changed the time allotted for science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics instruction in the K-12 curriculum. Particularly in
elementary school, instruction emphasizes mathematics and English
language arts because those subjects are tested annually under the
current accountability system. Meanwhile, surveys of districts,
schools, and teachers are reporting diminished instructional time for
science in elementary schools. The decrease in time for science
education is a particular concern because some research suggests that
interest in science careers may develop in the elementary school years.

Key element 5: Equal access to high-quality STEM learning
opportunities. Many factors contribute to students having unequal
access, including poverty, but we focused on structural inequalities
that states, schools, and districts have the potential to address. For
example, disparities in teacher expectations and other school and
classroom-level factors, such as access to adequate laboratory
facilities, resources, and supplies, contribute to gaps in science
achievement for underrepresented groups. Similar structural inequities
hinder the mathematics learning of underrepresented minorities and low-
income students, such as disparities in access to well-trained or
credentialed teachers, less rigorous educational courses, and ability
tracking in the early grades. In mathematics, these inequalities can
have cumulative effects as students progress through grades K-12
because mathematics is a gatekeeper to academic opportunity. Policies
to ensure that well-prepared teachers are placed in all classrooms can
redress the imbalance in students' access to qualified teachers.

Findings about School Conditions that Support Effective Instruction

Strong teachers and focused, rigorous, and coherent curricula are
certainly important factors to improve student learning in STEM.
However, school and community conditions also affect what is taught,
how it is taught, and with which results. A variety of studies
highlight the value of teacher learning communities as a source of
improvement in teacher and student learning. In a study of 200 low-
performing elementary schools in Chicago, no schools with a poor
learning climate and weak professional community substantially improved
math or reading scores. However, about half of schools with a well-
aligned curriculum and a strong professional community among teachers
substantially improved math and reading achievement. \11\ The
elementary schools that improved student learning in mathematics and
reading shared five common elements, as summarized in the Successful
STEM report (p.24):
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Bryk, A. S., Sebring, P. B., Allensworth, E., Luppescu, S., &
Easton, J. (2010). Organizing schools for improvement: Lessons from
Chicago. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

1.  School leadership as the driver for change. Principals must be
strategic, focused on instruction, and inclusive of others in the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
leadership work.

2.  Professional capacity, or the quality of the faculty and staff
recruited to the school, their base beliefs and values about change,
the quality of ongoing professional development, and the capacity of a
staff to work together.

3.  Parent-community ties that involve active outreach to make
school a welcoming place for parents, engage them in supporting their
children's academic success, and strengthen connections to other local
institutions.

4.  Student-centered learning climate. Such a climate is safe,
welcoming, stimulating and nurturing environment focused on learning
for all students.

5.  Instructional guidance that is focused on the organization of
the curriculum, the nature of academic demand or challenges it poses,
and the tools teachers have to advance learning (such as instructional
materials).

The strength of these supports varied within and across elementary
schools in Chicago: Some schools were strong along all dimensions, and
some were stronger in some dimensions than in others. Although not all
of these supports need to be strong for schools to succeed, schools
that were weak on all of these dimensions showed no gains in
achievement.

Gaps in Our Knowledge about Successful K-12 STEM Education

Careful assessment of existing research is valuable not only
because of the findings it reveals, but also because it helps identify
gaps in our knowledge that need to be filled before we can fully answer
questions about highly successful STEM schools and programs. The
Committee identified four major areas that urgently require new
research.

Research that links organizational and instructional
practices to longitudinal data on student outcomes.

State longitudinal data systems now permit researchers and policy
makers to monitor student achievement trends over times and across
schools and classrooms. Yet too little is known about the conditions
under which achievement differences are produced. We need more research
like the Chicago study that linked school conditions and instructional
practices to student outcomes. Work of this sort is currently under way
at the National Center for Scaling Up Effective Schools at Vanderbilt
University. This type of work is especially critical because successful
implementation of STEM programs may depend on contextual factors such
as leadership and professional supports.

Research on student outcomes other than achievement

While we know too little about conditions that elevate achievement
and reduce achievement gaps, we know even less about other outcomes of
STEM education. A successful school or program is one that not only
promotes cognitive growth but also stimulates interest, entices
students with the allure of scientific discovery, provides
opportunities for inquiry and research, and motivates students to
engage in scientific pursuits. Few studies investigate these outcomes
using designs that permit one to discern school or program effects.

Research on STEM programs and schools that allows one to
distinguish school effects from effects of student characteristics;
that identifies distinctive aspects of educational practices; and that
measures long-term effectiveness relative to goals.

As noted earlier, a shortage of studies that permit conclusions
about cause and effect was one of the major challenges faced by the
Committee. More such studies are needed to allow firm conclusions about
successful schools and programs. At the same time, studies that adopt
experimental designs often take a ``black box'' approach by not
investigating what is occurring inside the school or classroom, and
this limits the information one can draw, especially if the program is
not as effective as expected. Studies are needed that not only identify
program effects, but reveal how those effects emerge. Moreover,
research grant funding cycles mean there is an unfortunate tendency to
focus on short-term outcomes of a year or two (or even less). Effective
programs, however, often take five years to reach a high level of
success. Many programs deemed ineffective may not have been sustained
or studied for long enough to have the chance to succeed. Consequently,
research with a longer horizon is also needed.

Research on effects of professional development for STEM
teachers and of school culture for student learning

The Committee noted that an emerging consensus among researchers
has identified characteristics of effective professional development.
Yet these characteristics have yet to be confirmed with research
designed to measure impact. This is regarded as an extremely important
area of research because teacher quality is a major source of variation
in student achievement. Professional development that elevates the
quality of teaching is one potential strategy to enhance STEM learning
and reduce learning gaps. Research is also urgently needed on which
aspects of school culture contribute to STEM learning, especially in
schools that serve high proportions of students who are
underrepresented in the STEM fields, such as low-income and minority
students.

Implications of the Successful STEM Report for the

Federal Role in K-12 STEM Education

In my judgment, the federal government plays two essential roles in
K-12 STEM education: leveraging excellence and fostering equity.
Leverage for excellence occurs when the government sponsors research
that yields new understandings of how children learn in the STEM
domains, how teachers can teach more effectively, and how schools and
districts can better support effective teaching. It also occurs when
the federal government sponsors programs to train outstanding new
teachers and leaders for U.S. schools. These programs also foster
equity when they focus on improving conditions for students from
disadvantaged backgrounds. The federal government also helps foster
equity by holding states, schools, and districts accountable for
providing equal educational opportunities for students of all
backgrounds.

Federal Support for STEM Education Research

No other entity can fill the federal government's key role in
supporting research on STEM education. Much of the research reviewed in
the Successful STEM report was supported by federal funding, mainly
through the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the U.S. Department
of Education's Institute of Education Sciences. The Successful STEM
report shows that while much has been learned, the gaps in our
knowledge remain wide.
Funding for STEM education research should remain a priority
despite the fiscal challenges of our times. Like the authors of another
NRC report, Rising Above the Gathering Storm, I believe our nation
cannot afford to back away from investments in STEM education that are
crucial for our long-term economic and social prosperity. The Education
and Human Resources Directorate (EHR) at NSF and the Institute of
Education Sciences at the Department of Education are the primary
sponsors of STEM education research; the professional expertise of
their staffs and their engagement with the research community including
reliance on scientific peer review for funding decisions have
positioned them well for this role.
A challenge for NSF funding of STEM education research is that
recent laudable funding for developing STEM teachers and leaders has
come at the expense of funding for research. Both are important, and
indeed the Successful STEM report encourages federal investment in ``a
coherent, focused, and sustained set of supports for STEM teachers''
(p.28). Yet these supports should complement rather than compete with
funding for research-based innovations that can have wide and long-
lasting implications. Moreover, the Committee urged that ``federal
funding for STEM-focused schools should be tied to a robust, strategic
research agenda'' (p.28), so that the questions put to the Committee
can be fully addressed in the future.
The Committee recommended federal support for ``research that
disentangles the effects of school practice from student selection,
recognizes the importance of contextual variables, and allows for
longitudinal assessment of student outcomes'' (p.28). It is important
that NSF continue to fund basic as well as applied research in STEM
education. While rigorous impact studies are essential, they cannot be
the only focus of education research because there is still much to
learn about basic questions such as how teachers and students learn,
what motivates learners, and what conditions support the development of
high-quality teachers. Particularly in light of the applied research
mission of the Institute of Education Sciences (IES), it is important
that NSF continue to support research that addresses more basic
questions about fundamental processes that lie behind teaching and
learning. Indeed, collaboration between IES at the Department of
Education and EHR at NSF can help ensure that ongoing research covers
the continuum from basic insights about STEM teaching, learning, and
leading to research on applications as they are tested, replicated, and
implemented at scale.
In addition to NSF and IES, numerous federal agencies have small
roles in education research and programming. This scattershot approach
should be reconsidered as the more concentrated investments at agencies
where education research is the primary mission are likely to have
higher yield.

Federal Support for Equal Opportunity

With the passage of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act of 2001,
the federal government greatly expanded its role in holding states,
districts, and schools accountable for student performance. NCLB has
galvanized the attention of educators and the public towards elevating
achievement, and has highlighted the pervasive inequalities in
achievement in U.S. education. Yet the Committee identified two major
negative consequences of NCLB that could be addressed in new federal
legislation.
First, the assessments used for accountability tend to be
inadequate to promote deep understanding in the STEM domains. In
mathematics, now tested in all states every year in grades 3-8,
assessments commonly used for accountability focus on fragmented bits
of information instead of more meaningful knowledge. By contrast, a
system of assessments that spans the range from basic concepts to deep
understanding could be equally well tied to standards and more
supportive of instruction. Efforts to develop such assessments are
currently under way in two multistate consortia supported by
substantial federal funding. Similar efforts are needed in science. The
National Research Council recently developed a new and generally
acclaimed conceptual framework for 21st century science education
standards. \12\ Currently, over 20 states have signed onto an
initiative by Achieve, Inc. to develop new standards. When the
standards are complete, a major federal investment will be needed to
develop assessments that align with the standards, so that student
performance can be benchmarked to the new standards and student growth
monitored over time.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ National Research Council. (2011). A framework for K-12
science education: Practices, crosscutting concepts, and core ideas.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, the Committee learned that NCLB's emphasis on reading and
mathematics is squeezing out time for science instruction. Particularly
at the elementary level, studies show that less time is being devoted
to science, presumably because it is not a subject for which schools
are held accountable. Yet other research points to the importance of
capturing students' interest in science at an early age. This may be
particularly important for disadvantaged youth who have fewer
opportunities for science learning in their homes and neighborhoods.
The Committee thus recommended that science should be elevated to the
same level of importance as mathematics and reading in federal and
state accountability systems. Science should be tested with the same
frequency as mathematics and reading using assessments that support
learning and understanding.
A major source of educational inequality in the U.S. is that which
lies between states. While the federal government cannot compel states
to adopt high standards, it can provide incentives that encourage
states to promote high levels of STEM learning and to equalize
opportunities for learning among students from all backgrounds.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Gamoran.
Next, we have Mr. Heffron. You may begin your five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. MARK HEFFRON, DIRECTOR,

DENVER SCHOOL FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: STAPLETON HIGH SCHOOL

Mr. Heffron. Thank you, Chairman Brooks and members of the
committee, for the opportunity to testify on this critical
topic facing our Nation. I applaud the foresight of the
Committee to commission the National Academy study on
successful K-12 STEM models in the country seeking to find what
works.
I serve as the Campus Director of a 6-12 STEM school in
Denver, DSST's Public Schools network of charter schools. DSST
Public Schools currently operates five STEM open-enrollment
charter schools, three middle school and two high schools,
serving 1,500 students in Denver. Because we are a charter
school, all of our students enroll through a non-selective,
random lottery. As a result, our student body is diverse. Fifty
percent of our students are low income and 70 percent are
minorities. This is roughly half African American and half
Hispanic. Our schools truly represent a cross-section of
Denver, the city we serve.
DSST Public Schools operate some of the most successful
public schools in Colorado. Last year, our schools operated the
highest-performing middle school and high school in Denver. We
are most proud, though, of our measures that show growth,
meaning how much did a student learn from the first day of
school to the last day of school? Within the State of Colorado,
our schools showed some of the highest growth numbers of all
public schools, according to the Colorado Model on State CSAP
tests. And at DSST Stapleton High School, the school I lead,
all of our four senior classes in the school's history have
earned acceptance to four-year colleges. All of our students
are prepared to study STEM fields of study in college, and we
estimate that 40 percent of our students are choosing to do so.
Most importantly, DSST proves without a doubt that all
students, regardless of race or income, can earn a rigorous
STEM high school diploma and attend a four-year college or
university. Preparing every student to succeed in a four-year
college with the opportunity to study STEM is at the center of
our academic program, which is centered on three pillars.
First, our schools are built on the premise that all
students deserve access to a high-quality STEM education. A
majority of DSST students enter well below grade level in the
sixth and ninth grades and could never test into a magnet
science program. Many students are conditioned to believe that
science and advanced math is an extra and only for smart kids.
In our schools, these subjects are not extras but core subjects
that all students are required to take. All students have
access to STEM college preparatory curriculum.
Our second key belief is that schools must provide a
rigorous STEM preparatory curriculum. We believe that the most
important factor in a student choosing and ultimately
completing a STEM degree is their preparedness to succeed at
college and the graduate level. Regardless of their starting
point at DSST, all students are expected to pass three years of
integrated science in middle school and more than five years in
high school. Many students choose more than that.
Students take algebra-based high school physics in the
ninth grade. This provides students with a lab-based class to
practice, apply, and synthesize the math skills they are
learning elsewhere. All ninth grade students also take
``Creative Engineering'' where they learn the design process,
how to conduct basic research, how to maximize and minimize
constraints, and are hooked into engineering and sciences as
careers that improve the human condition.
Students complete their high school requirements by taking
a college-level physics class coupled with an engineering
course or a college level biochemistry class coupled with a
bio-technology class. Math is also a critical component. All
students take four years and must successfully complete pre-
calculus to graduate.
Lastly, we believe that the success of any school must be
rooted in a strong school culture that focuses on building
character and creating an accountable environment that expects
all students to be college-ready. Students are challenged and
supported in our schools. A peer-driven culture is reflected in
each of our schools where going to college is cool and
expected.
In sum, we agree with the recommendations of the National
Academy's Report. However, I would like to highlight four
recommendations for further consideration by this committee:
First, while we agree that there is a clear need to create more
STEM schools, we urge this committee to stress the creation of
open-enrollment, access for all STEM schools. Only through
these schools will we tap into the potential of all children in
our country to create new labor markets for our STEM fields.
Second, we must create rigorous STEM schools that go beyond
``engaging'' students into STEM to truly preparing them for
STEM post-secondary study with rigorous math and science
instruction. Getting students excited about STEM is important,
but the larger problem lies in that most students lack open
access to programs that truly prepare them for those STEM
degrees.
Third, we must do more to simply create great schools built
on high expectations and high accountability cultures. The
emphasis needs to be on high-quality models, not just more STEM
schools.
Fourth, we need to attract more high-quality candidates to
teaching math and science. DSST Public Schools is a proud
member of the 100Kin10 initiative to help recruit science and
math teachers over the next decade. This is a critical area of
focus and effort.
On behalf of DSST Public Schools, I thank you for the
opportunity to share and welcome further dialogue around the
importance of creating high-quality STEM education options in
our country.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Heffron follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Mark Heffron, Director, Denver School of
Science and Technology, Stapleton High School
Thank you, Chairman Hall, and the Members of the Committee, for the
opportunity to testify on this critical topic facing our nation. I
applaud the foresight of the Committee to commission the National
Academy study on successful K-12 STEM models in our country--seeking to
find what works.
I serve as the Campus Director of a 6-12 STEM school in the Denver
School for Science and Technology (DSST) Public Schools network of
charter schools. DSST Public Schools currently operates five STEM open-
enrollment charter schools, three middle schools and two high schools,
serving over 1,500 students in Denver, Colorado.
Because we are charter schools, all of our students enroll through
a non-selective, random lottery. As a result, our student body is very
diverse--50% of our students are low income and 70% are minorities. Our
schools truly represent a cross section of Denver, the city we serve.
DSST Public Schools operates some of the most successful public
schools in Colorado. Last year, DSST Public Schools operated the
highest performing middle school and high school in Denver. We are most
proud of measures that show growth--meaning, how much did a student
learn from the first day of school to the last day of school. Within
the state of Colorado, our schools showed some of the highest growth
numbers of all public schools, according to the Colorado Growth Model
on State CSAP tests. And at DSST: Stapleton High School, the school I
lead, 100% of all four senior classes in the school's history have
earned acceptances to four year colleges. All of our students are
prepared to study STEM fields of study in college and we estimate that
40% of our students are choosing STEM fields after graduation.
Most importantly, DSST proves, without a doubt, that all students,
regardless of race or income, can earn a rigorous STEM high school
diploma and attend four-year colleges and universities.
Preparing every student to succeed in a four-year college with the
opportunity to study STEM is at the center of DSST's academic program.
Our STEM program is centered on three pillars.
First, our schools are built on the premise that all students
deserve access to a high quality STEM education. A majority of DSST
students enter well below grade level in the 6th and 9th grades and
could never test into a magnet science program. Many students are
conditioned to believe that science and advanced math ``is an extra''
and only for ``smart kids''. In our schools, these subjects are not
extras, but a core subject for all students. All students have access
to STEM college preparatory curriculum.
Our second key belief is that schools must provide a rigorous STEM
preparatory curriculum. We believe that the most important factor in a
student choosing and ultimately completing a STEM degree is their
preparedness to succeed at the college and graduate level.
Regardless of their starting point at DSST, all students are
expected to pass three years of integrated science in middle school and
more than five years in high school--and many students take more.
Students take an algebra-based high school physics in the 9th grade.
This provides students with a lab based class to practice, apply and
synthesize the math skills they are learning elsewhere. All 9th grade
students also take ``Creative Engineering'' where they learn the design
process, how to conduct basic research, how to maximize and minimize
constraints, and are hooked into engineering and the sciences as
careers that improve the human condition. Students complete their high
school requirements by taking a college level- physics class coupled
with an engineering course or a college level biochemistry class
coupled with a bio-technology class. Math is also a critical component
of a rigorous STEM curriculum. All DSST students are required to pass
at least pre-calculus to graduate.
Lastly, we believe the success of any school must be rooted in a
strong school culture that focuses on building character and creating
an accountable environment that expects all students to be college
ready. Students are challenged, but supported in our schools. A peer-
driven culture is reflected in each of our schools where going to
college is cool and expected.
In sum, we agree with the recommendations for the National
Academy's Report. However, I would like to highlight four
recommendations for further consideration by this Committee:

First, while we agree that there is a clear need to
create more STEM Schools, we urge this committee to stress the creation
of open-enrollment, access for all STEM schools. Only through these
schools will we tap into the potential of all children in our country
to create new labor markets for our STEM fields.

Second, we must create rigorous STEM schools that go
beyond ``engaging'' students in STEM to truly preparing them for STEM
post-secondary study with rigorous math and science instruction.
Getting students ``excited'' about STEM is important, but the larger
problem lies in that most students lack open access to programs with
the rigor needed to prepare them for college STEM degrees.

Third, we must do more to simply create great schools
built on high expectations and high accountability cultures. The
emphasis needs to be on high quality models that focus on STEM
instruction, not just more STEM Schools.

Fourth, we need to attract more high quality candidates
to teaching math and science. DSST Public Schools is a proud member of
the 100Kin10 initiative to help recruit and retain 100,000 new math and
science teachers over the next decade. This is a critical area of focus
and effort.

On behalf of DSST Public Schools and Denver Public Schools, I thank
you for the opportunity to share, and welcome further dialogue around
the importance of creating high quality STEM education options for our
country.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Heffron, for your testimony
and insight.
At this point, the Chair will recognize Dr. Wilson for her
five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. SUZANNE WILSON, CHAIR,

DEPARTMENT OF TEACHER EDUCATION,

DIVISION OF SCIENCE AND MATH AND EDUCATION,

MICHIGAN STATE UNIVERSITY

Dr. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Brooks, Chairman Wolf,
Ranking Member Lipinski, and other Members of the Subcommittee
for this opportunity to speak with you today.
In my prepared statement, I prepared--I provide an overview
of the current teacher support system and comment on the
challenges we face. In my comments now, I would like to
emphasize what I consider to be our core problem and suggest to
you how we might solve it.
The vision of STEM education in the NRC report is
ambitious. It includes increased study of engineering and
technology and it also includes learning science and
mathematics in challenging and rigorous ways. Unfortunately,
most of the 3.6 million teachers who now teach in our schools,
as well as the 1.7 million teachers we will need in the next
seven years, have themselves never had opportunities to learn
engineering and technology nor engage in the practices of deep
study of science and mathematics and so they teach what and how
they were taught. This is a vicious cycle that we need to
break.
Part of the solution is the development of good assessments
and curriculum. Part of the solution is creating schools that
are good environments for learning by students and by their
teachers. Part of the solution is improving initial teacher
training and ongoing teacher development so that teachers can
learn this new content and learn to teach it.
Let me make clear to you just how localized and
uncoordinated our so-called system of supplying quality STEM
teachers is. We stand out among other leading countries for our
lack of a national infrastructure for high-quality schooling.
Here is what I mean: there are over 1,200 teacher preparation
programs at universities; there are another 130 alternative
routes; there are as many if not more early career professional
induction programs; there are 1,500 school districts in the
United States, and each has an entirely independent portfolio
of training for its teachers. There is no coordination and the
quality and effectiveness is both variable and often weak.
This ``system'' of professional training is a carnival. It
is crowded, it is noisy, it is alternatively attractive and
seedy with no order or coherence. Teachers walk down the midway
and wander as they please. They attend a teacher preparation
program with one particular emphasis and then they head off to
an induction program with another. They sign up for
professional development because of their interests, their
convenience, or mandate.
Considerable personal, public, state, and federal resources
are poured into teacher development programs. Despite the
investment of these material and human resources, teachers
seldom receive coordinated guidance about what they should
study or have opportunity to select professional development
that builds on their previous experiences. This is
irresponsible. It has adverse effects for our young people and
on our Nation's position in a rapidly changing world and global
economy.
If we expect to excel in STEM education, we must build a
system to deliver it. We can no longer leave to local
preference what teachers know and what they can do. Teaching
well demands substantial skill and should not be made up one
school, one district, even perhaps one state at a time. In no
other professional where skilled trade do we leave so much up
to chance. We are in a position to fix this problem. The
Federal Government can help.
We can establish specific standards for teaching practice
and build a professionally valid licensure system which would
include common core state standards for teachers that are
aligned with but go well beyond the common core state standards
for K-12 students; teacher preparation and professional
development programs that are aligned with those standards;
high-quality, rigorous training that is anchored in classroom
practice and that is designed to support teachers over time;
teacher training that differentiates between the needs of
beginning teachers and experienced teachers and that focuses on
a few empirically validated high-leverage teaching practices;
classrooms and schools that are designed to support instruction
and its continuous improvement; credible and predictive
assessments of teacher knowledge and skill that can both
provide feedback to those who need to improve and differentiate
between the teachers who can teach and those who should be let
go.
And if we are to hold teachers and teacher preparation
programs accountable for the kind of student learning and
engagement that is portrayed in this report, we also need K-12
student assessments that focus on the kind of outcomes
envisioned and not what is easiest to test.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wilson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Suzanne Wilson, Chair,
Department of Teacher Education, Division of Science and Math,
Education, Michigan State University
Thank you Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski, and the other
Members of the Subcommittee, for this opportunity to discuss the
Federal government's role in K-12 STEM education. I am pleased to add
my perspective on the Committee's questions, drawn from nearly 35 years
in academia as first a high school mathematics teacher, then, teacher
educator and education policy researcher, and now as chair of the
Department of Teacher Education at Michigan State University, where I
also conduct research on the effects of teacher preparation,
professional development, and education policy. I also note that I was
commissioned to prepare a review of the literature for the National
Research Council's (2011) Board on Science Education and Board on
Testing and Assessment workshop on Highly Successful K-12 STEM
Education in School. I have also served on several NRC panels,
including the one that issued the report on teacher preparation and
Congressionally mandated (Preparing Teachers, 2010), and am a newly
appointed member of the Board on Science Education. I also chaired the
National Academy of Education's (2009) White Paper committee on teacher
quality, which was also undertaken in response to the requests of
several senators.
My expertise is in the area of teacher quality policies and
practices, specifically teacher preparation, induction (early career
support), and professional development. I will keep my comments focused
on that domain.

The Critical Role of STEM Teacher Preparation, Induction,

and Professional Development

While there is currently considerable debate about where and how
teachers should be prepared, there is little question that STEM
education depends on the sound preparation of K-12 teachers. Research
clearly shows that it takes between 3-8 years to become an effective
teacher, which underlines the importance of strong early career support
(often called induction). And given the lackluster performance of U.S.
schools in STEM education overall--as well as the push for higher and
more demanding standards--there seems little question that we need
equally strong professional development to build the capacity of
practicing teachers. Further, there seems little debate about the need
for all teachers to have sufficient content knowledge, as well as
knowledge and skill in working with and adapting instruction for one's
particular students, selecting and using appropriate curriculum
materials, assessments, and other resources.
However, beyond that, there is much less agreement on who should
prepare teachers, how that preparation should be structured and
organized, and how to differentiate between the initial preparation of
teachers and support they receive over their careers. This has resulted
in what some have called a ``non-system'' of teacher support in this
country: There are over 1200 teacher education programs at
universities, another 130 ``alternative routes,'' and at least as many
induction programs. Every one of the over-15,000 school districts in
the U.S. has multiple professional development programs sponsored by
school districts, foundations, federal grants, universities, informal
institutions, and other agencies. While there are similarities across
some of these programs, there is considerable variation in content and
quality.
However, we know that high quality teacher support needs to be
anchored in clear and concrete vision of both what we want our K-12
students to learn and the instruction and other factors that lead to
that learning. The NRC (2011) report, Successful K-12 STEM Education:
Identifying Effective Approaches in Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics accurately notes that effective STEM instruction:

. . . students successively deepen their understanding both
of core ideas in the STEM fields and of concepts that are shared across
areas of science, mathematics, and engineering. Students also engage
with fundamental questions about the material and natural worlds and
gain experience in the ways in which scientists have investigated and
found answers to those questions. In grades K-12, students carry out
scientific investigations and engineering design projects related to
core ideas in the disciplines, so that by the end of their secondary
schooling they have become deeply familiar with core ideas in STEM and
have had a chance to develop their own identity as STEM learners
through the practices of science, mathematics, and engineering.

These are ambitious--and in the case of technology and engineering,
new, ideas for what all students should learn and do in schools.
Unfortunately, this kind of instruction is rare in U.S. K-12 schools.
And because our future teachers come through those schools, there are
many teachers, especially elementary teachers, who themselves have
never experienced that kind of instruction. I also note that although
the problem is exacerbated for prospective elementary teachers, the
majority of prospective middle and high school teachers seldom have an
opportunity for first hand experience with the ``practices of science,
mathematics, and engineering.''
Breaking this cycle requires improved teacher preparation (both in
terms of the quality and quantity of teachers' engagement with relevant
disciplinary content and in terms of professional coursework and
experiences), subject-specific support during induction, professional
development that targets teachers' needs and systematically builds on
prior STEM learning, and professional communities in schools where
teachers and administrators collectively focus on their students'
learning. It would also entail considerable research to identify both
the effective instructional strategies, educational resources, school
supports, and teacher development programs that would inform those
changes.

Main Points

Before elaborating, I present four main points that frame my
comments:

We have high aspirations for mathematics and science
learning, and some new ideas about what children should learn about
technology and engineering.

Many of our teachers have never experienced, as students,
the learning we envision in those domains for their students.

We have a massively incoherent system and very
challenging contexts for instructional improvement.

Yet we do know some things about improving instruction
(including preservice and prospective teachers' training). And there
are concrete things we can do to address the challenges that lay before
us.

Challenges Facing STEM Initial Teacher Preparation

There is a growing consensus that initial preparation of teachers
needs to include substantial study of the relevant disciplines. This is
not identical to disciplinary majors, as the K-12 school subjects are
not always taught in college majors. Thus, teacher preparation needs to
be designed to explicitly address the content that will be taught. The
development of the Common Core State Standards will help in this
regard, as they clearly lay out the focal content that teachers will
need to know how to teach. There is also consensus that teachers need
professional knowledge that goes beyond subject matter, and that the
process of learning to apply that knowledge in practice requires
focused attention to a core set of teaching practices, over time, in
structured and well-designed field experiences.

That said, teacher preparation currently faces several challenges:

One overarching challenge has been the lack of a common
curriculum that all teachers will teach. This has contributed to the
diffuse nature of initial teacher preparation across the country since
programs do not know what content or curriculum their graduates need to
be prepared to use. The development of the Common Core State Standards
might potentially help in this regard.

Not surprisingly, therefore, there also exists no common
curriculum for the preparation of teachers. And there is no agreement
on what initial teacher preparation should focus on as opposed to the
support of practicing teachers. This results in both variations in the
content of what new teachers learn in their programs and an approach
similar to the ``a mile wide and an inch deep'' characterization of
U.S. mathematics education offered by William Schmidt and his
colleagues in the TIMSS study.

Another challenge, specific to elementary school, is that
teachers are expected to teach all subjects. Most universities limit
the maximum credits required for an undergraduate degree; given the
need to prepare all elementary teachers to teach all subjects, and the
increasing number of mandates about what they need to know (special
education, English Language Learners, the arts, all academic subjects,
etc.), most prospective elementary teachers have limited exposure to
STEM disciplinary content. Specifically, the average elementary teacher
might take two mathematics courses, two science sources (neither of
which engages them in genuine science inquiry), no engineering courses,
and if they take a technology class it is likely about instructional
technology, not technology generally.

At the middle and high school levels, recruitment into
STEM teaching continues to be a challenge, especially in terms of long-
term solutions that can be institutionalized. Programs with financial
incentives or benefits at the front end (subsidized preparation, for
example) have uneven track records for preparing teachers who stay in
the profession. In an age of shrinking resources, it is unclear how
programs or schools will secure funding to continue those programs.

Middle school STEM teacher preparation continues to be
serious challenge. The most recent research by William Schmidt and
colleagues suggests that middle school mathematics teacher preparation
programs in the U.S. are wildly uneven. State certification laws also
vary, and many middle school teachers were originally prepared as
elementary teachers (and therefore have limited disciplinary content
preparation (see above)).

To address these challenges, we must establish specific standards
for teaching practice and build a professionally valid licensure
system. Assessments would focus on teachers' content knowledge, their
actual skill with the instructional practices most important for
student learning, and their persistence in working to make sure that
every one of their students learns. These assessments would be
different from the ones we currently have in this country which do not,
for the most part, focus on the ability to teach.
To prepare teachers for these standards, we need to engage
prospective teachers in disciplinary study directly related to the
school subjects they will teach. We also need to integrate more content
concerning engineering and technology into the teacher preparation
curriculum, without making the curriculum wider and thinner. In terms
of professional preparation, we need to design a system of high-quality
rigorous training that is centered on practice. This system would
require three components:

1.  A curriculum focused on the highest leverage instructional
practices and specialized knowledge of the academic content that
teachers teach;

2.  Close practice and feedback in clinical settings so that
teachers can be deliberately taught and explicitly coached with the
skills to reach a wide range of learners.

3.  Highly credible and predictive assessments of professional
knowledge and skill so that no one enters a classroom without
demonstrated capacity for effective performance as a beginning teacher.

In addition, we might want to consider alternative staffing
patterns in elementary schools so that teachers can specialize in
particular content.

Challenges Facing Professional Development

There is also a growing consensus among researchers regarding
characteristics of high quality professional development, especially of
effective science professional development. In particular, the National
Science Education Standards (National Research Council, 1996) published
professional development guidelines for teachers. Those standards
emphasize the importance of professional development that focuses on
subject matter, draws upon teachers' current practices and experiences,
and is intensive and sustained. This resonates with the NRC report's
findings, specifically the statement that:

In any discipline, effective professional development
should

focus on developing teachers' capabilities and
knowledge to teach content and subject matter,

address teachers' classroom work and the problems
they encounter in their school settings, and

provide multiple and sustained opportunities for
teacher learning over a substantial time interval. (p. 21)

However, as the report authors note, the empirical evidence
supporting these professional development characteristics is not always
consistent and little research allows us to trace ``the causal pathway
from professional development to student achievement.'' Additionally,
other factors pertaining to teachers and schools also appear to play a
noteworthy role in each characteristic's importance.
STEM professional development programs in this country vary
enormously in terms of their content and character and the challenges
they face include:

There is no agreed upon curriculum for professional
development of STEM teachers. Professional development leaders often
identify ``big ideas'' that transcend particular curricula: in science
that might include the nature of science or scientific inquiry, or key
concepts (like force and motion or natural selection) that seem
foundational to scientific disciplines (like physics or biology). In
mathematics, this might include fractions, patterns and functions, or
reasoning and proof. But these big ideas are not selected in any
systematic or deliberate way, and most professional development does
not build on what teachers have already learned. Here too the Common
Core State Standards might provide some guidance.

Inconsistency and lack of predictability in terms of what
teachers have learned prior to specific professional development. Thus,
professional development leaders can have very experienced and brand
new teachers in the same workshop, and those teachers can have little
to high knowledge of STEM content.

Lack of diagnostic information concerning what teachers
need to learn. We do not tailor professional development in this
country to the learning needs of the specific teachers in the class.

Lack of centralized funding for professional development
or plans to use funding in coherent ways. This includes a lack of
integration and coordination of professional development concerning
STEM education and other knowledge/skills teachers need to work on,
including teaching STEM content to English Language Learners, or
adapting STEM instruction to diverse student populations.

School districts and states lack policies, practices, and
resources that support the long term, sustained, collective focus that
research suggests is necessary for high quality professional
development.

In sum, professional development for STEM teachers is most often a
patchwork of fragmented and disconnected experiences. The teachers who
need the most support often do not pursue such opportunities. The NRC
report authors note that:

professional development alone is not a solution to current
limitations on teachers' capacities. Instead, it is more productive to
consider teacher development as a continuum that ranges from initial
preparation to induction into the practice of teaching and then to
systematic, needs-based professional development, including on-site
professional support that allows for interaction and collaboration with
colleagues. (p. 21)

To address these challenges, we need to radically change the way
that states and school districts think about professional development.
On-going teacher learning needs to be part of the mission of every
school. Schools have to be structured and resourced so that teachers
have clear instructional guidance, sound materials, a strong school
leader, and time to work with other teachers on improving instruction
and tailoring it to the specific children in that school. Professional
development needs to be focus on the content teachers are responsible
for teaching, and it needs to be tailored to the learning needs of the
teachers involved. It needs to gradually become more and more
sophisticated along the career paths of teachers.

Similar to initial preparation, the components of professional
development would include:

1.  A well articulated curriculum focused on the highest leverage
instructional practices and specialized knowledge of the academic
content that teachers teach, building on what teachers mastered during
their initial preparation;

2.  Close practice and feedback in their classrooms, including
coaching.

3.  Highly credible and predictive assessments of professional
knowledge and skill so underperforming teachers can be identified and
supported or, if they do not improve, removed.

The Current State of Teacher Assessment

Teacher assessment is under a great deal of scrutiny. In many
current evaluation systems teachers receive almost universally high
ratings. As many of these systems use a binary means of scoring
(satisfactory or not), the systems also do not give teachers useful
information to improve their practice. There has been a great deal of
research and commentary on the quality of value added measures of
teachers. However promising these methods might be, there are still
several enormous challenges to the measurement and policy community
related to these measures:

Student achievement and gains are influenced by other
factors besides the teacher, including, school factors such as class
sizes, curriculum materials, instructional time; home and community
supports; individual student needs and abilities, health, and
attendance; peer culture and achievement; and prior teachers and
schooling, as well as other current teachers. Most of these factors are
not actually measured in value-added models. (AERA/NAE, 2011)

Second, value-added estimates are based on test scores
that ``reflect a narrower set of educational goals than most parents
and educators have for their students. If this narrowing is severe, and
if the test does not cover the most important educational goals from
state content standards in sufficient breadth or depth, then the value-
added results will offer limited or even misleading information about
the effectiveness of schools, teachers, or programs'' (NRC, Getting
Value Out of Value-Added, 2010).

For the purposes of this committee's discussions, tests currently
do not measure the ``practices'' of the disciplines, for instance, the
ability of students to engage in scientific inquiry or reason
mathematically. Nor do the tests measure students' continued interest
in, commitment to, or engagement in STEM fields. Here one can see the
interdependence of research on student and teachers. Without good
research on student engagement and learning, any and all attempts to
measure teacher effectiveness are hamstrung.
There is other work underway in teacher assessment as well,
specifically in the area of creating observation protocols for
measuring teacher quality. This would allow for more refined
documentation of instruction. However, preliminary work suggests that
training raters to score such protocols reliably continues to be a
challenge.

The Role of the Federal Government in K-12 STEM Education

While our teacher preparation and professional development
practices may appear inconsistent-- like the larger educational system
they serve--they were built from the bottom up, school-by-school,
program-by-program; and were designed to serve locally managed and
funded markets. This is not to say that they were or are immune to
national issues; consider that with the Elementary and Secondary Act of
1965, and continuing even today, they have steadily worked at better
serving students across lines of race, gender, and ability with the
goal of achieving equality. At present, and for indisputably good
reason, the national press in on for quality in addition to equality.
In terms of teacher preparation, induction, and professional
development, the primary role of the federal government has been to
produce resources to stimulate thinking about state and district level
policies, programs, and practices, as well as to press for increased
evidence of effectiveness. In particular, research and development work
sponsored by the National Science Foundation and the Department of
Education, including the Institute for Education Sciences has played a
major role in influencing how we think about teacher preparation and
professional development, as well as how we assess its effectiveness
(see below). But that support has been limited, especially in the area
of teacher preparation, and it has not been leveraged to catalyze
coherence or the accumulation of knowledge.
What role might the federal government play to shape reform in STEM
education? There are several avenues to pursue that could encourage
more coherence and focus.

Use the Common Core State Standards to focus the initial
preparation of teachers. Because states control teacher licensure, this
might include providing guidance and resources to states to align state
policies with the CCSS.

Federal investment in the development of resources might
focus on programs and materials that also align with the CCSS so that
teachers have strong instructional materials.

Expand investment in the assessment consortia to include
assessments that go beyond content knowledge in ways that align with
the recommendations of the NRC report (these are essential for
anchoring teacher assessment/evaluation).

Create consortia for the development of teacher
assessments that align with the knowledge/skill teachers would need to
master to effectively teach to the CCSS.

As all teacher preparation programs are pressed to tie
their graduates to K-12 student outcomes, invest in strategies that
would enable teacher preparation programs to track their graduates
across states.

The Role of the National Science Foundation in Teacher Preparation,

Induction, and Professional Development

The NSF plays a critical role in supporting both innovation and
research on teacher support programs. It has played three roles: (1)
the development of programs, practices, and tools (curriculum,
assessments, etc.) for teacher development; (2) the development of
networks (i.e., ``systems'' or ``partnerships '') of stakeholders who
collaboratively work in those programs and/or use those tools; and (3)
sponsoring research on the effectiveness of some of those programs/
practices/tools.
In the sprawling landscape of programs for teacher support, NSF-
sponsored programs play an important role. Most of the time, funding is
for four or five years, which allows for a program to be carefully
planned and launched. NSF-sponsored programs are required to have a
well-articulated theory-of-action, as well as plans for evaluations, so
all such programs tend to be more carefully constructed and data
driven.
However, the emphasis on launching innovation, however, means that
many of those launched programs are not then studied over time in terms
of their effects on students or teachers. And because the field lacks
robust metrics for student and teacher effects, the limited budgets for
evaluation do not allow for extensive research.
Another contribution that NSF-sponsored programs make to the larger
field is in the development of professional development leaders. Even
when funding ends, programs leave in their wake increased human capital
that schools and districts tap into for their own local efforts.
Unfortunately, the three NSF foci (program development, networking,
and research) are--at times--in competition with one another, so that
the development of programs comes at the expense of empirical research
on how teachers learn, what teachers need to know, or the effects of
various programs on student engagement and achievement or on teacher
knowledge, skill, and practice. It is important that NSF and IES
continue to both support the development of innovative programs and
fund ambitious basic and applied research on both how teachers learn
and the effects of various programs.

Research Gaps in STEM Teacher Preparation and

Professional Development

Several Congressionally-mandated efforts have made suggestions
concerning the most pressing research areas. As the authors of the
NRC's (2010) Preparing Teachers: Building Evidence for Sound Policy
note:

There is no system in place to collect data across the myriad
teacher preparation programs and pathways in the United States. Thus,
we can say little about the characteristics of aspiring teachers, the
programs and pathways they follow, or the outcomes of their
preparation. (p. 174)

This is equally true of professional development programs. The
federal government could play a major role in the development of such a
data system.
The authors of Preparing Teachers argued forcefully that we need
research that studies core features of teacher preparation, not
research that contrasts ``traditional'' and ``alternative.'' Given the
recent diversification of teacher preparation, the three areas they
nominated were:

1.  comparisons of programs and pathways in terms of their
selectivity; their timing (whether teachers complete most of their
training before or after becoming a classroom teacher); and their
specific components and characteristics (i.e., instruction in subject
matter, field experiences);

2.  the effectiveness of various approaches to preparing teachers
in classroom management and teaching diverse learners; and

3.  the influence of aspects of program structure, such as the
design and timing of field experiences and the integration of teacher
preparation coursework with coursework in other university departments.
(p. 174)

The National Academy of Education/NRC Ed in '08 committee on
teacher quality made recommendations that resonate with this, noting
that

States, school districts, and the federal government should
support research on a variety of approaches to teacher preparation.
Investments should be made in research and development on the core
practices and skills that early career teachers require; preparation
programs should then focus on these skills. (p. 2)

In the area of professional development, the characteristics of
high quality professional development nominated by researchers are not
linked to measures of impact in terms of student engagement,
motivation, continued interest in pursuing STEM disciplines, or student
achievement. And because research has demonstrated that school culture
and resources play an important role in developing effective
teaching,we also need research that links student outcomes to teacher
outcomes to school culture, in particular for schools that serve
children who do not typically pursue STEM fields.
Finally, there is extraordinary need for research and development
in tools and metrics to assess the effects of teacher support programs.
These would range from measures of student learning/engagement, of
teacher content and professional knowledge, and of classroom practices
and school quality.

References

American Educational Research Association and National Academy of
Education. (2011). Getting teacher evaluation right: A brief for
policymakers. Washington, DC: Authors.

National Academy of Education. (2009). Teacher quality: A white paper
report. (S. M. Wilson, Ed.). Washington, D.C.: Author.

National Research Council. (1996). National science standards. Center
for Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Education (CSMEE).
Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.

National Research Council and National Academy of Education. (2010).
Getting value out of value-added: Report of a workshop. Committee on
Value-Added Methodology for Instructional Improvement, Program
Evaluation, and Educational Accountability (H. Braun, N. Chudowsky, &
J. Koenig, Eds.). Center for Education, Division of Behavioral and
Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies
Press.

National Research Council. (2010). Preparing teachers: Building
evidence for sound policy. Committee on the Study of Teacher
Preparation Programs in the United States. Washington, D.C.: The
National Academies Press.

National Research Council. (2011). Successful K-12 STEM education:
Identifying effective approaches in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics. Committee on Highly Successful Science Programs for K-
12 Science Education. Board on Science Education and Board on Testing
and Assessment, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and
Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Wilson. I couldn't help but
think when you were using the word ``carnival'' and somewhat
chaotic system, that reminded of a Winston Churchill quote to
the effect of that America can always be depended on to do the
right thing after it has first tried everything else.
That having been said, Dr. Allensworth, if you would please
share with us your insight for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. ELAINE ALLENSWORTH,

SENIOR DIRECTOR AND CHIEF RESEARCH OFFICER,

CONSORTIUM ON CHICAGO SCHOOL RESEARCH, UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO

Dr. Allensworth. Yes, thank you. Thank you, Chairman Brooks
and Chairman Wolf and members of the committee.
I come from the Consortium on the Chicago School Research
at the University of Chicago where I have been studying the
Chicago public schools for the last 15 years. Chicago has
attempted to improve students' achievement in science and math
through a number of large-scale, bold initiatives, many of
which have been followed by similar policies at the federal
level. I am going to briefly talk about three.
I am sorry. These are the wrong slides. I will not show the
slides. Those are the wrong slides.
I am going to briefly talk about three, which are
curricular standards, changing curricular standards, hiring for
teacher quality and accountability. While each of these has the
potential to improve STEM outcomes, they also have the
potential to unintentionally make them worse, particularly in
schools that are struggling the most with low achievement, such
as many of our schools serving mostly minority youth in urban
areas like Chicago.
In terms of curricular standards, Chicago has tried to
increase curricular rigor in a number of ways that have clear
implications for states and districts implementing the new
common national standards. In 1997, for example, Chicago
required all students to take a college-preparatory curriculum
and dramatically increased its graduation requirements. As with
the new common standards, the goal was to increase equity and
rigor by exposing all students to more uniformly challenging
coursework.
After the policy, there was a dramatic rise in the number
of science and math classes taken by students. However, there
were a number of adverse consequences. Most students earned
very poor grades in their science and math classes, which
indicated minimal engagement and very little learning. As
schools struggled to find teachers to expand high-level math
and science courses to all students, high-achieving students
were less likely to take physics, pre-calculus or calculus. The
quality of math classes declined for high-achieving students as
classrooms now contained students with a much greater
variations in skills, and teachers had a hard time teaching
college-preparatory work to classes with very low-achieving
students.
In the end, low-skilled students had slightly higher
failure rates in math, system-wide graduation rates declined
slightly, and college entrance declined for the high-achieving
students.
In 2006, Chicago implemented another new strategy where
they implemented high-quality curricula in science, math, and
English, aligned with the ACT college entrance exam, along with
curriculum coaches and professional development. As with the
increase in graduation requirements, there were no improvements
in students' test scores or grades, and in some schools, test
scores actually declined, even though teachers were using high-
quality curricula with better pedagogy, a more academic demand,
and aligned, formative assessments.
We found that a central challenge of the program was that
classrooms became more disorderly as teachers struggled to
implement the new curriculum, and learning declined.
What we found is that implementing rigorous standards for
all students is an especially difficult challenge in schools
serving large numbers of students with very weak academic
skills. Schools need strategies for supporting teachers to
teach more diverse learners, and they also need systems in
place to support students so that they can handle the tougher
material.
A second policy area for improving some learning is around
accountability. Now, way back in 1995, Chicago was one of the
first districts to enact very strong accountability sanctions
to schools based on standardized tests and has been very active
in closing and restructuring schools in response to low
performance.
As federal initiatives such as the No Child Left Behind and
Race to the Top have increased the use and focus on high-stakes
testing, it is important to pay attention to some of the
effects that accountability has had on learning generally and
STEM in particular. While there have been some benefits to the
emphasis on accountability, there have also been some very
adverse consequences for students, especially in schools under
the most pressure to increase test scores, which tend to be
racially isolated scores where all students are African
American or Latino. This includes the narrowing of the
curriculum away from science and subjects other than reading
and math, as Dr. Gamoran mentioned. It also means that schools
now spend extraordinary amounts of time just practicing tests
using up time that could be spent actually improving students'
academic skills.
Another way that the government is trying to improve STEM
education is by increasing the number of highly qualified STEM
teachers. What we found in Chicago, though, is that teachers
tend to leave schools with poor climates for learning, so you
can bring in high-quality teachers but they won't stay if the
environment is not good. And in fact they are not even
successful in environments that are poor. What we found is that
in order to make good use of high-quality curriculum, respond
to accountability, and retain good teachers, schools need to
have five essential supports: strategic school leadership,
professional capacity that is professionals that work together
collaboratively around instruction and learning climate, strong
instruction, student-centered learning climate, and involvement
of parents.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Allensworth follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Elaine Allensworth, Senior Director and
Chief Research Officer, Consortium on Chicago School Research,
University of Chicago
I have been studying the Chicago public schools for the past 15
years at the Consortium on Chicago School Research (CCSR) at the
University of Chicago. Chicago is a district that is 85% minority, 85%
low-income, where almost all students aspire to go to college, and many
students aspire to enter STEM careers. But very few of the students who
have those aspirations end up making them a reality.
Chicago has attempted to improve students' achievement in science
and math through a number of large-scale, bold initiatives, many of
which have been followed by similar policies at the federal level. I am
going to briefly talk about three. While each has the potential to
improve STEM outcomes, they also each have the potential to
unintentionally make them worse, particularly in schools that are
struggling the most with low achievement, such as many of our urban
schools serving mostly minority youth.

1.  Curriculum standards. Chicago has tried to increase curricular
rigor in a number of ways that have clear implications for states and
districts implementing the Common Core standards. In 1997, Chicago
required all students to take a college-preparatory curriculum and
dramatically increased its graduation requirements. As with the Common
Core, the goal was to increase equity and rigor by exposing all
students to more uniformly challenging coursework. Prior to 1997,
students entering high school had to complete any one science course,
and many took remedial science. Beginning in 1997, students were
required to take three laboratory science classes, one from each of
these categories: 1) earth and space or environmental science, 2)
biology or life science, and 3) chemistry or physics. Changes in
science requirements were accompanied by increases in math
requirements, where students could no longer take remedial math and had
to take at least three courses in the math sequence, including geometry
and advanced algebra (algebra 2). After the policy, there was a
dramatic rise in the number of science and math classes that students
took; almost all graduates received credit in full science and math
sequences.

However, there were a number of unintended negative consequences
as well. These negative consequences were a direct result of asking
more of both students and teachers without providing them with
sufficient additional supports. Under Chicago's College Prep for All
policy, most students earned very poor grades in their science and math
classes-Cs, Ds and Fs. Such low grades indicate minimal engagement and
very little learning; in fact, comparisons with test scores tell us
that it is only students earning As and Bs that show substantial
learning gains in their courses. As schools struggled to find teachers
to expand high-level math and science courses to all students, high-
achieving students were less likely to take physics, pre-calculus or
calculus. The quality of math classes also declined for high-achieving
students as classrooms now contained students with a much greater
variations in skills, and teachers had a hard time teaching college-
preparatory work to classes with very low-achieving students. In the
end, low-skilled students had slightly higher failure rates, system-
wide graduation rates declined slightly, and college entrance declined
for high-skill students. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Allensworth, Elaine M., Takako Nomi, Nicholas Montgomery,
Valerie E. Lee. 2009. College Preparatory Curriculum for All: Academic
Consequences of Requiring Algebra and English I for Ninth Graders in
Chicago. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 31 (4).
Montgomery, Nicholas and Elaine M. Allensworth. 2010. Passing Through
Science: The Effects of Raising Graduation Requirements in Science on
Course-Taking and Academic Achievement in Chicago. Consortium on
Chicago School Research, Chicago, Illinois. Nomi, Takako. (2010)
Unintended consequences of an Algebra-for-all policy on high-skill
students: Evidence from Chicago Public Schools. Paper presented at the
Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management, Boston, MA and
the Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness conference,
Washington DC.

In 2006, Chicago invested deeply in another curricular reform
that exhibited some of the same challenges as College Prep for All.
Through a program called Instructional Development System (IDS),
Chicago implemented high-quality curricula in science, math and
English, aligned with the ACT college-entrance exam, along with
professional development and coaches for teachers. As with the increase
in graduation requirements, there were no improvements in students'
test scores or grades. In some schools, test scores actually declined,
even though teachers were using high-quality curriculum with better
pedagogy and aligned, formative assessments. Our evaluation of IDS
found that a central challenge of the program was that classrooms
became more disorderly as teachers struggled to implement the new
curriculum, and learning declined. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Hart, Holly, Sporte, S., Correa, M. (June 9, 2009). Adopting a
rigorous curriculum: Successes and challenges of Chicago's High School
Transformation initiative. Paper presented at Annual Symposium of the
Illinois Education Research Symposium, Champaign, IL. Sporte, Sue,
James Sebastian and Valerie Lee. (in progress.) Attempting Curricular
Coherence: Three Years of Chicago's Instructional Development System
Reforms and Developing a Framework for Assessing School Capacity:
Insights from Curriculum Reforms in Chicago Public Schools.

As the IDS and College Prep for All examples demonstrate,
implementing rigorous standards is not sufficient to improve student
learning, especially in schools that already struggle with low levels
of student engagement in their coursework. Engaging all students in
more challenging work is crucial if they are to learn at high levels;
however, it is important to note that such engagement requires more of
both students and teachers. IDS and College Prep for All, like the
Common Core, will require teachers to teach new and more challenging
material to the students they serve. If schools do not have enough
teachers with the content expertise to teach these new subjects, then
more challenging standards can result in worse instruction and less
learning. What is more, the Common Core will require that teachers be
able to teach that material to students with diverse skills-including
students entering their classes with skill levels so low that they have
little chance of meeting standards without substantial support. If
teachers don't know how to teach the standards to their students well,
students learn less than they would if teachers had remained focused on
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
material with which they were comfortable.

Implementing rigorous standards for all students is an
especially difficult challenge in schools that serve large numbers of
students with very weak academic skills. Schools need strategies for
supporting teachers to teach more diverse learners and to provide them
support. They also need systems in place to support students so that
they can handle tougher material. In other words, higher standards need
to be accompanied by structures that will support teachers and
learners.

2.  Accountability. Beginning in 1995, Chicago was one of the first
districts to enact very strong accountability sanctions to schools
based on standardized tests and has been active in closing and
restructuring schools in response to low performance. As federal
initiatives such as the No Child Left Behind Act and Race to the Top
competition have increased the use of and focus on high-stakes testing,
it is important to pay attention to some of the effects that
accountability has had on learning generally and STEM learning in
particular. High-stakes accountability in Chicago has had some benefits
for low-achieving students: teachers are more likely to pay attention
to students scoring below standards, and there are more resources aimed
at low-scoring students through summer and after school programs.
Furthermore, schools that previously were not teaching students grade
level material in math in the middle grades started teaching students
the material they needed to know to pass the standards.

However, there have also been adverse consequences to the strong
focus on test-based accountability, especially in schools that are
under the most pressure to increase test scores. In Chicago, these
schools tend to be racially isolated schools where all students are
African-American or Latino. One consequence has been the narrowing of
the curriculum away from science and subjects other than reading and
math. Another adverse consequence has been that schools now spend
extraordinary amounts of time just practicing taking tests--using up
time that could be spent on improving students' academic skills.
Furthermore, test practice and drilling test problems is boring for
students, and leads them to be less engaged and interested in class.
\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Allensworth, Elaine and Jenny Nagaoka. 2010. ``The effects of
retaining students in grade with high stakes promotion tests.'' Chapter
20 in Judith Meece (ed.), Handbook on Schools, Schooling, and Human
Development, Taylor & Francis. Roderick, M., & Nagaoka, J. (2005).
Retention under Chicago's high-stakes testing program: Helpful, harmful
or harmless? Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 24(4), 309-340.
Roderick, M., & Engel, M. (2001). The grasshopper and the ant:
Motivational responses of low-achieving students to high-stakes
testing. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 23(3), 197-227.
Roderick, M., Engel, M., & Nagaoka, J. (2003). Ending social promotion:
Results from Summer Bridge. Chicago, IL: Consortium on Chicago School
Research.

Too much of an emphasis on tests can lead it to appear as if
learning is improving, when instruction is actually being narrowly
focused to better test performance. This can be seen when districts
change the assessments used for school accountability. In Chicago, for
example, performance declined considerably at the schools under the
most pressure to improve scores when the district switched tests in
2006--these schools had been tailoring instruction too narrowly to the
old test. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Luppescu, Stuart. Elaine M. Allensworth, Paul Moore, Marisa de
la Torre, James Murphy with Sanja Jagesic. 2011. Trends in Chicago's
Schools Across Three Eras of Reform. Consortium on Chicago School
Research, Chicago, Illinois. http://ccsr.uchicago.edu/content/
publications.php?pub_id=157

When so much pressure is placed on students' test performance,
the goal of instruction becomes improving test scores, rather than
making students into good learners. Ironically, test scores are not
that predictive of later outcomes--including success in college.
Getting students to do well on tests does not have much pay-off for
students, unless it is done in a way that makes them more engaged in
the subject and teaches them how to be better learners. What is much
more important is the degree to which students are actively engaged and
earning high grades in their science and math classes--regardless of
their test scores. \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Roderick, Melissa, Jenny Nagaoka, Elaine Allensworth, Vanessa
Coca, Macarena Correa and Ginger Stoker. 2006. From High School to the
Future: A first look at Chicago Public School graduates' college
enrollment, college preparation, and graduation from four-year
colleges. Consortium on Chicago School Research, Chicago, Illinois.
Allensworth, Elaine M., John Q. Easton. 2005. The On-Track Indicator as
a Predictor of High School Graduation. Consortium on Chicago School
Research, Chicago, Illinois. http://www.consortium-chicago.org/
publications/p78.html

3.  Teacher Quality. One of President Obama's key STEM initiatives
has been his 100Kin10, a public-private effort to recruit and train
100,000 new high-quality STEM teachers within the next ten years.
Chicago also has sought to increase the supply of highly qualified
teachers by partnering with a number of organizations to try to
increase teacher quality, and the system has succeeded in hiring many
more high-achieving candidates. However, teachers tend to leave schools
with poor climates for learning, or where they do not feel supported by
their colleagues and administration. \6\ Getting the best teachers in
the worst schools doesn't help improve the schools if they don't stay
in those schools. Furthermore, highly-qualified teachers are not even
very effective in schools that are not well organized to support
instruction. While student achievement tends to be higher in schools
with more highly-qualified teachers, there is no relationship between
teacher quality and student achievement in schools with poor climates
for learning-places that are disorganized and where students and
teachers do not feel safe and supported. \7\ Thus, the federal
investment in training and recruiting high-quality teachers is unlikely
to have a positive effect on chronically low-achieving schools without
a corresponding push to improve the organizational health of schools.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  Allensworth, Elaine M., Stephen Ponisciak and Christopher
Mazzeo. 2009. The Schools Teachers Leave: Teacher Mobility in Chicago
Public Schools. Consortium on Chicago School Research, Chicago,
Illinois.
\7\ DeAngelis, Karen J. and Presley, Jennifer B.(2011) 'Teacher
Qualifications and School Climate: Examining Their Interrelationship
for School Improvement', Leadership and Policy in Schools, 10: 1, 84-
120.

What we have learned from our 20 years studying Chicago Public
Schools is that we need well-organized schools to make good use of
high-quality curriculum, respond to accountability standards, and
retain good teachers. Otherwise, these policies do not improve student
achievement. Schools that do not have the capacity to respond to the
policies react in counter-productive ways.
What matters most for school improvement and high learning gains is
whether they are organized to support students as learners. Two decades
of research in Chicago shows that this requires building the
organizational capacity of schools in five essential areas. \8\ Schools
that are strong in three of five of these areas are 10 times more
likely to improve student learning in math and reading than schools
that are weak in any. These include:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Bryk, Anthony S., Penny Bender Sebring, Elaine Allensworth,
Stuart Luppescu, John Q. Easton. 2010. Organizing Schools for
Improvement: Lessons from Chicago. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Strategic school leadership. Principals must be strategic--
focused on improving the other four organizational supports, and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
include staff and parents in school decision-making.

Strong professional capacity. Teaching staff should be skilled,
but more important than the qualifications of individual teachers is
the degree to which faculty and staff work together to improve the
learning climate and instruction in the school.

Parent-community ties. Successful schools actively involve
parents as partners in children's education and use local partners to
support instruction in the school in a coordinated way.

Student-centered learning climate. Learning requires an
environment that is safe, stimulating and supportive for all students.

Instructional Guidance. Student learning depends on instruction
that engages them as learners, so that the focus is on students rather
than on content. It also requires that curriculum be aligned across
grade levels and subjects so that students are increasingly developing
their skills through challenging tasks.

One of the key studies that examined these organizational supports
compared reading and math improvement in 400 low-performing elementary
schools in Chicago. As previously mentioned, this work showed that
schools with strong organizational supports were 10 times more likely
to improve learning gains over time than those with any weakness. No
schools with a poor learning climate and weak professional capacity
improved over the six years of the study. But half of the schools with
an aligned curriculum and collaborative relationships among teachers or
between teachers and parents showed large improvements in math and
reading scores gains. All of these schools were high-poverty schools
located in highly disadvantaged communities. \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\  Bryk, Anthony S., Penny Bender Sebring, Elaine Allensworth,
Stuart Luppescu, John Q. Easton. 2010. Organizing Schools for
Improvement: Lessons from Chicago. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notably, those schools in the most disadvantaged neighborhoods were
most in need of strong organizational supports to show improvements. In
neighborhoods where external supports for schools were weak--where
there were low levels of education and employment in the community and
little participation in community or religious organizations--the
internal supports needed to be stronger. In schools serving families
and communities with more social and financial capital, schools could
improve as long as the internal organizational supports of the school
were not weak.
This suggests that for policies around standards, accountability,
and teacher quality to succeed, they should be designed in ways that
promote the development of the five essential supports. It is important
to think about the organizational capacity that schools will need to
successfully implement new policies, and whether additional resources
will be needed for schools with low capacity to implement them
successfully. For example:

Curricular Standards. To make the new Common Core
standards effective for improving learning, schools requiring the
largest instructional shifts will need support for students and
teachers so that learning climate does not decline with the challenge
of the new curriculum. For the new standards to result in better
outcomes for students, students need to be engaged in that curriculum.
Teachers need help designing instruction in ways that keep students
engaged around the rigorous material, and to continuously monitor how
they are doing so that they can support them as soon as they start to
struggle. This is more likely to happen if there are systems in place
to support teachers in instruction, classroom management, and
monitoring and assessment. Potentially beneficial supports include time
in teachers' schedules to work together to help each other with
instructional challenges, extra staff in classrooms as partners with
teachers to help students as soon as they start to struggle or
withdraw, and use of technology to help monitor students' engagement
and provide immediate feedback to teachers and parents when students
fall behind. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ In 2003, Chicago attempted to improve algebra performance for
students entering high school with weak math skills by giving them
twice as much instruction, and giving their teachers professional
development to use the extra instructional time. While the policy only
targeted students with below-average math skills, it resulted in higher
test scores for all students. By giving extra support to low-skill
students, they no longer held back the pacing and content of algebra
classes for students with above-average skills, so that students with
above-average skills also learned more (Nomi, Takako and Elaine
Allensworth. 2009. ``Double-Dose'' Algebra as an Alternative Strategy
to Remediation: Effects on Students' Academic Outcomes. Journal of
Research on Educational Effectiveness, 2: 111-148.). For further
discussion of this issue, see Luppescu, Stuart. Elaine M. Allensworth,
Paul Moore, Marisa de la Torre, James Murphy with Sanja Jagesic. 2011.
Trends in Chicago's Schools Across Three Eras of Reform. Consortium on
Chicago School Research, Chicago, Illinois. http://ccsr.uchicago.edu/
content/publications.php?pub_id=157

Accountability. In order for accountability to lead to
real progress, the indicators that are tracked need to measure
progress. This means looking at average gains, rather than tracking the
percentage of students that meet particular scores corresponding with
state or national standards. Furthermore, accountability metrics should
include measures that are strongly associated with later outcomes, not
just test scores. College acceptance rates, and whether students
persist in college through graduation, are not subject to the problems
associated with accountability based on test scores. Basic measures
like attendance in classes, interest in math and science, and students'
perceptions of challenge and support in their math and science classes
are strong and valid indicators of later outcomes. These are also
indicators that are easier for staff to work together to improve, and
improvement in student achievement is most likely to happen when staff
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
work together on common problems.

The money that has been invested by the federal government in
data systems allows for better use of data for intervention and
strategy, not just for accountability. In Chicago, high schools have
been making tremendous progress in high school graduation and college
enrollment by tracking indicators such as student attendance, grades,
college applications, and FASFA through student and school reports that
are updated frequently. In Chicago, the percentage of students who are
``on-track'' to graduate after freshman year increased by 11 percentage
points between 2002 and 2010. This improvement should result in a
commensurate increase in graduation rates. Those schools that have made
the most progress use the reports to get staff working together to
develop strategies and help each other improve those outcomes. They use
data on individual students to build partnerships between teachers and
parents.

Teacher quality. It is vital to have teachers who know
their subject well, and who know how to teach the students in their
classroom. If we expect students who have very weak academic skills to
master college-ready material, this means they need the strongest
teachers. More importantly, those teachers need support, high-quality
professional development that is embedded in their work at their
school, and colleagues who are collaborative and will help them when
they need it. \12\ It is difficult to mandate cooperation, but the
government can provide resources so that teachers have the time to work
together, and resources that help them use that time effectively. They
can encourage the use of teacher evaluation systems that promote
collaboration with colleagues and with parents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Bryk, Anthony S., Penny Bender Sebring, Elaine Allensworth,
Stuart Luppescu, John Q. Easton. 2010. Organizing Schools for
Improvement: Lessons from Chicago. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Rigorous curriculum standards, high-stakes school accountability,
and efforts to attract more teachers with strong backgrounds are all
strategies that may have potential for improving student achievement;
however, they have had little pay-off in Chicago's schools. As the
federal government works to implement similar strategies it would be
wise to learn lessons from Chicago's efforts and carefully consider
when designing new initiatives the capacity of schools to implement
those standards, respond to accountability, and keep and support strong
teachers. This is especially critical if there is to be real
improvement in STEM learning and STEM careers among minority youth
concentrated in low-performing urban school districts.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Allensworth.
And next, we have Dr. Means for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. BARBARA MEANS, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR TECHNOLOGY
IN LEARNING, SRI INTERNATIONAL

Dr. Means. Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski,
Chairman Wolf, and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
this opportunity to testify.
I am going to address what I believe is one of the most
vexing questions facing STEM education today. Given the many
innovations that show promising results in early studies, why
does so little rise to the scale where it makes a real
difference in schools across the country? As Dr. Gamoran noted,
we need rigorous longitudinal studies to help us understand how
to develop and nurture STEM interest, persistence, and learning
among all students. And we also need effective strategies for
putting the insights that come from such studies into practice
on a broad scale.
Conventional thinking is that once we have identified an
effective educational product or approach, we should simply
roll it out to as many schools and classrooms as possible. The
assumption is that these schools will experience the same
positive outcomes observed earlier. My basic message is that
this assumption is flawed and that efforts to improve or to
implement innovative K-12 STEM education approaches on a large
scale need to be combined with rigorous research on those
approaches in multiple contexts.
Educational effectiveness is a function of what gets
implemented, not simply the elements of an innovation's design
or a government policy. And aspects of context--by which I mean
factors such as grade level, school size, accountability
measures, student characteristics, family, and community
resources--have profound effects on how educational programs
get interpreted and actually implemented.
Take the case of STEM-focused high schools. Selective STEM
high schools were designed to serve our brightest students, and
test scores are a major factor in gaining admission. The bold
idea behind inclusive STEM schools such as that in Denver is to
offer the same intensive focus on STEM subjects to students who
are not selected by examination, to develop STEM expertise
rather than selecting for it. It is easy to understand that
instructional approaches and materials that work well with
northern Virginia's highest-scoring students who gain entrance
to Thomas Jefferson High will need to be modified to be
effective with students who enter an inclusive STEM high school
a year or more behind in mathematics.
Before promoting inclusive STEM high schools as a policy,
we should have well designed research demonstrating that such
schools increase the likelihood that their students will be
interested in and prepared for STEM college majors and careers.
But this kind of research, though important, is not enough. If
inclusive STEM high schools are effective, we will still need
to figure out how we can make them widely available.
For example, Texas has been particularly active in
promoting inclusive STEM high schools. Although there are
scores of these schools in Texas, less than one percent of the
State's high school students attend one. So solid evidence that
these schools are effective would lead us to the next and more
difficult question: How can we obtain similar results for all
students? The approach that works with T-STEM schools of 400
students likely would have to be modified for schools with
1,000 or 2,000.
The rationale for bringing a new, potentially effective
educational approach to many students is obvious, but the need
to support initial large-scale implementations with research is
less understood. We tend to plan for replicating a successful
education approach as if we could simply have an assembly line
produce more widgets. But the components of an education
approach interact with and are shaped by the elements of
context where we try to implement them. For this reason, we
need to combine scaling with research on the approach as
implemented under different conditions.
I will illustrate with something found in the New York
Times last weekend. The National Evaluation of Educational
Technology Interventions, of which I was a part, examined the
effectiveness of 16 reading and math software products. These
products were selected for the study because they had prior
evidence of effectiveness. In the large-scale national study,
however, on average none of them produced significantly better
achievement than was attained by students in classrooms
assigned to the control condition.
On the other hand, for virtually every product there were
some schools where those using the software outperformed the
control classrooms and some schools with the opposite pattern.
We learned that features such as the student's grade level, the
school's technology infrastructure, and district policies
around curriculum and assessment influenced the extent to which
and the way in which software was implemented.
To increase the odds that new K-12 education approaches
will have positive effects when implemented on a large scale,
researchers should be brought in to work with educators.
Researchers can contribute their expertise to implementation
planning and to building in data collections that can serve as
feedback for those in charge of the program. We need
collaborative efforts aimed both at scaling up approaches with
prior evidence of effectiveness and studying what happens in
multiple settings while advising those responsible for
implementing the education approaches.
Thank you for your attention and the opportunity to submit
this testimony.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Means follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Barbara Means, Director, Center for
Technology in Learning, SRI International
Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski, and other Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to participate in this
hearing on What Makes Successful K-12 STEM Education.
My name is Barbara Means and I direct the Center for Technology in
Learning at SRI International, an independent nonprofit research
organization based in Menlo Park, CA.
I was a member of the National Research Council committee chaired
by Dr. Gamoran that produced the Successful K-12 STEM Education report.
In my testimony today, I'm going to first underline my support for
what I regard as key aspects of that report and then address what I
believe is the most vexing question that faces us today: Given that the
federal government funds so many wonderful innovations that show
promising results in the early studies, why does so little rise to the
scale where it makes a real difference in schools across the country?
And just to foreshadow where I'll be going, I will argue that our
greatest unmet R&D need is learning how we can achieve consistently
high-quality implementation of good ideas across all the variation
found in American schools.
I believe that the Successful K-12 STEM Education committee's
articulation of K-12 education goals not just for universal STEM
literacy but for preparing broader sections of our student population
for advanced-degree STEM and STEM-related occupations as well is very
important. A balanced K-12 STEM education agenda will work toward all
three of these goals.
And meeting these goals will require research addressing not only
math and science achievement but also students' interest in STEM, their
persistence in STEM courses in high school and postsecondary study, and
their participation in STEM-related activities outside of school and in
the job market. As Dr. Gamoran noted, we need rigorous longitudinal
studies to help us understand how to develop and nurture STEM interest,
persistence, and learning among student groups that now shy away from
these subjects.
I am going to focus the remainder of my remarks on the steps needed
to put the kinds of insights that could come from such studies into
practice on a broad scale. The big challenge is scaling up what appear
to be successful programs in ways that produce positive results for
most or all of our students.
Conventional thinking on the part of many federal and private
philanthropic programs has been that once we've identified an effective
educational product or approach, we should simply roll it out to as
many schools and classrooms as possible. The implicit assumption is
that these schools will experience the same positive outcomes for the
approach observed originally. I am going to argue that this assumption
is flawed and that efforts to implement innovative K-12 STEM education
approaches on a large scale need to be combined with rigorous research
on those approaches in multiple contexts.

Need for Combining Scaling and Implementation Research

Educational effectiveness is a function of what gets implemented,
not simply the elements of an innovation's design or a government
policy. \1\ And aspects of context--by which I mean factors such as
grade level, school size, accountability measures, students'
characteristics, and parent and community resources--have profound
effects on how educational programs are interpreted and implemented.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ McLaughlin, M. W. (1987). Learning from experience: Lessons
from policy implementation. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
9, 171-178; Spillane, J. (2004). Standards deviation: How schools
misunderstand education policy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I will illustrate this argument with the case of STEM-focused high
schools. Selective STEM high schools were designed to serve our
brightest students, and test scores are a major factor in gaining
entrance. The bold idea behind inclusive STEM schools is to offer the
same intensive focus on STEM subjects to students who are not selected
by examination-to develop STEM expertise rather than selecting for it.
It is easy to understand that instructional approaches and materials
that work well with Northern Virginia's highest-scoring students who
gain entrance to Thomas Jefferson High School will need to be modified
in order to be effective with students who are a year or more behind
national norms in math achievement when they enter an inclusive STEM
high school.
Before promoting inclusive STEM high schools as a policy, we should
have well-designed research demonstrating that such schools increase
the likelihood that their students will be interested in, and prepared
for, STEM college majors and careers. In fact, with a grant from the
National Science Foundation (NSF), I am starting to examine the
feasibility of conducting such a study. But this kind of research by
itself is not sufficient.
If today's inclusive STEM high schools are effective, we need to
figure out how we can make them widely available. For example, Texas
has been particularly active in promoting inclusive STEM high schools.
The Texas design for inclusive STEM schools calls for providing
students with personal attention, in part by limiting school size to
100 students per grade. Although there are scores of these schools in
Texas, less than one percent of the state's 1.4 million high school
students attend them. So solid evidence that these schools are
effective would lead us to the next, more difficult question. How can
we obtain similar results for all of our students? The approach that
works with schools of 400 students would have to be modified for
schools with 1,000 or 2,000 students, and we would not know whether it
would still be effective.
The rationale for bringing a new, potentially effective educational
approach to many students is obvious, but the need to support initial
large-scale implementations with research is less easily understood. We
tend to plan for replicating a successful education approach as if we
could simply have an assembly line produce more widgets. But the
components of an education approach interact with, and are shaped by,
the elements of the context in which we try to implement them, as Dr.
Allensworth's research illustrates. For this reason, we need to combine
scaling with research on the approach as implemented under different
conditions.
Over the last decade, we have invested in large-scale experimental
studies to answer the question of whether certain prominent educational
approaches on average produce a significant benefit. Such studies are
valuable in building a knowledge base, but educators care about results
for their students, not averages. And they want to know not just
whether they can expect good results in their setting but how to
implement the approach to maximize prospects for success.
Let me illustrate my point with an example that found its way into
a New York Times article last weekend. \2\ The National Evaluation of
Educational Technology Interventions, of which I was a part, examined
the effectiveness of 16 reading and mathematics software products
implemented in grades 1, 4, 6 and high school. These particular
software products were selected for this large-scale experiment because
they could point to some evidence that they were effective. In the
large-scale national study, however, on average, none of the products
produced significantly better student achievement than was attained by
students in classrooms assigned to the control condition. \3\ On the
other hand, for virtually every product, there were some schools in
which the software-using classes out-performed the control classes,
some schools where the control classes outperformed the software-using
classes, and some schools where the two were equivalent. We can choose
to treat such variation as random ``noise,'' or we can focus on it as
an object of study. I am among those advocating the latter stance. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Gabriel, T., & Richtel, M. (2011). Grading the digital school:
Inflating the software report card. The New York Times, Oct. 9, 2011.
\3\ Dynarski, M., Agodini, R., Heaviside, S., Novak, T., Carey, N.,
Means, B., et al., (2006). Effectiveness of educational technology
interventions. Report prepared for Institute of Education Sciences,
U.S. Department of Education. Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy
Research, Inc.
\4\ Bryk, A., Gomez, L., & Grunow, A. (2010). Getting ideas into
action: Building networked improvement communities in education.
Available at http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/print/7645.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the case of the national experiment on educational software, for
example, we learned that features such as the students' grade level,
the school's technology infrastructure, and district policies around
curriculum and assessment influenced the way in which software was
implemented. For example, some elementary school teachers had a set of
computers in their classrooms and could have some of their students
using the software while others worked with the teacher or did silent
reading. Such flexibility was rare in middle and high schools where it
was more common to have the whole class use the software on selected
days, often in a separate computer laboratory.
The physical environment makes a difference in how an educational
approach is implemented. In an extreme example, a sixth-grade class
tried to use math software on laptops passed out to students in a large
auditorium. The teacher could not help students because they were
tightly packed in rows, so students could not get instructor assistance
if they were having difficulty with the software program.
This class also provided an illustration of the inter-connected
roles of teacher judgment and district policies. The math software was
designed to individualize instruction, with each student working on a
learning objective until he or she had mastered it. The teacher had
different ideas, based upon his interpretation of school district
policy. The district had instituted benchmark tests in mathematics
every six weeks along with associated pacing charts indicating what
should be taught in each period. In this context, the teacher felt
there was no time to teach to mastery even though many of his students
were English language learners who struggled with math. The infinitely
patient technology tutor might have been ideal for such students, but
the teacher believed that the district's policies required him to
``touch upon a topic and move on.''
I do not want to leave the impression that the effects of local
context are always negative. Modifications of an education approach to
better fit with local circumstances or the needs and interests of a
particular set of students and instructors may enhance effectiveness in
that setting. We found a number of examples in our studies of GLOBE, an
Internet-based Earth science education program in which students took
weather, vegetation, soil, and water measures for a local study site
and uploaded them to a worldwide database used by both scientists and
educators. Students whose teachers elaborated on the practices in the
Teachers Guide by adding data analysis activities performed better than
students of other GLOBE teachers on an assessment of science inquiry.
\5\ We found also that classes of teachers who designed extensions of
the GLOBE investigations focusing on questions about their local
environment were more active in the program (contributed more data to
the database) than did other classrooms. \6\ We brought these practices
to the attention of the GLOBE program staff who were then able to build
training and support for such practices into their program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Means, B., & Penuel, W. R. (2005). Scaling up technology-based
educational innovations. In C. Dede, J. P. Honan, & L. C. Peters
(Eds.), Scaling up success: Lessons from technology-based educational
improvement. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
\6\ Means, B., Penuel, W. R., Crawford, V. M., Korbak, C., Lewis,
A., Murphy, R. F., et al. (2001). GLOBE Year 6 evaluation: Explaining
variation in implementation. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SRI spent over ten years conducting research in support of the
GLOBE program, an unusually long-lived collaboration. At the start of
this joint work, the GLOBE program staff assumed that they could
promote effective STEM learning activities if they simply trained
teachers in how to conduct the scientific data collection protocols.
They expected teachers to know how to make the data collection
activities instructionally meaningful. Early on, we were able to show
program staff that many teachers struggled to relate GLOBE activities
to their local science curriculum. While high school teachers brought
greater knowledge of science content, many of them were inexperienced
in conducting hands-on activities with small groups of students. The
program needed to entirely revamp its teacher training approach to
address the range of needs uncovered by the research.
To increase the odds that new K-12 STEM education approaches will
have positive effects when implemented at a large scale, researchers
should be brought in to work with educators. Researchers can contribute
their expertise to implementation planning and to building in data
collections that can serve as feedback for those in charge of the
program. At the same time, by studying implementation in multiple
contexts, researchers can advance our understanding of the necessary
preconditions, critical elements, and both therapeutic and harmful
adaptations of the approach.
In short, I am calling for a much closer relationship between STEM
education research and K-12 STEM education practice. We need
collaborative efforts aimed both at (1) scaling up approaches with
prior evidence of effectiveness and (2) studying what happens in
multiple settings while advising those responsible for implementing the
education approaches.

Approaches to Implementation Research

In recent years the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of
Teaching has been promoting what it calls ``improvement research''
incorporating design, educational engineering, and development (DEED)
activity. \7\ Applied to K-12 STEM education, DEED collaborations would
involve scientists, researchers, and education practitioners in jointly
defining a problem of practice and then developing, trying out,
evaluating and revising education approaches. Repeated cycles of
design, development, measurement and feedback are central to this
approach.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Bryk, A., & Gomez, L. M. (2008). Ruminations on reinventing an
R&D capacity for educational improvement. Available at http://
www.carnegiefoundation.org/improvement-research/approach.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many of the same elements can be found in educational researchers'
call for ``implementation research" \8\ or ``design-based
implementation research.'' \9\ Defining elements of this approach are:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ McLaughlin, M. W. (2006). Implementation research in education:
Lessons learned, lingering questions and new opportunities. In M. I.
Honig (Ed.), New directions in education policy implementation:
Confronting complexity (pp. 209-228). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
\9\ Penuel, W. R., Fishman, B. J., Cheng, B. H., & Sabelli, N.
(2011). Organizing research and development at the intersection of
learning, implementation, and design. Educational Researcher, 40(7),
331-337.

a focus on important problems of educational practice as
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
defined by practitioners and researchers,

commitment to iterative, collaborative design,

interest in developing a theory of program implementation
through systematic inquiry, and

concern with developing education systems' capacity for
change.

Implementation research requires a kind of partnership between
education research organizations and schools and districts that is rare
at present, but there are several existence proofs involving
mathematics or science education. \10\ When the focus is STEM
instructional materials, science institutions should be brought into
the mix as well.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Cobb, P. A., Henrik, E. C., & Munter, C. (2011). Conducting
design research at the district level. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans.
Roschelle, J., Schechtman, N., Tatar, D., Hegedus, S., Hopkins, B.,
Empson, S., Knudsen, J., & Gallagher, L. (2010). Integration of
technology, curriculum, and professional development for advancing
middle school mathematics: Three large-scale studies. American
Educational Research Journal, 47(4), 833-878. Songer, N. B., Kelcey,
B., & Wenk Gotwals, A. (2009).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A key difference between the K-12 STEM education implementation
research agenda I am advocating and many existing federal K-12 STEM
education expenditures is the principle of striking a three-way balance
between scientists, education researchers, and education practitioners.
Federally funded K-12 STEM education R&D should reflect deep expertise
in STEM, address problems that educators care about, and have the
potential to produce generalizable insights regarding organizational
change, learning, and instruction. Funded initiatives should be neither
research for its own sake, nor federal underwriting of K-12 education
as usual, nor feel-good programs of scientists visiting classrooms for
show and tell. I am advocating long-term, sustained collaborations with
the three types of partners (scientists, educators, and education
researchers) having equal roles in setting the agenda.

Federal Role in K-12 STEM Education

In this country, public education is a state and local
responsibility. So what role should the federal government have in K-12
STEM education? I believe that the federal government has two
responsibilities in this realm. First, it can articulate our country's
goals for K-12 STEM education and a vision of how to attain them. The
Successful K-12 STEM Education report provides a starting point for
articulating goals. Second, the federal government has a responsibility
to support the infrastructure for improving STEM education and
measuring that improvement. This infrastructure includes both concrete
resources, such as assessment tools and data systems, and R&D
activities, such as those I've described as implementation research.
The bringing together of research and educational practice that I have
described would require both intellectual and monetary investments.
Individual states and districts lack the resources and the broad
national vision for this undertaking.

Funding K-12 STEM Education Implementation Research

How do we fund this kind of research and implementation at scale in
this time of limited resources? I am no expert in federal agency
budgets, but I suspect that we could implement a significant program of
K-12 STEM education implementation research using money that we are
already spending that could be put to better purpose. I would look to
programs that add a small K-12 education component to grants intended
for STEM research activities or that add a token evaluation component
to grants for STEM educational activities.
Pro forma outreach activities where a STEM professional makes a
one-time visit to a classroom are unlikely to have long-term effects
for education institutions, teachers or students. STEM education
programs where 95% of the resources go to providing services and less
than 5% to measuring whether and under what circumstances those
services had positive effects are unlikely to build a robust knowledge
base about how to implement effective STEM education at scale. Funding
that is thinly spread across many grants and programs for ``light
touch'' STEM education activities and perfunctory evaluations could be
re-allocated toward a smaller number of significant implementation
research efforts.
In 2007 the Academic Competitiveness Council reported that a dozen
different federal agencies were supporting 105 STEM education programs
at a cost of over $3 billion ($574 million of which was for K-12
programs). Some of these are surely valuable programs, but others are
likely to be too superficial to be serving our national STEM education
goals. A portion of those targeting K-12 education could be
consolidated or eliminated to free up funding for a significant program
of K-12 STEM education implementation research.
Networks of multiple K-12 STEM education research and development
collaborations, working on the same problem and sharing a common
analytic framework, could accelerate the generation of knowledge about
what approaches work in what contexts and with what range of
implementation practices.

Policy Implications

Education approaches that are significant enough to have long-
lasting consequences are necessarily complex. We need research on the
resource requirements, key choices and practices in implementing K-12
STEM education approaches, and on how the approaches can be implemented
to good effect in different settings.
At present, the National Science Foundation encourages proposals
for implementation research under one of its field-initiated grant
programs, but STEM education implementation research is not a core
responsibility of any federal agency. The National Science Board
Commission on 21st Century Education in STEM called attention to this
gap in its 2007 national action plan (p. 14) and called for NSF to
promote STEM education research on critical challenges defined by the
field of educational practice.
Research on STEM learning, instructional practices, and
infrastructure needs to be coupled with the study of implementation and
local infrastructure reform. The work needs to be designed in such a
way that it both enhances the practice of participating education
institutions and yields generalizable insights that build knowledge for
the field. Such collaborations require new practices and new sets of
skills on the part of scientists, educators, and researchers alike.
Field-building activities, promoting the needed skills both in people
being trained for STEM professions, education research, and education
administration and in those currently engaged in these professions,
will be necessary. We have seen a few isolated examples of such
collaborations, but we are unlikely to see them become common without
leadership and support at the federal level.
Thank you for your attention and the opportunity to submit this
testimony.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Means.
Just by way of background, my wife used to be a certified
public accountant, had kids, went back to school, got a math
degree, taught math at middle school and I am very familiar
with the STEM program. My father and two sons, they are all
engineers. I am the wayward one that Chairman Wolf referred to
earlier who became a lawyer.
Having said that, for decades now we have been discussing
the benefits of STEM education to United States innovation and
economic competitiveness. Bookcases can be filled with the
reports dedicated to this topic. We have spent tens of
billions, perhaps hundreds of billions of dollars, looking at
ways to improve K through 12 STEM education and all indications
are that we are not making the kind of vast improvements we
would expect from those large expenditures.
I am not suggesting stopping these investments, certainly
not that, but I would like to ask all the witnesses what have
we gotten for our investments to date? How will putting more
money towards research and programs produce a better quality
and quantity of STEM students? Not just at the K through 12
level, which is certainly where you all have focused, but as I
understand it, you are focusing at STEM at K through 12 in
hopes of our being able to graduate from our universities with
BS degrees, master's degrees, or Ph.D. degrees individuals who
have the kind of skills in the STEM subjects that empowers
America and empowers our economy to a technological advantage
that we would not have if we did not have those students going
into those areas.
So with that having been said, how would you evaluate the
expenditures so far and where would you prefer we put the money
if you have a different preference on how to get to the end
game, and the end game being the additional BS, master's, and
Ph.D. diplomas in the STEM subjects? Please, Dr. Gamoran?
Dr. Gamoran. Well, your question focuses on one of the
three goals that we identified. You are talking about nurturing
some of our most talented students from all walks of life and
getting them into these high-level STEM careers. That is
extremely important along with creating a broader STEM-capable
workforce and encouraging scientific literacy.
But what we have learned from research is that there are
programs and schools that can foster these effects. One thing
you gain by going through the research carefully is you find
out what we do know and you also find out what we don't know.
And I think this is a good moment in time to have taken stock
and to say here is where the critical investments are needed.
For example, research that connects the outcome to specific
practices within these high-flying schools, research that
connects student outcomes to specific practices in a broad
range of schools as well.
With respect to investments, as I said in my written
testimony, I think the Education and Human Resources
Directorate at NSF and IES, which are the leaders--IES is in
the Department of Education--which are the leaders in
supporting STEM education research are well positioned for this
role. We invest in STEM education, programming, and research in
a wide range of federal agencies, and I know that the Office of
Science and Technology Policy is reviewing that, and I think we
should take a close look at that to see whether narrowing our
investments to agencies that specialize in STEM education
research would produce a higher yield.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Gamoran.
Any other comments? If not I have got another question or
two, but anyone has anything to add, please do so. Dr. Means?
Dr. Means. I would just reiterate that I think the
important point here is to try to combine things that we are
funding as implementation of programs with research on the
effectiveness of those programs. Too often we have treated
research and implementation as separate activities, and I am
arguing that we really need to put these things together and
not implement broad policies in the absence of having research
support for their implementation and research that helps us
learn from those broad implementations.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you.
It seems to me one of the issues we have is motivation of
students so that they will focus on the STEM subjects. In turn,
to some degree that involves the motivation of parents. You
motivate the parents, we all know that parents can to some
degree help motivate the students. That having been said, one
of the ideas that I have toyed with--and there are a lot of
out-of-box thinking approaches that can be used, and again, I
welcome whatever insights you all may have of an out-of-the-box
nature--but we spend over $30 billion a year promoting STEM in
one shape, form, or fashion, and just doing some math that--you
could spend $10,000 a year per pupil in our universities as
scholarships as an inducement to go into the science,
technology, engineering, and math fields and still have
billions of dollars left over for what we are now doing.
Do you all have any insight as to whether $10,000 a year
would be an incentive for people--students and parents in the K
through 12 levels to focus more on the STEM subjects and then
enter those in college if they knew that kind of scholarship
was coming? Yes, sir? Mr. Heffron?
Mr. Heffron. So I could speak to that. I think that if
there is funding tied to STEM fields as far as scholarships,
that is hugely impactful to a kid who is trying to decide where
they are going to go to school. The only problem there is if
they get to the 12th grade and they are not prepared for those
degrees and those fields of study, it doesn't matter if there
is money out there. So I guess I just want to go back to kind
of the importance of preparing every kid with a rigorous
education so that when they get to their senior year and there
is more money out there for a particular field, they actually
have the capacity to go after it.
Chairman Brooks. So you see the scholarship as impacting
12th grade but not K through 11th?
Mr. Heffron. I see it impacting a student who is prepared
and is trying to decide whether they are going to go to law or
medicine or engineering or something like that, but I don't
think it is big enough, I don't think it is going to affect a
ninth grader when they are really trying to make a decision
about--or even a ninth grade family around what they are taking
or what a school is potentially offering.
Chairman Brooks. Okay, thank you.
Dr. Allensworth?
Dr. Allensworth. Yeah, I absolutely agree. And, you know, I
come from Chicago. It is a low-income, high-minority district.
Lots of students actually want to go into STEM careers when
they are in ninth grade and tenth grade but they have no idea
how to get there and they don't realize that they are vastly
underprepared. They are not being closely monitored, they are
not being closely tracked to make sure that they actually do
what they need to do to get on a path. And then they get to
12th grade and they are very under-qualified to get into
college and go into STEM careers. Many of them haven't taken
the classes they need, and more importantly, they haven't been
engaged in those classes.
In Chicago, we find that tracking--having data systems in
place that actually track how students are doing and giving
them--giving students information and parents information about
what they need to do to actually end up college-ready, end up
ready to go into a STEM career early on and then really
monitoring them to keep them on that path makes a huge
difference for students.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Allensworth.
My time has expired. I now recognize the Ranking Member,
Mr. Lipinski of Illinois.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I again thank all of the witnesses for their testimony.
Let us start with Dr. Gamoran. I know that the NRC report
includes a wealth of information about what we need to be
emphasizing in STEM education. and approaches to the problem
that have been successful. Can you tell me what is being done
to disseminate this potentially helpful information to STEM
education practitioners or whether there are plans to further
publicize the results of this report?
Dr. Gamoran. Yes. The National Research Council has
prepared a research brief, a two-page research brief which has
been widely distributed. There was also a public event in
Philadelphia recently which was widely covered. A large number
of copies of the report itself has been printed. And I think I
could call on the National Research Council to pass more
specific information on the dissemination activities to you
subsequently.
Mr. Lipinski. Yeah, I would like to see that. Since we have
this report I think it is very important to disseminate it.
Obviously, we have a lot of--we have heard about what is
working, what is not working. It is also a matter of really
getting people knowing what we have learned.
Now, one other question, Dr. Gamoran. Have you gotten any
feedback from the community on this and if so has there been
any ideas for follow-up research?
Dr. Gamoran. With respect to feedback, we have received a
great deal of positive feedback such as that which Mr. Heffron
stated, that practitioners are affirming the findings. To some
extent people are saying well, this is information that we
know, and that is good because our job wasn't to do new
research; it was to pull together the findings and evaluate the
findings from research that is out there.
With respect to next steps, we are getting advice that the
study should be--or the report should be done in another five
years or so to see what progress has been made, and that is one
suggestion for follow up that has come up.
Mr. Lipinski. Well, I have a general question then for
everyone. If we--do we need to have--well, I think we need to
have more information but the information we have out there,
are we making use of that, of the research that has been done,
what we have learned? Some of what Dr. Wilson said seems to
suggest that we are simply not doing that, that there are so
many ways in teachers' training that teachers will go from one
course to another one, from one place to another and it is not
reinforcing the same lessons for the teachers. It is something
completely different. So what can we be doing better to take
what we already know, what we have learned and really put that
into practice? So let me start on the--Dr. Means, do you have
any suggestions on that, what we could be doing better to
actually put this into practice?
Dr. Means. I think we can not only review our existing
programs to see whether they are consistent with the research
that we do have that is in the report, but I also think it is
important for us to have the kind of capability they built in
Chicago where they are gathering data along the way, looking at
factors we know are important, things like school climate,
things like support from the parents and communication to
parents, whether the teachers actually collaborate and support
each other in providing STEM. And I think having more of those
feedback systems where you really try to build in feedback
according to whether you are implementing the things we do know
are effective practices would help us do a better job all the
way up and down our education system.
Mr. Lipinski. You are not just saying that because I have a
systems engineering degree at Stanford, are you?
Dr. Means. No, but I was aware that you are an engineer.
Mr. Lipinski. Dr. Allensworth, Dr. Means mentioned Chicago.
What--how would you respond to that?
Dr. Allensworth. I would say Chicago is doing some things--
doing some great things but also has the same kinds of problems
as every place else. It is very difficult oftentimes when
people want a quick solution to really think about the theory
of action behind the policies that are being suggested and
whether they are likely to have a beneficial impact on schools
and also to think about the context of different schools and
the different kinds of supports that they will need to actually
make those benefits happen with those policies. Too often,
things are done quickly without thinking about the research
evidence that is out there.
On the other hand, Chicago has put into place a number of
data systems which allow--which are increasingly allowing
practitioners to base decisions on data and coming up with
strategies that are based on where their children are and how
they are doing in the school. And I think there is a lot of
hope there.
Mr. Lipinski. Anyone else want to jump in? Dr. Wilson?
Dr. Wilson. Just to reiterate what I hear my colleagues
saying. I think that we are at a stage right now where we have
an opportunity because we have come to understand the need to
think about things systemically so that it is components of
curriculum and school culture and teacher support, that we
don't think about those as isolated, that we need to change the
culture of our schools, our educational system, and our
research so that we do the kind of research that can be
produced quickly and put into symbols--systems that become much
more nimble about responding to that data, that we need a clear
vision like the one that is articulated in this report about
what teaching and learning looks like and what we are aiming
for, and that we have articulated standards.
I think the Common Core State Standards are going to help
us ground our work in schools by saying that we are all
focusing on the same thing. One of the huge problems for the
teacher support system is that people who have been supporting
teachers don't know what those teachers are going to have to
teach. So the combination of those four strategies, we have
never been in that kind of position before as a Nation and I
think it is time to take advantage of the fact that we have
learned that largely from school districts that have tried to
do these kinds of things and research that has been produced in
this sort of carnival-esque world but where we can sort out
what the good stuff is and choose to focus on that now.
Mr. Lipinski. Mr. Heffron?
Mr. Heffron. So on page 27 of the report, the fifth bullet
says, ``District should provide instructional leaders with
professional development that helps them to create the skill
conditions that appear to support student achievement. School
leaders should be held accountable for creating school contexts
that are conducive to learning in STEM.'' I would suggest that
we remove the ``in STEM.'' If you can create a school
environment that promotes learning and a school leader that is
held accountable, then you can drop ``STEM'' in there, you can
drop ``art'' in there, you can drop ``business'' in there with
the right leadership and the right expertise. And I think that
that is the thing that didn't show up in the next page, which
is really what the Commission suggested we do next, and I think
we really need to reprioritize and say, you know what? This has
got to be a school that is run effectively, that the leadership
is accountable to that, that there are students in that
building who are supported and able to learn, and then you can
drop ``STEM'' in there and it will work. And if you don't, you
can try program--all these programs that are being tried and
some places they work and some places they don't, they are
going to work where there is a school culture that supports
that learning and they are not going to work everywhere else.
And that should be reprioritized I think.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
Next, the Chair recognizes Representative Tonko of New
York.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good morning, everyone.
As an engineer, I am very interested in this topic. If you
could cite for me any good partnerships with states out there,
and is there a way to better involve states with federal policy
to maximize the outcome here and achieve our goals?
Dr. Means. I certainly think that is the attempt under a
number of the Race to the Top initiatives that are going on
now. We have a very strong STEM focus on the initiative in
North Carolina, for example, which is really focusing on STEM
issues and preparing the population for STEM careers and STEM-
related careers in a variety of different places. Those things
are just unfolding now, so it is a little early to say how
fruitful they have been, but certainly they have harnessed
state energy and state policy. And from the leading
universities and the Superintendent of Instruction's Office, I
think we see a lot of action in that particular State and we
will know better in a few years how effective it has been.
But they are establishing a number of STEM-focused
specialty schools, some of them focused on careers, some of
them focused more generally, and they are watching those very
carefully.
Mr. Tonko. Does anyone else want to--yes, Dr. Gamoran?
Dr. Gamoran. Well, the partnerships with states has been
challenging because of the states' dual role in regulation and
implementation and the challenges of gaining capacity for real
reform at the state level. I think the Federal Government has
provided states with extremely important tools in the
regulatory environment of the last ten years and in the new
approaches to school improvement grants and school turnaround.
And I think that is a place we can look to in the future for
the kind of progress we are talking about.
Mr. Tonko. If I could just broaden the segue to STEM. We
have had a lot of discussion about high schools and some about
middle schools and developing the cultural aspects of science,
tech, and engineering and math, but with education being like
the whole segue, the mission of self-discovery, and at times to
combat fear that might be developed before you even enter into
this sphere, the role of elementary education and the training
of elementary teachers, science and tech awareness, science and
tech acumen at that level, introducing children to that,
drawing forth their self-discovery, perhaps combating the fear
factor which is subliminal, but is there a way to address some
development in that K through six, or pre-K through seven
discipline where we can introduce science and tech in a way
that combats the fear factor and enhances the self-discovery of
the student? Yes, sir, Dr. Wilson?
Dr. Wilson. I think that there are--this is another case
where I know of some examples of some very good programs and
approaches, but they are local and they haven't been tested or
tried to be spread and tested so that we know what is--what
will spread and what will not spread. These programs tend to
focus both on developing--there is one example, for instance,
is the Urban Advantage Program in New York City itself where
the cultural institutions in the city took responsibility for
helping the schools, and one part of that work was to help them
with the curriculum and the standards for children in those
schools. But then they didn't just help with the development of
curriculum standards; they also thought about what role they
play in teacher-professional development. And in that teacher-
professional development, an important piece is also parent
involvement. And so they work with--it is a middle school
program, but a lot of middle school teachers tend to be
elementary teachers who moved up to middle school, and I think
that a lot of what goes on in urban advantage can be used to
think about elementary.
They think about what parents need to learn, how they need
to be pulled in, what kind of relationship they need to have
both with the school and with the cultural institutions in the
city because they have a lot to do with getting people over
fear and getting them excited about science. They think about
the curriculum, they think about a supportive assessment system
because there is an exit exam in the city, and they think about
what the teachers need to know and what kind of support the
teachers need in order to be able to pull this off.
This is just one example but I think NSF--it is an NSF-
sponsored project, and the city of New York also sponsors it.
But I think there are other examples like that and I think it
is time that we found them and we invested in figuring out how
to leverage what we have learned from them rather than asking
for other people to reinvent the wheel.
Mr. Tonko. Um-hum. Dr. Gamoran?
Dr. Gamoran. Yes, I think this is a strength of NSF's Math-
Science Partnership Program which establishes partnerships
between institutions of higher education and school districts
with math and science educators and mathematicians and
scientists, as well as the K-12 personnel. At the elementary
level, a fundamental problem is that elementary teachers have
taken very little math and even less science, and we need
content-focused professional development, and we need to work
with our institutions of higher learning to infuse greater
content in the elementary education preparation programs.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Mr. Heffron?
Mr. Heffron. So I think this has been said earlier, but I
believe the report even indicated that science is getting less
time in elementary school. I know it is getting less time in
middle school. It is not getting less time in our high school,
but that is a really purposeful change that we have made. And
when I look at our testing program in Colorado, math and
English and reading are tested every year grades three through
ten and science is on an every-other, every-third-year program.
The science assessments typically aren't as strong as some of
the other assessments in our state testing system, so I think
it needs more time, the assessments need to be more frequent
and better, and with those things, you will have more time
spent and it will be better time spent. That is one other way
that we can help get more science infused in grades K through
six.
Mr. Tonko. I think my time is up, so thank you.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Tonko.
Next, we have Mr. Sarbanes of Maryland.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
your testimony.
I am going to ask you to quantify--I always do this to
people and it is impossible for them but I am going to ask you
to do it anyway. If 100 is where we want to be with our STEM
education in this country like on a 100-point scale--and you
all I think probably have a pretty good sense from the research
you have done, so forth, where we need to be as a country in
terms of STEM education--where were we ten years ago? I will
start with you, Dr. Gamoran. We don't necessarily have to go
down the whole line, but give me your best show. Ten years ago
where were we on a 100-point scale in terms of STEM education?
Where were we five years ago and where are we today?
Dr. Gamoran. Well, if we take 100 as where we want to be
with the best--the most prosperous nations in the world in the
STEM fields and 0 is where the least prosperous nations are in
the STEM fields, we are around 50, and we have not moved the
needle very much in the last ten years. We have moved it a
little, so maybe we have gone from 48 to 52. We have also
witnessed some closing of learning gaps among different groups
in the last ten years, but again, very small progress.
So just as Chairman Wolf said, I think--excuse me, Chairman
Brooks said in his first question, we have made some progress
but it falls far short of the vast amount of progress that we
need to make.
Mr. Sarbanes. Does anyone on the panel differ substantially
with that perspective? Okay.
I would be curious to know from each of you as briefly as
you can describe what for you was the most surprising finding
in the report that was issued, something that kind of came out
of the blue if there was such a thing or if you want to
substitute for that what you consider the most noteworthy? But
I am most interested in stuff maybe that you didn't see coming
that kind of jumped out at you as you think about the report.
Just pick one if you could. Why don't we start at this end, Dr.
Means, and go in that direction.
Dr. Means. This was not something that was new to me but I
thought about it in a different way after being on the
Committee. I realized that since No Child Left Behind and the
annual testing in reading and math were implemented that
science was getting less time. And in fact science programs I
was studying that were very interesting were becoming more
difficult to implement because the time was mandated for
reading and math. And I realized that we have on the one hand
our government saying that we think STEM education is really
important and it is a national priority and on the other hand
we have an accountability system that is not measuring it and
that is undercutting efforts to do STEM education. So we
actually have a contradiction in our national policies that is
hurting one of our priorities.
Mr. Sarbanes. Okay. Dr. Allensworth?
Dr. Allensworth. This wasn't a surprise to me but it was a
surprise in that I was happy to see that it was in the report
so prominently, and that was the suggestion that test scores
are not the only measure of STEM progress in our schools. You
might be surprised--and I was surprised because there is such
an emphasis on test scores as the only indicator of learning in
science and math but the fact is it is not the best indicator.
Test scores are actually not very predictive of whether
students will go to college, enter STEM careers, and actually
get high earnings in the workforce. There are much better
indicators including students' engagement in the classes,
through their grades, their interest in science and math, their
knowledge about science and math, and their--and how to do
inquiry. And I was very happy to see that that was in the
report because we need to start following these other
indicators. And these are also indicators that it is easier to
get teachers to work around to try to improve rather than just
the focus on test scores.
Mr. Sarbanes. Okay, thank you. Dr. Wilson?
Dr. Wilson. I was most happy to see the writing about
assessments as well in large part because if we are going to
find some way to measure teacher quality, we are going to have
to in the end use student outcomes. And if we are going to do
that, we need good student outcomes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Right. Mr. Heffron? You need to put your mike
on.
Mr. Heffron. I was especially pleased with the first
paragraph, ``Policymakers at the national, state, and local
level should elevate science to the same level of importance as
reading and mathematics.'' I think that is--that was the thing
I was most pleased with and I think I stated earlier I was just
surprised to see--to not see school culture and kind of
accountability to leadership make the last page.
Mr. Sarbanes. Okay. And Dr. Gamoran?
Dr. Gamoran. I guess the two things that were surprising to
me was first as Dr. Allensworth already indicated, how little
research has been done on outcomes other than student
achievement. I am always complaining that we don't have enough
research on student achievement that is rigorous and it turns
out there is even less when it comes to other outcomes. And
especially when we are looking at young children, that has got
to be equally if not more important.
A second issue alluded to by Mr. Heffron is the role of
STEM-focused leadership and leadership for learning. The
Chicago report that Dr. Allensworth was involved with came out
shortly before our committee began its work I think or during
the time, and it indicates the elements of school context that
are so important for some of the reforms that we discussed to
take place, I think our report is able to bring those together,
the instructional practices and the school context conditions
discussed in the Chicago report in a way that hadn't been done
before.
Mr. Sarbanes. Okay. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Brooks. We have enough time for additional
questions should any of the Members wish to follow up, and in
that regard, Mr. Lipinski has informed me that he has
additional questions. So Mr. Lipinski, the time is yours.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
allowing this time.
I would be remiss if I didn't say that my thoughts and my
ideas about STEM education are not only shaped by my own
experience as an engineer but also by my wife as an actuary.
She was a math major in college. I hear a lot back home from
manufacturers in my district and we talk about the state of
manufacturing in this country, we talk about lack of jobs. I
keep hearing from local manufacturers that they cannot find
employees that meet their basic criteria of being qualified to
do the jobs that they are doing.
Now, when we are talking about STEM education, I always
think well, who are we really aiming for and is this a
situation where we want to provide everyone--obviously--
clearly, we want to provide everyone the basics of math, basics
of science, and basics of engineers, which to me is just a
logical thought process. But then there are others who will go
on to be engineers, who will go to college and major in a STEM
field. Then there is another group who will go to graduate
school.
Now, are there different things that we have to do? At what
point do these paths diverge? How do we do that because there
is a lot of--you know, a few of you mentioned--I think
especially Dr. Wilson--about--or maybe Dr. Allensworth about
some students who were higher achieving--have shown higher
achievement going off into more intense and higher levels of
math. How does this all come together so that we are preparing
a sort of basic level of what you need in STEM education, and
the need for those who are going to go to college in a STEM
field and then who are going to go to graduate school in a STEM
field? How do we do that? Do we need to focus on--I think we
need to focus on all of it, but that seems to add a
complication to it perhaps. But as a general question, let me
start with Dr. Gamoran.
Dr. Gamoran. Well, that is a terrific question and it is a
question that is fundamental to all areas of education, not
just STEM. How do we set up an education system that provides
equal opportunity for all and yet recognizes that young people
are going to go off into different futures? What we have
learned from research in this area is that providing rigorous
set of curricular opportunities is essential all the way along.
We shouldn't try to foreordain--well, this is the graduate
student and this is the person who is going to go into a
current technical occupation, and this is the person who needs
to read the newspaper. We shouldn't try to foreordain those
differences because young people surprise us. And the one who
is not doing his homework today could be the engineer of
tomorrow.
So it is I believe not until the high school level really
where we need to have a different stream of classes available
for our most advanced students at earlier ages. We need to try
to provide rigorous opportunities for students at all
performance levels and of all interests. Of course, there are
extra school activities, extracurricular camps, activities
after school, programs, and so on that students are going to
choose by interest. And some of the differentiation you
describe is going to come up through that process. But with
respect to what we are offering in schooling, we should try to
minimize the differentiation, particularly at younger ages, and
introduce that differentiation only at the most advanced levels
in high school. That is my view and it is based on--this
happens to be an area of research of mine.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. Mr. Heffron, did you have----
Mr. Heffron. Sure. I just think back to my preparation. I
was an engineer by training as well and I didn't have advanced
math leaving high school. I just had pre-calculus like every
one of our students at DSST has to have. So I think you have to
be prepared, and if you are prepared, it doesn't mean you are
going to be STEM-going but it means you can be STEM-going. The
other side of the equation is, of course, the interest piece.
So if you have a student that is interested and prepared, then
you have got a match, and it is much easier to change the
interest side. You can change the interest side by scholarships
like Chairman Brooks suggested. You can change the interest
side by activities and all kinds of things, but you can't
quickly change the preparedness piece. That happens over time
and only really happens if you have a really clearly defined
rigorous path from at least ninth grade and probably before.
Mr. Lipinski. Anyone else? Dr. Allensworth.
Dr. Allensworth. Right. It is just a really critical and
difficult issue and it is a matter of where you are going to
put your resources and really think it out how to do it right
because the tendency is always to teach to the students in the
middle. And as Dr. Gamoran was saying, we don't want to take
away opportunities from some students just to make sure that
others have the opportunity. But if we are going to teach
everybody at high standards, that means the students with the
weakest skills are going to need extra support because if they
get frustrated, they will withdraw, they will act out, and then
they will learn less and everyone else will learn less, which
means they need tutors, they need extra teachers in the
classroom depending on how the classroom is structured.
At the same time, the students with very high achievement
can often be ignored; they can coast and not reach their
potential because it is easy for them. So we also need to make
sure that we are paying attention to the students with high
achievement to make sure they are reaching their potential
potentially through extra opportunities.
Mr. Lipinski. Dr. Means?
Dr. Means. I just wanted to point out that in the report we
set three goals for STEM education, and the second goal was to
increase the proportion of our students who had preparation for
STEM-related occupations. And by that we meant occupations that
might require two years of post-secondary work or a
certificate, and we talked about some of the research on career
and technical education. And I think that is very important
because for some of our adolescents, high school activities
that aren't related to a future they can imagine for themselves
are not very motivating. So I do think it is important for
systems to consider these options for students who are going to
go into STEM-related occupations but not necessarily earn a
bachelor's or advanced degree.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, for
the opportunity.
Chairman Brooks. My pleasure.
Mr. Sarbanes, I understand that you would like some time
for follow-up?
Mr. Sarbanes. I appreciate it, Mr. Chairman.
I am the author of something called the No Child Left
Inside Act, which is a piece of legislation we have been
bringing forth over the last two years here, and Senator Jack
Reed is the author of the companion piece in the Senate. And
basically what it aims to do is strengthen environmental
literacy across the country, finds ways to better integrate
into the instructional program awareness of the environment, an
understanding of it, basic literacy with respect to the
environment, and provide funding opportunities through the U.S.
Department of Education to support environmental literacy with
a particular focus on how you can integrate outdoor education
opportunities and resources in our schools.
So the classic example would be a science teacher prepares
the class for two or three weeks in advance of a field trip
that is going to go to the Chesapeake Bay and take samples of
the water to test its acidity and salinity and look at marsh
grasses and all the rest and the class goes out for five, six
hours and does this. Then they come back from that experience
and they spend the next two or three weeks sort of analyzing
the data and putting it in context and so forth. And the
research suggests that when you integrate this kind of
experience into the instructional program, particularly with
respect to science classes that student achievement jumps
significantly because the kids are just more energized by it
and they see real-world application of what they are learning
in the classroom.
I wanted to get your perspectives on that as sort of an
opportunity for helping to boost and strengthen STEM education,
this sort of outdoor education component. And I wondered
whether the report, in looking at some of the schools that have
been most successful with respect to STEM education, were able
to identify that that is a resource or opportunity that has
been taken advantage of in some places. And anyone who wants to
speak on this can. Yeah, Dr. Gamoran?
Dr. Gamoran. What you are expressing is fully consistent
with the arguments in the report, the findings and
recommendations. In fact, I think the report would add fuel to
your fire because we have identified students' research
experiences as one of the keys to students'--young people's
further interest in science. In fact, at schools like Thomas
Jefferson or the Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy, this
is the kind of experience that they have. And extending that to
a broader range of students would likely be effective and
successful.
The approach that you are describing I think is consistent
with the broader emphasis on importance of inquiry activities--
asking questions, gathering data, analyzing the data and
connecting it to existing knowledge that is science. Too much
of our science instruction is reading a textbook and memorizing
the definitions of concepts. The kind of approach to science
learning--I am not surprised to hear that the kind of approach
that you are describing results in a boost in children's
achievement. I think that is consistent with the broader
research literature.
Mr. Sarbanes. I just have a minute and a half. Is there
anyone else who wants to speak to this? Yeah?
Dr. Means. I would just say having studied environmental
science programs that these activities can be done either well
or poorly. It is really critical that that connection with the
science curriculum and the analysis of data be included, that
it not just be a matter of going outside for the day and that
teachers need support in learning how to do this well. It is
actually not something that all teachers are well prepared to
do.
Mr. Sarbanes. Yes, Mr. Heffron?
Mr. Heffron. I would concur wholeheartedly with that and
just suggest that all those opportunities would build our
program and help us build. We spend a lot of time and effort
trying to recreate those things, and I feel like there is less
things out there that are existing for us to easily take
advantage of and the more the better, but again, it does need
to have a culture that supports all those things that Dr. Means
suggested.
Mr. Sarbanes. Dr. Wilson, did you have something?
Dr. Wilson. I was just going to make the point that you
cannot underestimate how much teachers need support in learning
how to do this kind of instruction, because any good idea that
comes into a school is often picked up enthusiastically by
teachers, but what it takes to manage the students on such
trips, what kinds of tools they need--the teachers need in
order to have students actually understand what is going on,
how to structure students' thinking, there is just a whole lot
of stuff that we don't think about when we think of good things
for teachers to do and ongoing support as well as the
consequences for how the school culture has to change, teachers
having the time to do that.
Mr. Sarbanes. Right.
Dr. Wilson. The assessments being in place so that they
don't feel like they are off track.
Mr. Sarbanes. Well, and yielding back my time I would just
observe that one of the key components of this legislation is
to provide resources for the kind of training that you all have
alluded to so that it is not just a field trip and timeout from
school; it is actually a very fully integrated experience.
And I yield back. Thanks.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you.
The Chair notices that Mr. Clarke of Michigan has arrived.
We are in our second round of questions but would you like to
have your first round? Mr. Clarke has five minutes.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And this question is posed to any and all Members. How can
we enact policies that could help African American students,
especially our young men, to get involved in STEM education?
Here is why I say this is that right now we have got a
challenge in the city of Detroit which really is an example of
the problems that many big city school districts are facing
where we have an enormously high dropout rate, especially among
black males, yet those very men that end up dropping out and a
lot of them end up going to prison really have an extraordinary
potential to give a lot back to our country.

I will give you an example. I won't use a name since this
person is known, but there was a gentleman that I know who I
believe sold drugs as a teenager. He was enamored with numbers.
Well, one of his athletic coaches introduced him to economics,
so he ended up becoming a Ph.D. candidate in economics and is
now a tenured professor in economics at a nationally known
institution here in this country. And he is not that old so it
was just my estimation that he sold drugs based on the
circumstances.
All right, still, with me, all right, I am first-generation
college. It was art because I used to draw pictures a lot, that
was my gateway into education, so I have an undergraduate
degree in painting. There are other young men that I know that
have--that can integrate both of those, the artistic and the
quantitative, which is exactly what we need in STEM education.
So I wanted to share with you those anecdotes because they mean
a lot to me.
My last point is I grew up with guys who used to help me
out academically when I was in middle school. One of them never
worked a day in his life because of an incident that occurred.
He has been emotionally disabled all of his adult life. And you
know, it may not be a waste to him because we don't know what
mindset he has, but his disability definitely deprives our
country of a contribution, a contribution from that perspective
of growing up in the inner city, which I think is so valuable
because it helps me represent people as a whole in these
troubled economic times because I went through some of those.
But enough of the anecdotes. How can we get our young men
involved in STEM who have the potential to do great things for
our country?
Mr. Heffron. I have an anecdote of my own. I also had the
opportunity to teach Calc II and three of my best students are
a Hispanic female, a Hispanic male, and an African American
male, and they are fantastic students. They are killing it, and
they have been good students all the way along. But there is a
series of other students who struggled in their middle school
and are now in calculus and in pre-calculus. And I guess I
would go back to the point that--and I think Dr. Gamoran said
this--we don't know which of those students is going to turn
around and when, but if we provide the support that Dr.
Allensworth is suggesting and the high expectations and the
avenue to get there and some opportunities to change a math
track or somehow reengage at a higher level when that switch
flips, that all of those students can be college-ready and many
of them will choose those STEM fields if there is the
preparation. And then all of the other things outside of the
Art For You, the Robotics class at our school, or the fields
trips and the other STEM possibilities as they are going up to
CU Boulder or down to the Health Science Center to really
engage in exciting STEM-related activities that are exactly
what Dr. Means is talking about, really legitimate science and
math, that is what I would suggest is the solution.
Dr. Gamoran. With all of the talk about the importance of
teachers' content knowledge in the STEM areas, we need also to
remember that teaching is about relationships, that having
teachers who can establish caring relationships with young
people and help guide them as perhaps you were nurtured in your
school experiences is fundamental to the success of our young
people from all backgrounds, including the African American
males that you described.
This is why teaching is not just a matter of knowing the
subject; it is also about knowing how to convey that subject to
young people and about establishing relationships and creating
a safe and trusting environment where young people can learn
and thrive.
Dr. Allensworth. So I come from Chicago where we went from
having a graduation rate of about 47 percent to now about 69
percent. For African American males it has gone from about 30
percent to over 50 percent at this point. Dropout rate--dropout
is a huge problem in our inner cities, in Chicago, in Detroit,
and other places. We have been looking at why students drop out
and what is really critically important. As Dr. Gamoran said,
relationships are key. What makes for a trusting relationship?
It is that students get the support they need when they need
it. Students withdraw when they feel like they can't succeed or
they have gotten further behind and they don't know how to
catch up.
Schools that actually get more students to graduate and get
them through their classes are schools where teachers closely
monitor students. When a student is absent, they call home that
day. They don't let a student get away with being absent for
two weeks. Schools that have structures that are set up to
actually track absences and make sure kids are coming right
away get them back on track, have better-than-expected absence
rates, they have better-than-expected grades and pass rates.
And actually having teachers keep up with their grades and as
soon as a student's grade slips, reaching out to the student,
reaching out to the parent, finding out why their grade is
slipping and getting that student back on track. It means
having people in the school monitoring so that when a student
gets an F, they call the parent, they call the teacher, they
call the student into a conference and they figure out what
needs to happen to get that student back on track.
When students feel like their teachers know when they are
struggling and want them to succeed, they trust their teachers.
When students feel like they are struggling and they don't know
how to succeed and they don't know why they are getting bad
grades, they don't trust their teachers, they get angry, they
think their teachers are unfair, and they withdraw and it
becomes this negative cycle that builds and builds. The key is
monitoring and support and having systems in place so that it
is easy for teachers in schools to monitor kids and give them
the support they need when they need it.
Mr. Heffron. Can I just follow up with that really quick? I
think that is perfect. In our school, what that looks like is
each teacher is an advisor of roughly 15 students and so every
week those teachers and advisors meet. It is called house
meetings and there are 50 to 60 students that they are teaching
all the same classes for and being advisors for. Who is
struggling this week? Why is that? Is this ongoing? What have
we tried already? Who has called home? Who is the teacher? Who
is the advisor that knows this student best? Who is their
support person? What do the parents say? Does the dean know
about this? I think that is exactly what we are talking about
and that is when I would go back to that whole culture piece
around building a school condition that supports learning.
Chairman Brooks. Mr. Clarke, you would like some follow-up
time, feel free.
Mr. Clarke. Thirty seconds, Mr. Chair, if you will.
Chairman Brooks. Feel free.
Mr. Clarke. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
That advisory concept, where did you get that from?
Mr. Heffron. My understanding--because I didn't create the
advisory structure. It was created before I came to our
organization in its second year. But my understanding is that
was kind of a meld from kind of the private school model and
some of the other highly successful charter schools on the East
Coast.
Mr. Clarke. All right. Because we have an advisory
structure in schools that are in the University Prep--this is a
charter school in Detroit, which I think is effective, too. In
fact, the model is some type of a homeroom that has 15 students
and where that one instructor actually is that mentor. And the
key is here is that many students now, they don't have any
parental supervision or support in the home in the sense that
maybe that advisory structure in some way could provide that
nurturing that is not in the home or at least in support of the
value of education. Any if you just remember even when you
are--if you were first generation college back in the old days,
your parent even though they didn't go to school or may not
even--couldn't even speak or read, but they would value
education precisely because they didn't have the opportunity to
get that. You know, now in the inner city at least where I am
from you have a lot of the parents who themselves need not only
education but an education in the value of education so they
could pass that onto their child.
Mr. Heffron. So that is exactly what the advisory program
is for, and when a new teacher joins our school, I tell them if
you are an advisor you are really that student's parent at
school. And sometimes what happens is that advisor may actually
be picking that student up and bringing them to school. I mean
it has gone to that level where a kid is--this kid can make it
but for whatever reason this kid can't get to school. And so
that person is providing that support that is necessary to get
that student to school so that they can learn.
Mr. Clarke. Mr. Chair, I just want to make a comment that I
think that this could be a feature that could be replicated in
all of these urban schools, this type of advisory structure. I
think it could work. I want to just put that out there on the
record. That is something I would support. I do look at the
reality right now of how these kids are not being raised many
times in their home even if they actually have a home that you
would call it that.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Clarke. You managed to get
your time for first round and second round in all at once.
With that, I want to thank the witnesses for the time that
you have spent with us and also the Members for their
questions. The Members of the Subcommittee may have additional
questions for the witnesses, and if so, we would ask you to
respond to those in writing. The record will remain open for
two weeks for additional comments from the Members.
The witnesses are excused and this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:44 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix:

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Adam Gamoran, Director,
Wisconsin Center for Education Research, University of Wisconsin

Questions submitted by Chairman Mo Brooks

Q1.  You highlight the need for NSF to fund basic and applied STEM
education research, but then mention gaps in basic research and the
ability of the Department of Education's Institute of Education
Sciences to do applied research. Is it really necessary for NSF to be
funding any applied STEM education research, or should they focus
funding solely on the fundamental research questions of ``how teachers
and students learn, what motivates learners, and what conditions
support the development of high-quality teachers.'' Why or why not?

A1. NSF plays a crucial role in supporting basic research that lays the
foundation for improving K-12 STEM education. Moreover, a productive
division of responsibility may be emerging in which IES pursues a
mission that is largely applied, while basic research remains the
province of NSF. Yet there are two reasons why, in my opinion, NSF
should continue to fund applied as well as basic research.

First, research on education is most productive when it reflects a
dynamic relationship between basic and applied studies. When
successful, basic studies yield insights whose relevance to the real
world must be tested in applied work. As an example, consider NSF's new
program in Cyberlearning: Transforming Education, a collaborative
effort among several directorates. The mission of this program is ``to
integrate advances in technology with advances in what is known about
how people learn to

better understand how people learn with technology and
how technology can be used productively to help people learn, through
individual use and/or through collaborations mediated by technology;

better use technology for collecting, analyzing, sharing,
and managing data to shed light on learning, promoting learning, and
designing learning environments; and

design new technologies for these purposes, and advance
understanding of how to use those technologies and integrate them into
learning environments so that their potential is fulfilled.'' (See:
http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm--summ.jsp?pims--
id=503581&org=EHR&from=home )

In this instance, findings about how people learn with technology
and how effective learning environments can be designed achieve their
ultimate aim when researchers ``design new technologies'' and
``integrate them into learning environments.'' Moreover, there is a
feedback loop from applied back to basic research as it is common for
applied settings to reveal unanticipated challenges that lead back to
the laboratory. Thus, basic and applied research are interrelated and a
funding stream that supports both goals is appropriate.

A second reason for continuing applied research at NSF rather than
yielding this ground entirely to IES is NSF's distinctive focus on
STEM. Consistent with broader federal education aims, literacy and
mathematics teaching and learning capture much of the IES portfolio.
IES does support research on science teaching and learning, but to the
best of my knowledge there are no IES-funded studies of engineering
education, nor of technology education (as opposed to research on the
use of technology in teaching and learning, which is well represented).
IES is mainly interested in studies of learning and achievement, but
the Successful STEM report identified outcomes other than test scores
as an important gap in our knowledge. IES-supported research tends to
focus on formal K-12 schooling, but NSF-supported research on learning
science in informal environments may turn out to be crucial as
investigators try to find ways of capturing student interest in science
at early ages and maintaining it throughout the schooling years. For
these reasons, also, applied as well as basic research at NSF will
continue to point towards improvements in K-12 STEM teaching and
learning.

Q2.  You testified that it is difficult to determine ``the extent to
which a school's success results from any actions the school takes, or
the extent to which it is related to which students are enrolled in a
school.'' You say research designs to address this challenge are
available, but have only recently started being used. How soon can we
expect to see the results of this research.

A2. In my judgment we are 5-10 years off from widespread findings that
address this challenge.

On the one hand, results from this type of research are already
emerging. For example, the What Works Clearinghouse at http://
ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/ has reviewed the results of rigorous analyses of
33 interventions in mathematics education. Of these, ten have shown
evidence of effectiveness. As of yet, however, no studies have been
reviewed in science education, nor in engineering or technology
education.

On the other hand, the fact that this type of research is
relatively new means that we are just beginning to confront the
problems it reveals--particularly problems of implementing and scaling
up effective programs. IES has funded a number of large-scale studies
that use rigorous designs to assess program impacts, including some
that address learning in mathematics. For example, the national study
of educational technology carried out by Mathematica included a focus
on middle and high school mathematics ( http://www.mathematica-mpr.com/
education/edtech.asp#pubs ). This study, like several others, concluded
that the programs assessed were ineffective at raising student
achievement, even though the programs had been shown to be effective in
smaller-scale studies. (Other such national studies include Reading
First, tutoring under No Child Left Behind, charter schools, and so
on.) This points towards scaling up effective programs as a major
challenge and calls for further investigation of the scaling up
process.

Similarly in my own NSF-funded work, my colleagues and I found that
a large-scale roll-out of ``science immersion,'' a sustained, inquiry-
oriented science program in grades four and five, failed to elevate
achievement scores as expected. We have now been able to pinpoint the
problem to incomplete implementation in the classroom: teachers engaged
in the first two steps in the inquiry cycle (asking questions and
gathering data) but did not follow through to connecting the data to
scientific knowledge nor to justifying and communicating scientific
explanations. Without the connection to domains of scientific
knowledge, it is not surprising that student learning of science
content did not increase. Like the study of educational technology, our
research suggests that although we can design effective classroom
programs, we are often unsuccessful in implementing these programs in
large numbers of schools and classrooms. Our findings offer important
contributions for future efforts to design innovative science education
programs that can be brought to scale.

The challenges of implementation and scale up mean that although
the findings from research designed to disentangle program effects from
selection are already beginning to emerge, findings that reveal large
positive effects when taken to scale remain elusive. A few studies of
comprehensive programs have yielded this sort of evidence (for example,
the four programs funded for Scale-Up awards under the Department of
Education's Investing in Innovation program), but it will take several
more years for such studies to become widespread. Several conditions
are contributing to the expansion of such research, including IES
predoctoral and postdoctoral training programs, the establishment of a
new scientific society on effectiveness research in education, a new
academic journal with the same focus, the increasing salience of the
What Works Clearinghouse, and more widespread understanding generally
in both NSF and the Department of Education on the importance of using
appropriate research designs to support causal conclusions. Thus, there
is reason for optimism in the future.
Responses by Mr. Mark Heffron, Campus Director,
Denver School of Science and Technology, Stapleton Campus

Question Submitted by Chairman Mo Brooks

Q1.  How do you ensure that your teachers are highly qualified to teach
STEM courses at DSST? What pre-service training do you require? What
in-service training do you provide?

A1. We go through a rigorous screening process requiring the following:

Teaching candidates submit resume, cover letter and
college transcripts that indicate background teaching experience and
course material taught.

We require teachers to prepare a sample lesson plan for a
desired topic and then teach a sample lesson, either at our school or
provide a video tape of the lesson being taught.

We require attendance at a 3-5 day teacher induction
program before any classes are taught that orient new staff to our
mission, vision, curriculum and assessment program and school culture.

Approximately every-other week, we provide 2-3 hours of
collaborative planning time or Professional Development time with a
department chair, or teaching partner. We require each new teacher to
collaboratively plan and create common lesson plans and assessments 1-3
hours per week.

Each new teacher receives additional organizational
professional development for 2-3 hours per month.

As an organization, we ensure that all teachers meet the
highly qualified teacher requirement, per applicable state law.

Q2.  According to your testimony, last year DSST operated the highest
performing middle school and high school in Denver. Your testimony
highlights many aspects of your program, from specific classes to
school culture. We are interested in what makes your students and
schools outperform other schools in the area. If someone were looking
to replicate your results what are the key elements to take into
account?

A2.

Hiring and retaining high achieving staff members that
are committed to the success of each student no matter the student's
introductory skill level and motivation.

Setting high expectations with a rigorous academic
program that provides less student choice and more focus on required
college preparatory coursework. (We require 5 1/2 yrs of science and a
minimum of pre-calculus for all graduates.)

Heavy focus on math and science in 9th grade-Algebra-
based physics, along with at least Algebra/Geometry in the 9th grade to
provide a strong math background in the 9th grade year.

Our culture focuses on college from day one (for the
majority of our students, that means 6th grade). Each student
understands the expectation that they will be prepared and ultimately
accepted to a four-year college or university. The school culture
celebrates college success in all grades with college trips, return
visits from Alumni and college celebrations that mimic what other
schools might do to celebrate athletic success. It is cool to be smart
and going to college at DSST.

A relentless commitment that each individual (student and
staff matters) with accountability and support systems in place to
insure that students will not move on unless they are prepared for the
next grade and tutoring and support classes to insure that they will
not fail a class and ultimately be held back from advancing to the next
grade without extraordinary efforts from peers and teachers and
administrative efforts to remediate skill deficits.

A high degree of support for first generation college-
bound students and their families.

Q3.  What unique and various challenges in STEM education exist for
teaching and learning between the middle and high school grades, and
how are they being addressed?

A3.

Attracting and retaining highly qualified STEM teachers
remains a significant challenge. The hiring pool is smallest in the
most certain science fields especially at the high school level, for
courses such as Advanced Chemistry and Physics. These subjects also
have the greatest turnover, as we have seen more of these teachers
leave for higher paying careers.

We continue to improve our induction and professional
development programs. Our support has improved. We do not have funding
to combat the market demands at this time.

It is challenging to find and/or create specific
engineering curriculum (especially at the middle school and early high
school grades) that is engaging to students, teaches engineering
principles and is well aligned to the math preparation of grades 6-10.

We are in the first year of a 9th grade STEM design
course at our Stapleton High School Campus (the school that I lead). We
are creating much of the curriculum. Once the first year of this course
is complete, we may move to replication at other campuses, possibly
lower grades depending on our experience.

Our focus on a college preparatory curriculum with a math
and science emphasis is considerably more rigorous than most
surrounding schools in the district. We are a public charter school and
not a magnet school by design to serve an underserved, under prepared
and underrepresented future STEM workforce. We have greater attrition
than magnet schools as student enter wanting a high quality college
preparatory education but may choose to leave our school and attend a
less rigorous school as they learn what is required to truly be
prepared for STEM college degrees. (Our attrition rates are better than
those in traditional Denver Public high schools.)

We don't presently have a solid answer to this
challenge at the MS or HS level. Our currents efforts are focused on
continuing to refine our support and intervention systems to help
remediate students with low skills. There is no substitute for success
and we absolutely find that students who experience success, even with
greater effort, are more likely to stay in our STEM program. We now
have three middle schools in our organization and within the next two
years, we will open two more. The middle school program is essential to
build the required foundational skills to be successful in rigorous
STEM high schools.

Q4.  What is the role of the local school administration, community,
parents, teachers, students, and various government entities in
creating these model schools and programs and in sustaining them?

A4.

Hiring, training and retaining school leaders and
administrators that have the skill and drive to create high
accountability school cultures.

Create funding sources that can be used to incent schools
and teachers that produce outstanding student achievement in STEM
subjects.

Provide funding (through grants or otherwise) that can be
used to hire staff and/or pay for programs that leverage parent and
community resources in STEM fields for things such as:

STEM tutoring

Robotics and other STEM afterschool programs

STEM field trips

Academic Elective teachers (from Industry) that are
qualified to teach cutting edge STEM electives that will interest and
prepare students for STEM fields
Responses by Dr. Elaine Allensworth,
Senior Director and Chief Research Officer,
Consortium on Chicago School Research, University of Chicago

Questions submitted by Chairman Mo Brooks

Q1.  Dr. Gamoran highlighted the need for NSF to fund basic and applied
STEM education research, but then mention gaps in basic research and
the ability of the Department of Education's Institute of Education
Sciences to do applied research. Is it really necessary for NSF to be
funding any applied STEM education research, or should they focus
funding solely on the fundamental research questions of ``how teachers
and students learn, what motivates learners, and what conditions
support the development of high-quality teachers.'' Why or why not?

A1. Both types of research provide useful information, and can be
complementary. Applied research is most useful when designed in a way
to answer broad questions that are generalizable beyond the specific
application. For example, rather than simply examining whether a policy
or program works, asking how it worked and under what conditions, makes
the research much more useful, since it is rare that a program is
implemented in the same way over time or in different places. Just
doing basic research is also eventually insufficient, because it is
difficult to translate to practice. School practitioners need to know
what worked and why and see models of changing practice to guide their
own efforts.

Q2.  When discussing the curriculum standards changes implemented in
Chicago, the three negative effects--low-skilled students with slightly
higher failure rates, system-wide graduation rates declining, and
college entrance declines for high-skill students--are a trio of
challenges other systems need to be sure not to replicate. Now that the
common core of standards is gaining momentum, how can schools and
systems looking to implement new standards and curricula steer clear
from making similar mistakes to those experienced in Chicago,
especially in STEM subject areas?

A2. This is absolutely a critical question at this point in time, if
the potential of the common core standards are to be realized. First,
we need to recognize that with expansion of challenging college-
oriented curricula to all students, there is the real possibility of
reducing the math and science preparation of the highest-achieving
students, who are also the students most likely to go into STEM
careers. In fact, because other students have such a low likelihood of
entering STEM careers compared to high-achieving students, expanding
math and science opportunities for other students at the expense of the
opportunities for high-achieving students can easily result in fewer
students overall entering STEM careers. One reason for the decline in
opportunities for high-achieving students that can occur with an
increase in overall standards is the lack of teaching capacity for
high-level math and science classes. This can result in a reduction in
the classes available to advanced students (e.g., eliminating pre-
Calculus/Calculus so that there are enough sections of Algebra II for
all students), or shift in the courses available (enrolling all
students in Earth Science/Bio/Chem instead of Bio/Chem/Physics because
it is easier to find Earth Science teachers than physics teachers). It
can also lead to a lowering of the expectations in math/science classes
as teachers who are used to teaching high-achieving students have
difficulty teaching to students who enter their classes with weaker
academic skills. There is a risk that if teachers do not know how to
teach the new standards to students without strong academic skills--
because they have not learned strategies for teaching to students with
weak skills--students will withdraw in frustration and be more likely
to withdraw effort and fail, lowering their own achievement and the
quality of instruction for the class as a whole.

This suggests several issues that schools will need to consider as
they increase curricular standards. First, they need to closely monitor
the opportunities for high-achieving students, to ensure that they
continue to enroll in the same degree of high-level math and science
classes as they would have before the new standards were implemented.
Schools may need additional resources to be able to offer more classes
overall without reducing the classes that are currently available for
some students. Second, teachers will need help expanding instruction in
high-level math and science topics to students with weak skills, and
students will need support handling the difficult material. This goes
beyond curricular support, to assistance in pedagogical practice and
skills in behavior management. Even the best curriculum is not
effective if teachers can't get through the lessons and students are
not engaged in learning.

Our research in Chicago has highlighted the key importance of
monitoring students closely, and reaching out to provide support
immediately if they start to fall behind (e.g., missing class, not
turning in homework, doing poorly on a quiz/test). Often teachers and
schools wait to respond until students are too far behind to catch up.
We have seen some schools in Chicago show success by having co-
teachers/tutors in the classroom to help students during class while
the primary teacher attends to the rest of the class. Another strategy
that has been successful in Algebra has been to provide a second period
of instruction for students with weak skills, structured to help them
handle the material in the primary class. This benefits students with
high skills, as well, since their classroom peers with weak skills
don't hold back instruction. The What Works Clearinghouse has noted
that two programs--Check and Connect and ALAS--were successful
mentorship programs; mentors with these programs closely monitored
students' course performance to provide support right away when
students fell behind.

Questions submitted by Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski

Q1.  Mr. Heffron described an advisory structure in place at the
Stapleton High School that appears to be an effective mechanism for
providing support to students in his school. I'm interested in learning
more about the effectiveness of advisory groups, and how successful
models like those at Stapleton High School can be implemented in other
schools across the country. What is the current state of research on
the topic, and what does research tell us about what makes a successful
sdvisory group structure?

A1. Advisories are in wide use in many schools across the country.
There are some successful programs that use advisories effectively, and
they can be a great tool for providing support to students. However,
the way that advisories are implemented is important. Simply
incorporating an advisory into a school's programming is not
sufficient. In fact, it can take away from instructional time if it is
not designed in a way that supports students' performance in their
academic classes and their overall engagement at school.
Responses by Dr. Barbara Means, Director,
Center for Technology in Learning, SRI International

Questions submitted by Chairman Mo Brooks

Q1.  Dr. Gamoran highlighted the need for NSF to fund basic and applied
STEM education research, but then mentioned gaps in basic research and
the ability of the Department of Education's Institute of Education
Sciences to do applied research. Is it really necessary for NSF to be
funding any applied STEM education research, or should they be focusing
funding solely on the fundamental research questions of ``how teachers
and students learn, what motivates learners, and what conditions
support the development of high-quality teachers.'' Why or why not?

A1. I respectfully disagree with the proposition that NSF should focus
on basic STEM education research while IES conducts applied research in
this field. The two central arguments I offer for my position are that
(1) there is an important category of STEM education research that
addresses both basic and applied questions and that is best housed
within NSF and (2) connections to disciplinary expertise and new
advances in STEM fields are essential elements of the kind of STEM
education research needed to support dramatic improvements to our
current practice.

Basic research on ``how teachers and students learn, what motivates
learners, and what conditions support the development of high-quality
teachers'' typically focuses on how individuals learn. But the problems
of education concern how to promote learning in the contexts of groups
of students and educators. Understanding ``how teachers and students
learn, what motivates learners, and what conditions support the
development of high-quality teachers'' requires studying these
phenomena in applied contexts, and we are unlikely to find answers
without deep knowledge of how various interventions and practices are
adapted in schools and classrooms. These basic questions need to be
studied in realistic environments, not just university laboratories.

Professor Donald Stokes, in his 1997 book Pasteur's Quadrant, lays
out a more differentiated categorization of research efforts than the
traditional dichotomy of basic versus applied. He suggests that
research can be described as either low or high in terms of two
dimensions: relevance for the advancement of knowledge and relevance
for immediate applications. By crossing these two dimensions he creates
four ``quadrants'' or categories of research and names three of the
quadrants after scientists whose work exemplified that category. Bohr's
Quadrant consists of work that searches for fundamental knowledge with
little concern for immediate applicability--essentially what is often
called ``basic research.'' Edison's Quadrant is work that is high in
immediate applicability but low in the advancement of new knowledge--
the kind of problem solving work that many people think of as applied
research. Pasteur's Quadrant consists of research designed to both
build fundamental knowledge and have high practical applicability. The
questions motivating research in Pasteur's Quadrant arise from practice
(Pasteur's own work on bacteria was inspired by concerns of the French
wine industry), but the research is designed to yield generalizable
insights as well as to address the immediate problem at hand. In
reviewing the history of NSF, Stokes asserted that the agency added the
most value by supporting work in Pasteur's Quadrant. What I described
as STEM education implementation research in my testimony would fall
into Pasteur's Quadrant because of its emphasis on research activities
addressing questions that arise from practice.

Russ Whitehurst, the first Director of the Institute of Education
Sciences, described the Institute's mission and his understanding of
its statutory authority as lying within Edison's Quadrant (http://
ies.ed.gov/director/speeches2003/04_22/2003_04_22a.asp). And indeed,
IES specializes in rigorous, large-scale experiments on the
effectiveness of well-defined, existing educational interventions.

In contrast, the STEM education work sponsored by NSF is intended
to exemplify Pasteur's Quadrant. The work is carried out in applied
settings and peer review of proposals focuses on the two criteria of
building significant new knowledge for the field and likely practical
benefit to STEM education.

An insight into the difference between the two agencies' respective
research sponsorship capabilities--both of which are valuable to our
nation--can be gleaned from their two catch phrases. IES is best known
for the phrase ``what works'' (as in the ``What Works Clearinghouse''),
whereas NSF is best known for the phrase ``transformative potential''
(as in NSF's fundamental role in creating the Internet). To appreciate
the importance of the latter, think back to the late 1980s. At that
time, economic researchers were finding no measureable productivity
gains from the rapid influx of technology into the workplace. We had no
evidence that technology was ``what works'' to stimulate productivity,
yet in hindsight we can now see that the Internet had vast
transformative potential that could be released only after
organizations changed their processes to take advantage of that
potential. Despite the lack of ``what works'' evidence, NSF was right
to keep investing in the transformative potential of the Internet. STEM
education today needs not only to sort out which of the currently
available well-defined products or approaches do indeed ``work'' but
also to invest in the development and refinement of new approaches with
transformative potential to make vast improvements in STEM education.

I see NSF and IES as having complementary roles with respect to
STEM education research. IES focuses on research designed to identify
causal relationships between education interventions and student
outcomes. Such work is appropriate for programs that are well-defined
and broadly implemented. IES tests interventions that can be tightly
defined and scoped at proposal time. The NSF review process, on the
other hand, seeks far-reaching advances that can emerge from the mutual
influence of powerful ideas and insights from design research in
realistic settings and is willing to fund investigations even when the
resulting educational product cannot be precisely defined and scoped at
proposal time. This latter kind of work--which will be essential if we
are to make the kinds of breakthroughs in terms of improving STEM
education that the Subcommittee on Research and Science Education and
the National Research Council have called for--is the strong point of
NSF.

NSF STEM education research is intended to promote the design and
refinement of new education approaches. Its focus on innovation and
building new knowledge means that these approaches are being tried out
and modified in applied settings and, typically, are not yet ready for
the kind of large-scale randomized control trials that IES sponsors.
For these approaches to be truly innovative, NSF must be freed to
conduct research in ``applied'' settings so the field can learn which
designs, theories, and approaches have promise for unlocking
transformative potential in real schools and classrooms.

This brings me to my second point. Conducting Pasteur's Quadrant
education research in STEM subject areas requires not just social
scientists but also STEM professionals and educators. Although there
are many insights into how teachers and students learn, what motivates
learners, and what conditions support the development of high-quality
teachers that cut across different subject domains, there are aspects
of these questions that are manifestly different in various STEM
fields. We cannot prepare students for careers in new areas of science,
such as bioinformatics, without a deep understanding of emerging
practices in those fields. NSF takes a more lifelong view of STEM
education (encompassing postsecondary as well as secondary education)
than IES does and has ties to the communities of research scientists,
mathematicians, and computer scientists that the Department of
Education cannot duplicate. NSF's Cyberlearning: Transforming Education
program, for example, is sponsoring exploratory, implementation, and
deployment research that combines cutting-edge advances in computer
science with advances in our understanding of how people learn. In its
first year, this research program was inundated with proposals from
multi-disciplinary teams including some of the most prestigious
computer science departments in the country.

In short, I believe that it is extremely important that NSF
continue to provide leadership and research funding in areas of STEM
education that many would label ``applied research,'' but that are more
aptly characterized as the intersection between knowledge building and
discovering the transformative potential needed to address the
practical, yet deeply challenging, problems of STEM education practice.


