- THE ROLE OF RESEARCH UNIVERSITIES IN SECURING AMERICA'S FUTURE PROSPERITY: CHALLENGES AND EXPECTATIONS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE ROLE OF RESEARCH UNIVERSITIES

IN SECURING AMERICA'S FUTURE PROSPERITY:

CHALLENGES AND EXPECTATIONS
=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 27, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-93

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
74-730                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              PAUL D. TONKO, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Tennessee                        VACANCY
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Research and Science Education

HON. MO BROOKS, Alabama, Chair
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       PAUL D. TONKO, New York
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               VACANCY
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
RALPH M. HALL, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, June 27, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Mo Brooks, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Research and Science Education, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Statement by Representative Daniel Lipinski, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Research and Science Education,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    14
Written Statement............................................    16

Witnesses:

Mr. Charles O. Holliday, Jr., Chair, Committee on Research
Universities, National Academies
Oral Statement...............................................    19
Written Statement............................................    21

Dr. John M. Mason, Jr., Associate Provost and Vice President for
Research, Auburn University
Oral Statement...............................................    40
Written Statement............................................    42

Dr. Jeffrey R. Seemann, Vice President for Research, Texas A&M
University, and Chief Research Officer, the Texas A&M
University System
Oral Statement...............................................    46
Written Statement............................................    48

Dr. Leslie P. Tolbert, Senior Vice President for Research, the
University of Arizona
Oral Statement...............................................    63
Written Statement............................................    66

Dr. James N. Siedow, Vice Provost for Research, Duke University
Oral Statement...............................................    84
Written Statement............................................    86

Discussion.......................................................   100

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Charles O. Holliday, Jr., Chair, Committee on Research
Universities, National Academies...............................   115

Dr. John M. Mason, Jr., Associate Provost and Vice President for
Research, Auburn University....................................   118

Dr. Jeffrey R. Seemann, Vice President for Research, Texas A&M
University, and Chief Research Officer, the Texas A&M
University System..............................................   124

Dr. Leslie P. Tolbert, Senior Vice President for Research, the
University of Arizona..........................................   143

Dr. James N. Siedow, Vice Provost for Research, Duke University..   149

THE ROLE OF RESEARCH UNIVERSITIES

IN SECURING AMERICA'S FUTURE PROSPERITY:

CHALLENGES AND EXPECTATIONS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 27, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Science Education,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mo Brooks
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.011

Chairman Brooks. The Subcommittee on Research and Science
Education will come to order.
Good morning. Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``The
Role of Research Universities in Securing America's Future
Prosperity: Challenges and Expectations.'' The purpose of this
hearing is to examine the challenges faced by the Nation's
research universities. The hearing will provide an opportunity
to discuss the future outlook for these universities and to
discuss the recently released National Academy Study,
``Research Universities and the Future of America.''
In front of you are packets containing the written
testimony, biography, and truth-in-testimony disclosures for
today's witnesses. I now recognize myself for five minutes for
an opening statement.
We are pleased to welcome our witnesses to discuss the
challenges faced by the Nation's research universities, as well
as the findings and recommendations from the June 14 report
issued by the National Academies, ``Research Universities and
the Future of America.'' I think we can all acknowledge the
importance of our Nation's research institutions; therefore, I
look forward to working with my counterparts on the
Subcommittee to review measures that Congress, the Federal
Government, State governments, research universities, and
industry can take to improve these vital resources.
Innovation has remained a part of the fabric of this Nation
since its founding. Particularly in today's tough economic
times, research universities play a vital role in America's
ability to maintain its competitiveness in an increasingly
technologically developed world, and the knowledge and skills
produced by our Nation's research graduates provide the fuel
for these endeavors.
The Morrill Act of 1862, signed by President Lincoln,
established a partnership between the Federal Government and
the States to build land grant institutions that would address
the challenges of creating a modern agricultural and industrial
economy for the 20th century. This partnership continues with
an even broader support of the Nation's educational, research,
and economic endeavors. Three of our distinguished witnesses
today come from these land grant institutions. It is my
understanding that other Vice Presidents for Research from a
number of these land grant institutions are in the audience
today, as they are all in town to celebrate the 150th
anniversary of the Morrill Act. To them, I offer a special
welcome and thank you for your hard work and dedication.
According to the recently released National Academies
report, requested in 2009 by now-Full Committee Chairman Ralph
Hall and other Members of Congress to identify the top 10
actions to be taken in order to maintain the excellence of
United States research and doctoral education, America's
research universities have emerged as a major national asset,
which supports the Nation's economic goals, among many other
things. The challenges faced by these institutions, which are
discussed in the report, range from unstable revenue streams
and antiquated policies and practices to increasing competition
from universities abroad.
Today, we will continue to examine the future outlook for
these universities, while taking into account the
recommendations from the National Academies report. I look
forward to a comprehensive discussion with our witnesses, and I
thank them for taking the time out of their busy schedules to
help the Subcommittee with this important oversight role.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Lipinski from the great State
of Illinois for an opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brooks follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Chairman Mo Brooks

Good morning. We are pleased to welcome our witnesses to discuss
the challenges faced by the Nation's research universities as well as
the findings and recommendations from the June 14 report issued by the
National Academies, Research Universities and the Future of America.
I think we can all acknowledge the importance of our Nation's
research institutions; therefore, I look forward to working with my
counterparts on the Subcommittee to review measures that Congress, the
Federal Government, State governments, research universities, and
industry can take to improve these vital resources.
Innovation has remained a part of the fabric of this Nation since
its founding. Particularly in today's tough economic times, research
universities play a vital role in America's ability to maintain its
competitiveness in an increasingly technologically developed world, and
the knowledge and skills produced by our Nation's research graduates
provide the fuel for these endeavors.
The Morrill Act of 1862 established a partnership between the
Federal Government and the States to build land grant institutions that
would address the challenges of creating a modern agricultural and
industrial economy for the 20th century. This partnership continues
with an even broader support of the Nation's educational, research, and
economic endeavors. Three of our distinguished witnesses today come
from these land grant institutions. It is my understanding that the
Vice Presidents for Research from a number of these land grant
institutions are in the audience today, as they are all in town to
celebrate the 150th anniversary of the Morrill Act. To them, I offer a
special welcome and thank you for your hard work and dedication.
According to the recently released National Academies report,
requested in 2009 by now-Full Committee Chairman Ralph Hall and other
Members of Congress to identify the top 10 actions to be taken in order
to maintain the excellence of U.S. research and doctoral education,
America's research universities have emerged as a major national asset,
which support the Nation's economic goals, among other things. The
challenges faced by these institutions, which are discusssed in the
report, range from unstable revenue streams and antiquated policies and
practices to increasing competition from universities abroad.
Today, we will continue to examine the future outlook for these
universities, while taking into account the recommendations from the
National Academies report. I look forward to a comprehensive discussion
with our witnesses, and I thank them for taking the time out of their
busy schedules to help this Subcommittee with this important oversight
role.

Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Chairman Brooks, and I thank you
for holding this hearing and thank the witnesses for being with
us today. And I think this is probably the biggest audience
that we have had here for a hearing, so that is good to see.
I fully agree with Chairman Brooks' comments about the
importance of the Morrill Act. Its passage 150 years ago was
undoubtedly an important milestone in our country's history.
Research universities are extremely vital to our Nation's--
a vital part of our Nation's R&D infrastructure and are thus
critically important to America's future economic success. And
that means American jobs, so it is especially important today
when everyone is asking us where are the jobs going to come
from? They are going to come from innovation. Innovation,
really, to a pretty significant extent--and I think we could do
more with that--comes from our research universities.
I understand all this from personal experience as a student
and Assistant Professor at some of our Nation's finest research
universities. I never pass up an opportunity to name them--
Northwestern, Stanford, Duke, University of Tennessee, and
Notre Dame. I appreciate the opportunity to explore in depth
the challenges all of our research institutions currently face
and discuss possible steps that both the government and
universities can take to help address these challenges.
Research universities' contributions to the health,
security, and prosperity of the American people cannot be
overstated. Advances in the fields of medicine, biotechnology,
the development of critical new military technologies, and
countless economically important companies and products can be
traced back to research conducted in university labs.
In addition to contributing immeasurably to our economic
prosperity and well-being, research universities also train the
next generation of scientists, engineers, and innovators. For
anyone who is interested in the role that the Federal
Government played in starting up Silicon Valley by funding
research at Stanford University, you should read online at
SteveBlank.com; he has a secret history of Silicon Valley,
which is very interesting. Now, that is military funding, but
we are looking at all federal funding here. But a lot of people
don't understand the role that federal funding does play at our
research universities. And then, as you see with the history of
Silicon Valley, that a lot of people think that it was all
private, but much of that was originally started from public
funding.
More broadly, university-government partnership that began
150 years ago with the Morrill Act has been critical to making
many of these contributions possible. The Federal Government's
support of academic research and patent laws to expedite the
commercialization of such research has helped make many of our
research universities the best and most productive in the
world. Today, a number of countries are attempting to emulate
our system, and they are increasingly competing with us to
attract the world's top talent.
Unfortunately, I say this is a time when research
universities face acute challenges that threaten their ability
to continue to provide a world-class education and help ensure
the United States remains a global leader in innovation. The
financial stress and resulting budget deficits our country has
faced in recent years have forced the Federal Government to
back away from bipartisan commitments to significantly increase
support for basic research at universities. At the same time,
public universities have received less financial support from
state governments, putting increased pressure on funding
sources like tuition to make up the difference.
Despite the fiscal challenges we face, we in government
cannot afford to jeopardize our Nation's future prosperity by
not providing sustained and predictable support for scientific
research and affordable education. At the same time, I believe
that research universities need to adjust to this new fiscal
environment by finding new and innovative ways to operate. I
also believe that it remains well within the ability of our
universities to continue to deliver a top-notch education,
allow creativity and innovation to thrive, and attract some of
the best researchers and students from around the country and
the world.
In closing, there are a couple of issues in particular that
are raised in the NRC report that I look forward to discussing
today. First, I am very interested in hearing about efforts to
accelerate the pace at which discoveries make their way from
lab to the market, and we welcome your thoughts on how the
Federal Government can help you in these efforts.
Also, I would like to hear about any initiatives at your
universities aimed at addressing the high attrition rate of
students in STEM subject areas and the need for greater
diversity. Related to that, I would like to learn more about
how you are working with industry to make sure you are
graduating students with the skills that they need in the
workforce.
Thank you again, Chairman Brooks, for holding this
important hearing, and I look forward to a productive exchange
with our witnesses. With that I will yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lipinski follows:]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski

Thank you, Chairman Brooks, for holding this hearing, and thank you
to the witnesses for taking the time to be here today. I fully agree
with Chairman Brooks' comments about the importance of the Morrill Act.
Its passage 150 years ago was undoubtedly an important milestone in our
country's history.
Research universities are an extremely vital part of our Nation's
R&D infrastructure and are thus critically important to America's
future economic success--that means American jobs. I understand this
from personal experience as a student and as an assistant professor at
some of our Nation's finest research universities, Northwestern, Duke,
Stanford, Notre Dame, and the University of Tennessee. I appreciate the
opportunity to explore in depth the challenges all of our research
institutions currently face and discuss possible steps that both the
government and universities can take to help address these challenges.
Research universities' contributions to the health, security, and
prosperity of the American people cannot be overstated. Advances in the
fields of medicine and biotechnology, the development of critical new
military technologies, and countless economically important companies
and products can be traced back to research conducted in university
labs. In addition to contributing immeasureably to our economic
prosperity and well-being, research universities also train the next
generation of scientists, engineers, and innovators. For anyone
interested in the role the Federal Government played in starting up
Silicon Valley by funding research at Stanford University, you should
read online The Secret History of Silicon Valley by Steve Blank.
More broadly, the university-government partnership that began 150
years ago with the Morrill Act has been critical to making many of
these contributions possible. The Federal Government's support of
academic research and patent laws that expedite the commercialization
of such research have helped make many of our research universities the
best and most productive in the world. Today a number of countries are
attempting to emulate our system, and they are increasingly competing
with us to attract the world's top talent.
Unfortunately, I say this at a time when research universities face
acute challenges that threaten their abililty to continue to provide a
world-class education and help ensure the United States remains the
global leader in innovation. The financial stress and resulting budget
deficits our country has faced in recent years have forced the Federal
Government to back away from bipartisan commitments to significantly
increase support for basic research at universities. At the same time,
public universities have received less financial support from State
governments, putting increased pressure on funding sources like tuition
to make up the difference.
Despite the financial challenges we face, we in government cannot
afford to jeopardize our Nation's future prosperity by not providing
sustained and predictable support for scientific research and
affordable education. At the same time, I believe that research
universities need to adjust to this new fiscal environment by finding
new and innovative ways to operate. I also believe that it remains well
within the ability of our universities to continue to deliver a top-
notch education, allow creativity and innovation to thrive, and attract
some of the best researchers and students from around the country and
the world.
In closing, there are a couple of issues in particular that are
raised in the NRC report that I look forward to discussing today.
First, I am very interested in hearing about efforts to accelerate the
pace at which discoveries make their way from the lab to the market,
and would welcome your thoughts on how the Federal Government can help
you in these efforts. Also, I would like to hear about any initiatives
at your universities aimed at addressing the high attrition rate of
students in STEM subject areas and the need for greater diversity.
Related to that, I'd like to learn more about how you are working with
industry to make sure you are graduating students with the skills they
need to succeed in the workforce.
Thank you again, Chairman Brooks, for holding this important
hearing, and I look forward to a productive exchange with our
witnesses. With that, I yield back.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time, I would like to introduce our witness panel
for today's hearing. Our first witness is Mr. Charles O.
Holliday, Jr., Chair of the Committee on Research Universities
for the National Research Council of the National Academies.
Mr. Holliday currently serves as the Chairman of the Board for
the Bank of America Corporation. From 1998 to 2008, he served
as the Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer for
DuPont.
Our second witness, I have a particular fondness in this
area, although I am an Alabama grad as is my wife. My sons and
my money went to Auburn University. They got good engineering
degrees I will add. But our next witness is Dr. John Mason,
Jr., Associate Provost and Vice President for Research for
Auburn University. He is responsible for the university's
research program development, sponsored programs, and
technology transfer and communications initiatives. Prior to
joining Auburn University, Dr. Mason was the Associate Dean for
Graduate Studies, Research, and Outreach in the College of
Engineering at Penn State University.
Our third witness, I want to welcome him to the
Southeastern Conference, but without further ado, I am going to
yield to Chairman Hall to introduce him more fully. Chairman
Hall is Chairman of the Science, Space, and Technology
Committee and from the great State of Texas.
Chairman Hall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and honored to get
to introduce Dr. Seemann and to welcome you, Doctor, to--as
Vice President for Research at Texas A&M University and Chief
Research Officer for the Texas A&M University System. I am
pleased to introduce you and I am trying to do it exactly as
John Sharp instructed me to and with his help with getting my
wayward daughter into Texas A&M. She is waiting for it to
start. She may be in the crowd somewhere here. I hope you will
see her through, Doctor, and be considerate with her and
patient. All she wants is a degree.
Off the record a little, we have Texas A&M at Commerce and
Texas A&M at Texarkana in my district, and great schools. Texas
A&M at Commerce was at one time East Texas State Teachers
College. I changed it when I was the Texas Senate to Texas
State College. At that time my wife graduated from there and I
had--I spoke to the student body at their graduation and got to
hand her her degree, almost made her reach for it two or three
times, but I knew better than to do that. But as--and Texas A&M
at Texarkana is doing wonders, but my wife didn't seek the
diploma of Texas A&M diploma. She kept her Texas--the East
Texas State University and that way that prohibited me from
beginning to sleep with an Aggie. I was both proud and
apprehensive for that.
But as Vice President, Dr. Seemann worked with faculty,
staff, and administrative to expand and enhance the
university's $700 billion plus research enterprise, which is
quite a task. Prior to that, he--to coming to A&M--he served as
Dean of the College of the Environment and Life Sciences at the
University of Rhode Island. Dr. Seemann, we thank you for being
here and joining us today as we thank each one of you. Thank
you.
I yield back.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Dr. Mason, I would be remiss if I didn't add not only
did my money go to Auburn and my sons get degrees but they have
jobs. That is very important to a dad.
Our fourth witness is Dr. Leslie P. Tolbert, Senior Vice
President for Research at the University of Arizona. As Vice
President, she supports the creative activities of a 611
million research enterprise, promotes the application of new
discoveries and innovations, and oversees the graduate programs
of the university. Dr. Tolbert served on the faculty of the
Georgetown University School of Medicine before joining the
University of Arizona.
On a side note, my--one of my daughters is a teacher in
South Carolina. We have a 1,100 square foot, two-bedroom condo
in Washington, D.C., my wife and I. My daughter brought six
people from South Carolina with her, teachers, and I can give
you the play-by-play of Arizona's win over those Gamecocks on
Monday night and I wasn't watching the game. But they were
really talking to that TV. Congratulations on your national
title in baseball.
Our final witness is Dr. James Siedow, Vice Provost for
Research at Duke University. I love this panel. I am a graduate
of Duke University, and that is where I met my wife most
importantly. So thank you, Duke University. Dr. Siedow became a
full Professor of Botany in 1987 and a Professor of Biology in
2000 and has been Vice Provost for Research since 2001. A
recipient of the Trinity College Distinguished Teaching Award,
Dr. Siedow's research is represented by more than 120
publications. And am I pronouncing that correctly? Is it Siedow
or Siedow?
Mr. Siedow. Siedow.
Chairman Brooks. Siedow, okay. Thank you. I just wanted to
make sure. Thank you, Dr. Siedow.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each after which the Members of the Committee
will have five minutes to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Mr. Charles Holliday.
Mr. Holliday, you are recognized for five minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF MR. CHARLES O. HOLLIDAY, JR.,

CHAIR, COMMITTEE ON RESEARCH UNIVERSITIES,

NATIONAL ACADEMIES

Mr. Holliday. Chairman Brooks, thank you very much. It is
an honor to be here today representing the National Academies
and my 22 colleagues on the Committee. A point of reference is
the National Academy went out to seek this Committee; they only
had to call 23 people. So it gives you a feel for how important
it was to these very busy cross-section of business leaders and
academic leaders to be a part of this work.
As you have pointed out our report, if you look at our
entire title, it is actually 17 words. And I know people will
want to shorten our title so we have a suggestion. We would
like to call it the Prosperity Report. And if you would like a
long title, you can call it the Prosperity and Security Report,
because what I would like to present to you today it is because
of our Nation's research universities that we enjoy such
prosperity and security today and we hopefully laid out a plan
to continue that. And I believe my colleagues on this panel
here today will reinforce that.
Let me briefly talk about the findings we had and then some
of our recommendations, particularly those that we think are
actionable right away. The good news is we have a commanding
lead in research universities in the world. Thirty-five to
forty of the top 50 are in America and that is extremely
strong. And as I mentioned earlier, that is contributing
greatly to our prosperity. But I must report to you we also
found that our public universities are on thin ice. The cuts in
funding--25 percent on average since 2002 to 2010, some as high
as 50 percent--are straining them significantly. And we believe
we are in jeopardy of losing that strength. And so many of our
recommendations speak directly to the importance of them and
what we must do.
Keep it in perspective that 60 percent of the federally
funded research comes from those public universities and 70
percent of our Ph.D.s. So they are absolutely critical to the
system.
The key products--and you have mentioned this in your
opening comments--are the talent, the people that come out, and
the discoveries and so we must be focused on both of those
because that is critical to our success.
I would like to comment some about the role of business. I
served for 37 years with the DuPont Company. For 11 years I was
fortunate enough to serve as the Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer. Our company was started by a university-trained French
immigrant who came here 210 years ago and the reason DuPont is
still a leading company today is because of our focus on
research and because of our tight link with research
universities.
I would like to tell you just a very brief story from my
experience there. I was having a dinner with a researcher who
was receiving his 100th patent that year, and we were having a
discussion about what our direction should be around raw
discovery research or focused research. I was insisting on more
focused because we had to deliver to our owners. And when we
asked me, well, then, where will we get this broad research? I
said we will get it from our research universities. He agreed
but he said, what if they are not there? And my response was,
they must be. And I can tell you from our two years of working
on this Committee, the answer is they must be. It is so
critical to our prosperity and security and we think a key role
is to--how to make that happen.
If I could just comment briefly on some things we can do
that don't necessarily take money--obviously, our report
requires some money--but we think there are things we can do
today. And you look at the bureaucracy that has built up over
time, the regulations that we put on my colleagues here on this
panel, we believe there are things we could do to streamline
that, still get the right controls to make sure the taxpayers'
money is being spent carefully, but we believe we could reduce
that with time. We had the same message for the States because
they have put too much on it to make a difference.
Second, we believe the business role is very important.
Indeed, business does take the talented students and we license
the great discovery research. The university is like that. They
want us to give jobs to their students; they want us to use
their research. But what we found from our work is too much of
a buyer-seller relationship. We want businesses very actively
involved so they are listening to the universities and guiding
universities about what skills do students need to create jobs?
What discoveries can they actually commercialize and create
jobs? We think that is very important. We believe if you do
that, you should take a hard look at the R&D tax credit. We
think it should be made permanent but make it permanent in a
very smart way. Reward companies that will have a 10-year
relationship with the university, my colleagues here on this
panel so that they can plan and we can plan. I think that would
start a different system and I believe you can look at other
countries in the world it is key. We believe funding cyber
infrastructure is critical. We believe that will do a lot to
improve the productivity at universities, which is a big thing
that we can deal with.
If I could focus on just one last example, 55 percent of
the Ph.D. engineering students in this country have temporary
visas and we must find a way to keep them in this country. We
must also work on STEM so more of those are native-born
Americans. But as you think about keeping this country, I would
like to leave you with one thought. You have one Ph.D.
researcher. From my experience at DuPont, he likely will have
one or two assistants that does the more routine tests. In
today's information technology world, he will almost have a
full-time information technologist helping sort the data. And
then there are maintenance facilities on the equipment. You can
easily then create five jobs for every Ph.D. And this is in the
discovery stage. Once you get to the commercialization stage,
obviously, it is many fold that. So these positions are not
just great for discovery; they are really great for massive
jobs.
We present to you the Prosperity Report. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holliday follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.030

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Holliday.
Next, we have Dr. Mason from Auburn University. Dr. Mason,
you now have five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. JOHN M. MASON, JR.,

ASSOCIATE PROVOST AND VICE PRESIDENT

FOR RESEARCH, AUBURN UNIVERSITY

Mr. Mason. Thank you. Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member
Lipinski, Chairman Hall, and other Members of the Subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's panel.
My name is John Mason. I do serve as the Vice President for
Research at Auburn University.
You may have heard it said that ``research is to teaching
as walking is to running; you have to do the first in order to
do the second.'' If we want robust learning in this country,
all the way from kindergarten to post-graduate level and
throughout business and industry, it starts with the creation
of new knowledge.
To put today's discussion in context, I offer the findings
of a December 2011 report from Battelle and the R&D Magazine.
They find that Asia, for the first time, will this year surpass
the Americas in their share of total global research and
development spending. The long-term implications for U.S.
prosperity and security are profound.
Research, along with our missions of instruction and
outreach, is part of Auburn's balanced attempts at enhancing
competitiveness of our future leaders and our workforce. We
focus on five strategic areas at Auburn. They are all
interdisciplinary--energy and the environment, health science,
cyber systems, transportation, and the STEM disciplines--those
of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
We continuously work in partnership with federal agencies,
business and industry to accomplish issues that are of national
need. Auburn has produced breakthrough scientific discoveries
such as the vapor wake canine that now screens passengers and
cargo for explosives and also very proud that we educate such
leading technology innovators such as Apple's CEO Tim Cook.
A priority research area right now at Auburn has been, and
continues to be, security, the security of our cyber
infrastructure, food supply, and energy resources. In that
context, we view relevant fundamental research as the
underpinning of industry. At Auburn, we have been referring to
this as ``putting ideas to work.'' Relevant fundamental
research is that which industry can apply to innovate and
create products and services. Our Auburn motto includes
technology transfer. We have created and are sustaining an
incubator for startup companies, a research park where
technology transfer businesses are flourishing, and close
collaboration with not-for-profit foundations.
Although these elements are not unique, very common among
our universities throughout the United States, the key to all
our success is how they work together for some goal and
function, not as independent silos. Throughout this process, we
pay particular attention to commercializing our inventions, one
of the best ways of moving new knowledge and creating jobs.
Mr. Chairman, we believe that the recently released
National Academies report has some insightful recommendations,
and in the balance of the time, some quick response from Auburn
University. We recognize and embrace the oversight and
transparency that is necessary with public funds. However, on
certain areas where there are redundant reviews and audits, it
appears they are focusing on process rather than on results.
Regarding written recommendation number four on university
productivity, I can assure you we will remain diligent in
seeking and addressing efficiencies. It is important, however,
to recognize that once the storehouse of academic and research
mindsets are eliminated, they are unlikely to be restored in
the future.
Recommendation number five deserves serious attention.
Long-term partnerships and our relationship with business and
industry will remove the uncertainty and will focus us on long-
term items of national need. Unfortunately, short-term shifting
of national priorities creates a perverse incentive to chase
funding rather than chase the discovery that will create jobs
in the United States.
In closing, I urge the Committee to consider the potential
of the National Defense Education Act of 1958. It was at that
point in time when we were focusing on space. The Federal
Government helped pay tuition for those pursuing advanced
scientific and engineering degrees and it helped to focus our
research on areas of national need. While the national concern
at that time was space, today it is the economic issues.
Tuition waivers would be a very inexpensive way to accomplish
research and economic development activities on national needs.
Mr. Chairman, we are confident that relevant fundamental
research enables teaching, enhances our learning, and is a job
creator. Thank you for examining these important issues, and I
thank you for the opportunity to provide my testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mason follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.035

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Mason.
Our next witness is Dr. Seemann. Dr. Seemann, you have five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. JEFFREY R. SEEMANN,

VICE PRESIDENT FOR RESEARCH,

TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY,

AND CHIEF RESEARCH OFFICER,

THE TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY SYSTEM

Mr. Seemann. Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee on Research and
Science Education, my name is Jeff Seemann, and I have the
privilege of serving as both the Vice President for Research at
Texas A&M University and as the Chief Research Officer for the
Texas A&M University System.
I want to begin by thanking you for the chance to come
before you today to present testimony on critically important
issues relating to the challenges and opportunities facing our
Nation's research universities, and I want to specifically
commend your leadership for making this hearing possible.
I would also like to extend my thanks to a fellow Texan,
Congressman Ralph Hall, Chair of the Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology. Chairman Hall continues a long and
distinguished tradition of Texas leadership on science
education and policy going back to Olin ``Tiger'' Teague, who
chaired the precursor to today's Committee in the 1960s when
Texas A&M made its bold move to join the Nation's major
research universities. And I note that the portrait of Tiger
Teague hangs over Chairman Hall's left shoulder.
Today, Texas A&M stands among the Nation's top 20 research
universities, and its rapid rise to Tier 1 research status owes
a great deal to the strong foundation provided by the State of
Texas, to the institution's land grant roots, to its heritage
as a military institution, and to major investments from the
Federal Government. The release of the National Research
Council's report on ``Research Universities and the Future of
America'' offers an important opportunity to revisit,
reevaluate, and reenergize the state of the university-
government R&D partnership, a partnership that has helped make
Texas A&M and our peers across America the great research
universities that they are today.
It is remarkable how much of the prosperity of our Nation,
its economic success, its leadership in innovation, and its
world leadership have flowed from the R&D pipeline that
originates with this partnership, a partnership fueled by the
taxpayers of our States and Nation and catalyzed by the ideas
and discoveries of our faculty. The productivity of our
research universities and our Nation are inextricably linked.
This is why we must recommit to and reinvest in this
partnership.
I suggest that we can achieve rapid progress through the
following four complementary actions, all reflected in the
NRC's recommendations. First, research universities must take
bold and aggressive steps to collectively and strategically
focus on solutions to grand research challenges and areas of
key national interest by prioritizing investments of internal
resources into these areas and breaking down traditional
academic and organizational barriers that may stand in the way
of this goal.
Second, federal agencies must continue, if not increase,
support for these research priorities of shared national
interest, particularly with targeted grant monies and support
for young investigators and infrastructure development.
Third, research universities must take greater action to
ensure that we utilize resources even more efficiently and
transparently than we already do, aggressively eliminating
unnecessary and redundant administrative activities and
barriers in order to make the most of limited resources.
And fourth and finally, federal agencies and regulators
must, in turn, act to reduce or eliminate unnecessary, overly
burdensome, redundant, and costly regulatory and reporting
obligations placed on the research operations of research
universities and faculty. I promise you that we can do so
without sacrificing accountability or safety.
By keeping our sights set on high-priority current and
future national and global problems, by investing in and
focusing on solutions and impacts, and by ensuring the
efficient use of resources, we will guarantee the continued
productivity of our world-class R&D pipeline. Alternatively,
our Nation runs the risk of ceding its current leadership in
innovation to other countries and reaching a plateau in our
research competitiveness. This we cannot afford.
Texas A&M, with our long history of public service and our
research enterprise that is dedicated to serving the national
interest, looks forward to reaffirming our commitment to this
partnership and to working diligently in collaboration with you
and federal agencies to ensure that we can continue in the 21st
century to serve and meet and our Nation's needs in the same
highly successful way we did in the 20th century.
Thank you for allowing me to speak with you today.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Seemann follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.050

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Seemann.
Our next witness is Dr. Tolbert from Arizona University.
Dr. Tolbert, you may now proceed with your five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. LESLIE P. TOLBERT,

SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR RESEARCH,

THE UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA

Dr. Tolbert. Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski,
Chairman Hall, and other distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you
today about the importance of the research being conducted in
our Nation's research universities. My name is Leslie Tolbert.
I am Senior Vice President for Research at the University of
Arizona in Tucson, Arizona.
Innovation driven by educated people drives our Nation's
economy. The astounding research and education accomplishments
in U.S. universities have been the backbone of our country's
economic competitiveness, high living standard, and national
security since World War II. During that time, the Federal
Government has taken the lead in supporting this innovation,
providing resources to universities to conduct research and
graduate education in the national interest.
In recent years, this essential research support has not
kept pace with research opportunities or with international
investment. At the same time, State support available to cover
research costs in the public universities has declined
precipitously. Private industry, traditionally another
important source of research, is focusing increasingly on
applied research and development leaving to the universities
most of the fundamental research and the unexpected discoveries
that provide the foundation for all future applications.
How can the federal and state governments, the
universities, and the private sector work together to ensure
the long-term health of university-based research, which is the
essential starting point for the innovation pipeline? The
recently released NRC report--``Research Universities and the
Future of America'' or the ``Prosperity Report''--makes some
good suggestions.
I am here today representing one of our Nation's large
public research universities on the 150th anniversary of the
first Morrill Act, which established the public land grant
universities. The University of Arizona is a large,
comprehensive land grant university of 39,000 students. With
annual research spending over $610 million, we rank among the
top 20 public research universities in the Nation. We
consistently rank first or second in the physical sciences
overall and are among the top four universities in space
sciences. Among other accomplishments, we design and build the
largest telescope mirrors in the world, and we are the only
public university to have served as mission control for a NASA
mission, this one to Mars. We also provide for the State and
the Nation leadership in smart agricultural water use and
genetically based pest control, and advanced mining
technologies. Approximately 27 percent of the University of
Arizona's operating expenses go to support research.
Our total revenues are roughly 1/6 from State-appropriated
funds, 1/4 from student tuition and fees, and the remainder
from other sources, including externally sponsored grants and
contracts, gifts, and investment income. Sponsored grants and
contracts come primarily from federal agencies, including the
National Institutes of Health, NASA, National Science
Foundation.
Support from the State of Arizona has fallen very steeply
in recent years. Our university-state support has fallen from
32 percent to 15 percent of our budget in the past decade with
a reduction of almost 180 million in just the past five years.
We are over $200 million behind in building renewal funds. With
that reduction, our faculty number has dropped by 60 and
older--in the last year--and older research buildings are being
taken offline because of inadequate maintenance even as our
student population continues modest growth.
As State support declines and the competition for federal
funding gets tougher, efficiency and careful planning are more
important than ever for us. We are using our limited resources
strategically to support areas of research and education in
which we already are clear leaders or where we have clear
potential to be competitive for projects that will have a major
impact on society and still also to provide relevant
undergraduate and graduate education to students from diverse
backgrounds.
Fundamental exploration and discovery is at our core, but
we also work increasingly to push new findings out to practical
application as quickly as possible, especially through
expanding our industry relations to true partnerships.
Increasingly, we perform research in large consortia where
partners share expertise and share resources as an efficient
mode of operation.
Toward bolstering the cutting-edge research and education
in our universities, we endorse several specific
recommendations from the NRC report. First, federal and state
agencies must understand and support the absolutely critical
role played by university-based fundamental research and the
continuum from fundamental research through applied research
and development to new product development. New knowledge is
the feed corn for the rest of the R&D system. Without new ideas
and insights, progress won't happen. Not targeted to particular
application, fundamental research has impacts that are
unpredictable and may not occur for years or decades, but that
research is essential and has the power to transform society.
Second, universities should be able to recover as fully as
possible the full costs of funded research, including full
reimbursement of the so-called overhead costs that are intended
to reimburse universities for the necessary expenditures that
collectively support their research. This reimbursement has
fallen behind over recent years, leaving the universities
having to subsidize federally funded research with other
funded. For my public universities, State funds continue to be
key here, but declining state support makes this increasingly
difficult.
And finally, regulatory controls on federally funded
research should be streamlined as much as possible to minimize
the administrative burden on both the Federal Government and
the universities and maximize the impact of federal funds spent
on university research.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Tolbert follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.068

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Tolbert.
Dr. Siedow, it is now your turn for five minutes. You may
proceed.

STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES N. SIEDOW,

VICE PROVOST FOR RESEARCH,

DUKE UNIVERSITY

Mr. Siedow. Chairman Brooks----
Chairman Brooks. Excuse me. Turn on your microphone.
Mr. Siedow. Oh, sorry. Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member
Lipinski, Chairman Hall, and Members of the Subcommittee, thank
you for your efforts to highlight research universities and the
important role these institutions play in our Nation's security
and economic prosperity. I am Jim Siedow, Vice Provost for
Research at Duke University, and I am grateful for the
invitation to be part of this critical discussion.
This is clearly a very important topic, not simply for
those of us sitting at this table but also for the Nation as a
whole, and I think it is very encouraging that our elected
officials, including three Duke alums who sit on this
Committee, see the NRC report and this topic as sufficiently
important to hold this hearing.
It has been said several times already but cannot be
reiterated enough that one of the cornerstones of the success
of the United States has achieved as a Nation over the past 150
years since the enactment of the Morrill Act has been the
partnership between the Federal Government and research
universities, operating under the notion that universities with
the support of federal and State governments would provide the
fundamental research and new discoveries that would drive the
development of new technologies, which in turn would underpin
the Nation's economy. That was true in 1862; it was even more
so in 1945 when Vannevar Bush eloquently restated the case in
Science the Endless Frontier, and it is even more true today
when we are locked in a struggle to maintain the primacy of our
Nation and its economic system in the face of very steep
competition.
We believe the NRC report does a very good job of making
the case of the need to reaffirm and revitalize this unique
federal-university partnership. No less important, however, is
the case the report makes for the need to strengthen the
linkages between research universities and industry. Many
people have made note of the fact that in the aftermath of the
dismantling of the large corporate research laboratories which
drove much of this Nation's industrial leadership in the 20th
century, universities and industry have yet to come together in
a way that fills the resulting gap. While most research
universities today can point to successful examples of
interaction with industry, in some cases interactions of large
consequence, for the most part industry comes to universities
today when they have a question they want answered or a problem
solved, reducing the partnership to more of a fee-for-service
transaction and less of a union of coequals trying to address a
corporate grand challenge or move a university discovery beyond
the so-called valley of death and into the marketplace.
The large corporate laboratories of the past were masters
at translating basic research discoveries into practical
applications. Research universities today are hotbeds of basic
discovery but remain somewhat slow and undercapitalized when it
comes to translating these discoveries into useful
applications.
In light of this situation, what is clearly needed is a new
partnership between industry and research universities that is
designed to address these shortcomings. As outlined in the NRC
report, the Federal Government is best positioned to broker
this partnership and to help bring about a more collaborative--
and to quote the NRC report--``peer-to-peer'' set of
interactions between the two entities.
As has also been pointed out in previous testimony, a major
challenge facing universities relates to costs associated with
the growing number of research-related compliance regulations
that have flowed down from federal agencies over the past 15 or
so years. Most of the cost of administering these regulations
have had to be borne directly by the university. To take Duke
as an example, the research-related and quality-assurance cost
to Duke is between--between the year 2000 and 2010 rose over
300 percent at the same time that our direct and indirect costs
only increased 130 percent.
In addition to presenting the university with a challenge
of continually keeping up and paying for new regulations,
operationalizing our compliance responsibilities in many cases
means flowing down these additional responsibilities to our
research-active faculty. This has led to negative responses on
the part of the faculty who see more of their time being
committed not to carrying out funded research but to a myriad
of mundane administrative duties. This is not to suggest that
these regulations are unwarranted, only that the extreme to
which some of these regulations have gone of late seems well
beyond that needed to accomplish the original regulatory end.
We support the recommendation in the NRC report that a thorough
review of these regulations is in order.
Finally, while not a Committee recommendation per se, the
overarching tenor of the NRC report on the development of my
testimony for this hearing led me to ask whether another
potential outcome of this assessment of the partnership between
research universities and the Federal Government might not
include a call for a formal look at the country's fundamental
research portfolio in light of the future strategic needs of
the country. In essence, does the current distribution of
federal support for basic research align or not with where
technology will most need to be advanced in the future if the
country is to maintain its competitive scientific and
technological edge?
I thank you for your time and interest, and I look forward
to answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Siedow follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.082

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Siedow.
I want to thank the panel for their testimony, reminding
Members that Committee rules limit questioning to five minutes.
The Chair at this point will open the round of questions.
Normally, the Chair would recognize himself first, but in this
instance, I am going to exercise the Chair's prerogative and
recognize a superior Chair, Ralph Hall from the great State of
Texas.
Mr. Hall, you are recognized.
Chairman Hall. With that description, I am not sure you
have recognized the right guy but I thank you for it. And I
thank you for being a Chairman that recognizes the importance,
as this full room indicates, of the subject matter that we are
talking about today. As a matter of fact, Mr. Chairman, some
three or four years ago, back--to be exact--June 22, 2009, Bart
Gordon, who chaired Science, Space, and Technology for eight
years and was a wonderful Chairman, an unusual Democrat, and I
was the Ranking Member at that time. There were two Senators--
Barbara Mikulski and Lamar Alexander--that signed this letter
on June 22, 2009, addressed to Dr. Ralph Cicerone, President of
the National Academy of Sciences; and Dr. Charles M. Vest,
President of National Academy of Engineering; Dr. Harvey V.
Fineberg, President, Institute of Medicine. They may be in the
audience, some of them; I am not sure, but they certainly know
about this hearing.
And we wrote to them asking, what are the top 10 actions
that Congress, State governments, research universities, and
others could take to assure the ability of the American
research university to maintain the excellence in research and
doctoral education needed to help the United States compete,
prosper, and achieve national goals for health, energy, and
environment and security in the global community of this 21st
century? That was our letter. Unlike the problem Darrell Issa
is having of getting any letters out of the Attorney General,
they answered back quickly and their answer was this:
``Research Universities and the Future of America,'' the
summary there, the 10 breakthroughs and one by one took them as
they were asked.
And I have--really the question I want to ask Mr.
Holliday--Dr. Holliday but I want to ask Dr. Seemann first. In
your testimony you stated that ``each research university must
leverage its respective assets and capacities to pursue those
challenge areas that best fit their strengths and then
aggressively adjust investments and priorities around their
home field advantage.'' How has Texas A&M identified those
assets and how have they handled those capacities?
Dr. Seemann. Well, thank you for the question and let me
also commend you for your vision in asking the National Academy
to deliver this report. And let me also promise you that I will
look closely after your family at Texas A&M University.
Chairman Hall. Just so she passes.
Dr. Seemann. As we say in Texas, yes, sir.
Texas A&M was born as a great institution of agriculture
and engineering and absolutely remains so and we have continued
to grow on those strengths. More recently, we have begun to
focus on the 21st century, I think the century that is
increasingly about biology and the life sciences and begun to
parallel developments in that arena. And over the past six to
seven years, the State of Texas has made important and critical
infrastructure investments in this arena in very state-of-the-
art facilities for preclinical studies, for genomic medicine,
and most recently, for a national center for therapeutics
manufacturing that have built on much of our capacity.
And that was rewarded, as you may know, last week in Texas
by the announcement of a $285 million award from Health and
Human Services Biomedical Advanced Research and Development
Authority to do development and production of vaccines for
emerging medical threats, including pandemic flu and bioterror
potentials. And again, that has come from our institution
recognizing what its strengths are, recognizing where the
opportunities are down the road--and particularly in the
biomedical and life sciences--putting in place in partnership
with the Federal Government, in partnership with the State the
necessary infrastructure to support this success. And again,
last week in Texas was a great day for Texas and Texas A&M with
this very large award that we think will continue to move us
forward.
Chairman Hall. I thank you. I only have about 20 seconds
left so I won't get to ask Mr. Holliday his question about the
outlook for federal and State funding over the next seven years
and how sometimes they glossed over some fiscal constraints
that you have to take into consideration.
And my time is up. I yield back, but Mr. Holliday, I
probably will send you something by letter, appreciate if you
will answer it.
And Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for being generous
and letting me go ahead with my interrogation. And I am still
concerned about my granddaughter because I know my scholastic
record--one time I made four Fs and a D and my dad punished me
for spending too much time in one subject. I am not sure that
she didn't get a little of that from me.
I yield back.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Know that I will
defer to your wisdom any time, you just let me know.
I want to talk a little bit about our country's financial
circumstances, and then I am going to follow that up with a
question. Just to reiterate where we are, in November we blew
through the $15 trillion debt mark. Sometime this year, we are
going to blow through the $16 trillion debt mark. We have had
three consecutive trillion-dollar deficits--$1.4 trillion, $1.3
trillion, $1.3 trillion. We are in our fourth year of what is
likely to be a trillion-dollar deficit. What is the impact of
all this? Well, two fiscal years ago our debt service cost was
$196 billion. This past fiscal year that ended September 30,
our debt service cost was $221 billion, which means that we had
an increase of $25 billion in a one-year period of time. What
does that mean? Well, that is more than the entire NASA budget,
one year. And we have lost that for future generations where
those funds are no longer available for endeavors of a NASA-
size quantity.
We have got a lot of competing demands for Federal
Government monies. We have got the programs that you all have
brought out. We have got national defense. We have got all
sorts of wealth transfer programs--food stamps, government
housing, you name it. We have possibilities of significant tax
increases, but to be quite frank with you, to balance the
budget would require more than a doubling of the income tax
rates now being paid by all Americans who pay income taxes. And
for those of you with an economic background, you can imagine
the adverse effects that would have on our economy, the job
losses and whether we would actually have an increase in
revenue or a decrease in revenue is an open question.
So with that situation in hand, I am concerned about the
report recommendation--particularly the Strategic Investment
Program; that is item number five--along with some of the other
recommendations and whether they are consistent with the
outlook for federal and State funding over the next several
years. Please expand on how the study committee considered the
current fiscal environment in its deliberations. Further, I am
concerned that recommendations for the creation of a new
program--and that is the Strategic Investment Program, number
five, that asks for another $7 billion per year--and covering
the full cost of research don't take into account the Nation's
true economic situation.
What are your thoughts on this? I understand how what you
do is productive, but if we are going to come up with an
additional $7 billion per year, where do you suggest it come
from? Or how do you suggest we prioritize? That seems to be the
task that Congress is faced with, properly prioritizing how our
funds are spent.
Mr. Holliday, if you will go first but then we will just
work our way down the panel.
Mr. Holliday. Thank you, Chairman Brooks.
Excellent point. We discussed that at great length in our
committee. As we stressed in the committee, we believe it will
take time to fully fund these programs. But we believe--in
response to your question about where it comes from is we
should focus on the things we can control today. Many members
of this panel have talked about the regulations that we believe
are choking down our universities. In the report, we show three
examples of universities that have found the ways to save $60
to $75 million per year by looking at their own backbone
operations, not the research itself but the support systems.
And we believe those should be implemented.
Urging companies to partner with universities is a step in
the right direction. A simple example from the University of
Tennessee and DuPont--we both were working on next-generation
biofuels. DuPont and University of Tennessee decided to pool
together. It would be much more effective and cut through
costs. I think if we put the framework in place where in the
short term we can do much more of that.
If I could close with the question, though, is it is very
important as you are considering deployment of funds to look at
what are investments and what are costs? And we truly believe
these are investments that get paid back multiple times--not
immediately, but over time, to the country.
Chairman Brooks. Dr. Mason, again, if there is any
ammunition you can give me in this debate that we are likely to
have in the halls of Congress, very much appreciate it.
Dr. Mason. Yes, Chairman Brooks. From a fiscal point of
view in our State of Alabama and at Auburn University, cuts are
very real. We have to make very clear decisions. I will assure
you we have had to understand with no new monies are coming in
what do we do? We have made decisions at the local level as the
Nation will have to what will we need to stop doing in order to
do other things?
On the other hand, we tried to align our capabilities and
our facilities with what we looked at national strategic areas.
One of those is in the cybersecurity area. By sharing our
research facilities with the private sector, with the federal
agencies, with State agencies, and various forms of the private
sector, we have been able to pool funding at a certain level to
accomplish and create some new opportunities and job creation.
So my point is the reality is it may not be where all new
revenues come from, but I do support the idea of the partnering
among--across all areas.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Mason.
Dr. Seemann.
Dr. Seemann. Yes, thank you.
I remind you what you know about--much better than I--about
the federal budget and that is we exist as successes that we
have talked about today, the innovation that comes from
American universities in a sense is funded through the Federal
Government out of that very small part of the budget, the
discretionary part that is left over when all the big things
are funded. So I remind you that from that little bit that is
there come future cures for cancer, come solutions to our
energy challenges, come answers to our climate change dilemmas,
et cetera, et cetera. So at least holding onto the investments
that you are making--and thank you for making them--I think are
critical down the road for this country to continue to see the
extraordinary contributions in the future that we have seen in
the past.
But I would say as I said in my remarks, there are
responsibilities in both--on both sides, the government and the
universities. The first is to focus, is to pick and choose what
it is we want to invest in and what we are going to let stand
aside for a moment, what we are not going to invest in. And
that is often one of the most difficult discussions both in
government and at universities as to what we will do and what
we won't do.
Secondly, again, on both sides--as I emphasized and as Mr.
Holliday said--I still think there is a great deal of room left
for efficiencies. Universities are working every day to be more
efficient with the resources that you give us, but we think we
can be more efficient.
On the other side, the regulatory burdens that are placed
on us that we think are above and beyond are extraordinary
costly to our universities and they directly take dollars away
from supporting research itself. They take away dollars from
working on cures for cancer. They take away dollars for finding
energy solutions. They create burdens on our faculty that may
consume up to 40 percent of a faculty member's time in non-
research functions because of that. And that is really not what
we want our best and brightest minds working on.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Seemann. I am in
wholehearted agreement.
Dr. Tolbert.
Dr. Tolbert. Thank you, Chairman Brooks.
I would echo everything that my colleagues have said and
simply add to what Dr. Seemann just said that in fact this
regulatory burden is growing, and it has an impact on federal
spending and university spending. We feel across the
universities that internally we must continue to find
efficiencies in the way we respond to regulatory oversight in
the use of taxpayer funds, but also that we would like to be
partners in developing rational policy that will streamline
federal regulations. I can think of a couple of areas. One
would be in export controls where there are redundancies and
actually inconsistencies in--among some of the regulations.
They are extremely important regulations. The easier they are
to follow, the clearer they are, the less work it will take and
the better job we will do at the universities and also on the
federal side in assuring accountability. That would be one.
Another place would be effort reporting as a very specific
example of something where we do sort of a whole separate
shadow system of following effort on research grants that is
probably not necessary and would be a place where we could find
efficiencies.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Tolbert.
Dr. Siedow.
Dr. Siedow. Thank you, Chairman Brooks.
We may have reached that point where everything that needs
to be said has been said but not everybody said it, so I will
just reiterate a couple of points that have been made, because
I think they are fairly critical. One is not everything in this
report can clearly be implemented in the near term. And there
are some fiscal realities which you have pointed out which I
absolutely agree with that mean we are going to have to think--
the strategic program that they suggested may well have to be
thought down the road when our economic and fiscal house is in
better order. I think the suggestion is still good; it is just
not viable at this point.
I would just--boy, let me hammer home. If you want to get--
if you want to look at where we can get efficiencies or make
strides right now, regulations are just burying us and we
really do need to--as I think was recommended--it wouldn't be
that costly to take a very hard look at the regulations now and
see where we can streamline some of those.
Just to bring up an example that hasn't been brought up, I
am really concerned at Duke at how the conflict-of-interest
regulations are running right up against orthogonal to our
attempts to technology transfer. I mean we talk about--again,
we talked about speeding up the rate at which technologies get
incorporated from the basic discoveries into application where
that second step we are just--we are getting--we are running
into potholes because the conflict-of-interest rules are taking
the very professors who should be taking that next step out of
the picture or at least marginalizing them to some extent.
Again, collaborations be it with industry, be it with other
universities, I think many people in this room would be
surprised at how much Duke and the University of North Carolina
collaborate on a regular basis, particularly in the biomedical
realm. Collaborations are just an excellent way to achieve
efficiencies. I could go on. The list is quite long but I think
there are--I guess the bottom line is I think there are plenty
of things in this--the NRC report where they have
recommendations that in fact would not--would either cost much
or might not even cost much of anything at all that need to be
looked at very carefully in the near term.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Siedow.
At this point I would like to thank Mr. Lipinski. It is
abnormal for two Republicans to go back-to-back, but he and I
discussed it and he was gracious enough to allow the Chairman
of the Science, Space, and Technology Committee to go first
followed by the Chairman of this Subcommittee.
And Mr. Lipinski, as you engage in your Q and A, I am not
often liberal, but I will be likewise liberal and generous with
your time as you ask questions and seek responses.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I do have a lot
of things that I want to explore with the panel, so I
appreciate that.
So many things, trying to figure out where to start. First
thing I think I just want to quickly make it clear for
everybody the situation that public universities are in right
now. I think, as Mr. Holliday said, the public universities are
on thin ice right now. Dr. Tolbert, what is the percentage--can
you tell us again what the percentage is of funding at the
University of Arizona that comes directly from the State?
Ms. Tolbert. Our current level of funding in the--is in the
20 percent range. It has fallen 40 percent in just the last few
years.
Mr. Lipinski. And I don't know if Dr. Mason or Dr. Seemann
can tell us anything about their universities, what percent
comes from the State. Do you know?
Dr. Mason. Congressman Lipinski, I don't know the
percentage but in the--I can do it in a different fashion, if
you would allow me. I arrived at Auburn in '08 and since '08
from an $800 million appropriation, over $125 million, I
believe, has been reduced. So, you know, whether that is a
proportion of the entire university budget, but the implication
of that is profound.
Mr. Lipinski. Dr. Seemann, do you have any----
Dr. Seemann. I am not--it is around the number at the
University of Arizona. I came three years ago from the
University of Rhode Island, and during my tenure there, that--
the percentage of State support slipped below 10 percent. And I
know there are a number of universities that are down at that
end of the percentages of State support.
Mr. Lipinski. Well, I was going to say Dr. Tolbert is doing
relatively well there at the University of Arizona, from what I
hear. And I hear more along the lines in the State of Illinois
down closer to what Dr. Seemann is talking about, 10 percent.
So I just want--I don't think most people in this country
understand how--they still see State universities and they
think that there is a large percentage of the money for those
universities that is actually coming directly from the State.
So I just wanted to make that point.
Commercialization of university research, I think, is
critically important here. We are investing a lot--the Federal
Government is investing a lot, taxpayers are investing a lot in
research at our universities across the country, and I think
more needs to be done to--in commercialization. Is there
anything specifically that anyone can talk about that their
universities are doing to help with commercialization? I will
start with Dr. Siedow.
Dr. Siedow. We have--actually, you can go onto the Website.
Actually, if you look in my written commentary, I actually
pointed out we have an innovation and entrepreneurship program
that basically tries to coordinate entrepreneurship across
campus. And there we have the Duke Fuqua School of Business,
the School of Law, the Medical School are all participants in
any number--and when I say any number, the number is about--I
think there are 12 different programs that I counted up when I
was putting together the written testimony--that are various
programs that are designed to either educate entrepreneurs or,
in many instances, take actual IP and--as a part of the
course--develop that IP and to try and move it downstream as it
goes along. So we are--we really have--our strategic plan of
several years ago focused on technology transfer and
translation of our basic discoveries into application as one of
our strategic goals. And we have worked very hard to bring that
about. And again, if you look in my written testimony, there is
a fairly good list of what we are doing and I think it is
fairly impressive.
Mr. Lipinski. Anyone else like to comment what their
universities are doing? Dr. Tolbert.
Dr. Tolbert. Thank you, Chairman--sorry, Ranking Member
Lipinski.
At the University of Arizona, we are changing the way we do
technology commercialization, because we have not been as
efficient and effective as we know we could be. One of the
things we have done is to take a new dean of our business
college, our College of Management, and give him strong control
over the new direction we are taking with something we call
Tech Launch Arizona. We have a top-ranked entrepreneurship
program, and we are increasingly bringing the students and the
faculty into that pipeline from basic research through to
technology commercialization. We are bringing under one
umbrella the functions of technology transfer and business
incubation and movement into our technology park so that we can
have an easier handoff. To the faculty member who is an
innovator and an entrepreneur, it will be an easier process
than it has been in the past.
And then finally, I would say we know that we are going to
have to raise philanthropic funds to help us through--I think
it was my colleague to the left who talked about a valley of
death. There are several valleys of death for new intellectual
property, and we can't raise those funds any way except to go
out to the private sector and the philanthropic community to
help us generate a fund that eventually we expect will be
evergreen.
Dr. Seemann. And Texas A&M is doing all the same things
that our peers are, but I would like to use the question to--in
this arena to make a point about the relationship between
research at universities and education and that they are not
two separate things at our institutions, but rather they are
inextricably linked even in this arena. It is critical that we
teach our young people and our students about what it means and
what has to happen to develop, commercialize, market
technologies, create new companies, and I am very proud to say
that my office, in this past year, in collaboration with our
Mays School of Business, has created a student innovation
accelerator bringing some extraordinarily bright students of
Texas A&M in partnership with faculties and ideas to create for
them a place, an opportunity, the resources to begin thinking
about how this happens and in fact probably, if it works like I
want, seeing the next Facebook come out of a small investment
in putting our students in that kind of environment.
Mr. Lipinski. I think that is a good point that this is
all--we talk about commercialization; it's often lost that what
we are talking about is education, educating students,
educating faculty on how to commercialize, how to be
entrepreneurs. So that is still all part of education. So if
Dr. Mason--you don't have to add anything but if you have
anything, go ahead.
Dr. Mason. Well, I am an academic so I have to add
something but I will be very, very brief----
Mr. Lipinski. I understand that.
Dr. Mason [continuing]. And I appreciate the Chairman's
allowance. Just two comments in transition, so in our
incubator--that is what you will also see in many universities
where we have student companies being formed, what better way
than to take this intellectual knowledge right from the
students, and the students are starting companies. These are
investments that we are talking about. While they often are
perceived as costs, but the fact is, imagine investing in our
next generation in that manner.
Something even more specific, we are making transitions
from what used to be referred to as technical licensing
officers, a very regulatory type of approach. I oversee our
501(c)(3) technology foundation, and we now hire business
development people who come from industry and also bring along
with them the private sector investment portfolios and our
contacts. So in response to the Chairman's question and to
yours, literally, the private sector is also willing to invest.
It is the partnership that we were looking for. So thank you
very much for the amount of time.
Mr. Lipinski. And I wanted to--as people here have often
heard me say--promote an NSF program called Innovation Corps
that is teaching faculty members and teaming them up with
faculty members, graduate students teaming up entrepreneurs and
teaching them how to commercialize. And I think that we need to
be doing more to sort of bring the best practices. From what
you all have learned, that all of our universities have learned
because a lot has been done in the past 20 years, especially in
the last decade when we are talking about tech transfer,
commercialization, and there are some different ways it is
being done at different universities. And I think that we
really need to collect all the best practices and--so that we--
everyone learns from each other.
And the last thing I just want to say I think we could all
agree up here in Congress to work on easing the regulatory
burden, and I think that is something that we need to address
further time in up here on Capitol Hill and making the changes
that we can so that the Federal Government is not putting too
many burdens on our universities.
Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
I appreciate the patience of our two colleagues to my left.
The Chair first recognizes Mr. Hultgren of the great State of
Illinois.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you all for being here, so grateful for
your time and your work. I am passionate about this subject and
really do appreciate all that you have done.
So much of what you said really struck me. One thing right
at the end of Dr. Siedow's testimony talked about almost as a--
kind of a side comment but also maybe a challenge of looking at
prioritization and how we actually are looking system-wide at
basic scientific research and how we are spending money and are
we doing it most effectively as we possibly could. I agree with
that. I think we need to do that. I am frustrated being one of
the new Members here in Congress feeling like we have very
little vision as far as science policy goes for our Nation from
the government, from our leadership and we need to change that.
We need to be working with you and I want to be a part of that.
I hope this--I know this Committee and Subcommittee will be
part of that as well.
I think part of that discussion, though, has to be not just
limited to basic scientific research but science and what
should we be doing as a Federal Government? I think this is a
really important discussion to have. I am privileged to have
quite a few physicist constituents in my district who are much,
much smarter than I am and they remind me of that often. But
they are a wonderful help. And one of the things that they talk
to me about and it just clicked with me is there is really two
forms of science. There is Newtonian science and Edisonian
science. Newtonian science really is basic scientific research.
Why does something work and how are we going to discover new
reasons why things work? And Edisonian science is how do we
apply? How do we use what we know to make our lives better?
Both are very, very important.
I absolutely am convinced that the private sector is very
good at the Edisonian science, that if we are continuing to
provide advancements in Newtonian science, private sector for
the most part can step up and take the ball to the next part of
applying it to make our lives better. But I am absolutely
convinced that the private sector is not good at Newtonian
science, that basic scientific research, and that is where we
need our research universities to continue to step up, to
continue to be funded, and I would say continue to work with
our national laboratories. We haven't talked about that very
much, but I think that is a key piece.
And I just feel like right now there is an attack against
our national laboratories. I can't see it any other way where,
again, many applied science line items are being increased 30
percent, 20 percent, and yet our national laboratories are
being cut 10 percent, 15 percent. It is just--to me it is a
misapplication of limited dollars that we have got where the
private sector oftentimes can step in and do this applied
science. No one other than universities, our national
laboratories with the Federal Government's direction can really
do this basic scientific research.
So I want to be a part of that discussion. We need your
help. I think you are a really key resource in this along with
our national laboratories to be able to do that.
One of the things I would challenge you all with--and I
have talked to my own universities about this as well. I am
privileged to represent Fermilab and--so that is how I get my
connection of all my brilliant physicists that I get to
represent. But I am so proud of what they have done and the
great work that they have done but also sense frustration from
them right now of really getting the support that they need to
do the great work that I know they can do moving us into the
future. But I have encouraged them to continue to build the
relationships with their research universities and have
research universities reaching out to their Members of Congress
and Members of the Senate to be talking about how important
this is.
We all talk and believe in the importance of STEM education
and getting young people interested in this, but we are not
going to get them interested if there is not a place for them
to be able to use that knowledge and education here in America.
If they have got to go over to China afterwards to be able to
use that or Russia or India or Europe, we have lost the battle.
And so I encourage you just to continue to be talking to
your Members of Congress of how important this is. I have seen
it very practically where there has been issues where I have
tried to talk to one of my colleagues and say, hey, I need your
help to sign on to this legislation. We don't get an answer.
Finally, we will call a university in their district,
university president calls this person. Five minutes later they
are on our letter. So you have a power and I just encourage you
to continue to use it. We need to hear from you of how
important this is for current students at your universities,
for your professors, for the research they are doing, but also
for our K-12th graders who are interested in going into science
and yet are saying maybe there is not a bright future for me in
that and I will go somewhere else. No, we can't let that
happen; it is too important. So I am getting up on a soapbox. I
apologize for that.
But real quickly, in the last minute I have, one of the
questions I had was brought up of regulation and the amount of
time that is used dealing with regulation. And specifically
wondered if one or two of you could maybe mention what reform
could happen? What are some of the frustrations you have that
is pulling you away from the research that could be done and
some regulatory reform that we could be doing to free up our
research universities to do the great work that they can do?
Great, thank you.
Dr. Tolbert. Congressman Hultgren, thank you for that
question.
Between the two of us at this end of the table, we have
suggested a couple of areas. There are many areas--I think this
really deserves significant attention--many areas where we can
imagine important efficiencies are available that will not
decrease our accountability. We will be held accountable for
spending the dollars correctly. One is conflict of interest,
which you heard about from Dr. Siedow. And another one is
effort reporting. It is an area that is too technical to go
into in detail here but it--we really do have parallel shadow
systems which is just really not necessary. It is not a good
waste of time--it is a good waste of time.
Mr. Hultgren. It is a waste of time.
Dr. Tolbert. Excuse me. And then the other I would bring up
again is export control. It is increasingly difficult. Dual use
is an important issue that has to be dealt with in great
technical detail but, in fact, I think most universities have
had to hire external legal counsel to help us interpret the
ITAR--the International Trade in Arms Regulation--guidelines
because they are virtually uninterpretable by us internally.
And I think that that could be improved. Thank you.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you very much. Again, thank you all. If
you have other suggestions and if it is okay if I can ask
permission to follow up with you or my office to follow up with
you on specifics of what we can do because we want to--I want
to go after some of this. And again, we want accountability and
I believe we can still have an accountable system without some
of this crazy redundancy, without this waste of time, without a
lot of things that are just outdated that just don't make sense
any longer, new ways of doing something more efficiently.
My time is up so thank you so much. I will be following up
with you if that is okay just to get other suggestions you
might have.
I yield back.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Hultgren.
At this point, the Chair recognizes the Chairman of our
Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee, Mr. Palazzo from the great
State of Mississippi.
Mr. Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lipinski brought up some good points when he was
talking about the commercialization and entrepreneurship and I
think, Dr. Tolbert and Dr. Siedow, you pretty much covered
those. But as a follow-up question--this was going to be for
Mr. Holliday, so if you could just put your entrepreneurship
caps back on--when the study committee was assessing the needs
of our research universities, did you discover that most
research campuses now have tech transfer offices? Or is it
still a major impediment to moving research out of the labs?
And also how about entrepreneurship programs like the ones Dr.
Tolbert and Dr. Siedow mentioned in their testimony?
Mr. Holliday. Great question, sir.
Yes, universities have tech transfer offices, but they are
not as efficient and effective as they should be. From my
experience with DuPont, we actually deployed three of our best
tech transfer people to go around and coach universities on how
to do that. We put in place a net company that--where they
could actually sell that from, so we think that is a very
important place.
But what I would stress is if you start early on with
partnering with entrepreneurs, partnering with businesses as
they are developing the technology, then those routes to
transfer it out become much more obvious and the technology is
more fit for commercialization. Most discovery research at
university is not ready to be commercialized. It still may take
a year or two to be done so you have got to find the right
partner to actually commercialize it, and that is what is
critical.
Mr. Palazzo. Thank you.
Dr. Mason, in your testimony you mentioned that Auburn's
Space Research Institute was recently closed. What happened to
the students, professors, and researchers who had been working
at and through the Institute?
Dr. Mason. Yes, Congressman. When we all take on new jobs,
you open a door and then you have to deal with what is behind
the door. In that situation, we--the university had been trying
to sustain the operations of that Space Research Institute.
When I arrived there, the funding was not available through
NASA and through others. Fortunately, over a four-year period
we were able to, through attrition, some people were absorbed
in other units, several of them went out and started some small
companies, and then some of the facilities are now going to be
shared with the University of Alabama at Huntsville. So in
reality it was the productivity of trying to sustain something
in separation from--so we primarily allocated to the locations
that were best suited for trying to continue it.
But the fact is that no longer exists at that university,
so if one were to stand up some new initiatives, one has to
recognize that infrastructure and that personnel are not there.
So whether it is my university or others, when we go through
these cuts, that is what will happen. Things will have to be
redeployed elsewhere. That will cause some inefficiencies to
start them up again.
Mr. Palazzo. Dr. Mason, that was well said.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
At this point, I am going to close with one set of remarks.
And I focused on recommendation number seven from your report,
and it is one that the Committee and its witnesses have focused
on extensively--reducing regulatory burdens. And it seems to me
that to a large degree we have been talking at the 30,000-foot
level, maybe even have gotten down to the 10,000-foot level,
but as much as possible I would ask our witnesses and their
colleagues to get into the weeds a little bit.
With respect to recommendation number seven, it says--and I
am going to quote some particular parts--``federal policymakers
and regulators and their state counterparts should review the
costs and benefits of federal and state regulations eliminating
those that are redundant, ineffective, inappropriately applied
to the higher education sector, or that impose costs that
outweigh the benefits to society. The Federal Government should
also make regulations and reporting requirements more
consistent across federal agencies that universities can
maintain one system for all federal requirements rather than
several thereby reducing costs. Reducing or eliminating
regulations can reduce administrative costs, enhance
productivity, and increase the agility of institutions.''
If you would, I would appreciate it if you all could get
some of your colleagues and yourselves to get into the weeds a
little bit and identify specific regulations that you think
that this Congress should be involved in the change of or the
repeal of. Now, I would very much welcome that kind of in-the-
weeds insight that you can share with us, this Committee, in
written form. You can also address my congressional office in a
written summary of the regulations that I am talking about with
the C.F.R.'s. If you can identify them by number and section,
that would be wonderful.
I was going to close my remarks at this point, but I see
Dr. Siedow has his hand going up so if you would like to add a
few remarks, inasmuch as I do have a degree from your
university, I feel great deference.
Dr. Siedow. I appreciate taking advantage of that, and
thank you for recognizing me.
I would just like to point out we can do that relatively
easily. And point of fact, because last summer, in response to
the OMB A-21 Task Force, they asked for examples of where we
saw regulatory burdens, and we have actually--through the AAU,
the auspices of AAU and COGR have actually developed a bunch--a
whole list of in-the-weeds regulations that we think could use
some help. So it will be a very easy thing for us to put
together because we have done that within the past year.
Chairman Brooks. Well, fantastic. If you could please
communicate that list to the Subcommittee staff and to my
office along with any justifications or reasonings,
explanations as to why that particular provision needs to be
changed or eliminated, I would very much welcome it. And I
would love to be your champion with respect to overregulation
by the Federal Government. I am familiar with the well-
intentioned but sometimes counterproductive effect some of our
regulators have in the Federal Government.
With that being the case, I want to thank the witnesses for
their valuable testimony and the Members for their questions.
In particular, I want to thank Mr. Lipinski for allowing the
Chairman of the overall Committee, Mr. Hall, to go out of
order.
The Members of the Subcommittee may have additional
questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to
those in writing. The record will remain open for two weeks for
additional comments from Members.
The witnesses are excused and this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:26 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 74730.133



