- ADVANCING COAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FOR A SECURE ENERGY FUTURE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADVANCING COAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
FOR A SECURE ENERGY FUTURE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
ENVIRONMENT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 13, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-45

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

70-591 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
Tennessee                        FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Energy and Environment

HON. ANDY HARRIS, Maryland, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               ZOE LOFGREN, California
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

October 13, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Andy Harris, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    16
Written Statement............................................    17

Statement by Representative Brad Miller, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    18
Written Statement............................................    20

Witnesses:

Mr. Scott Klara, Deputy Director, National Energy Technology
Laboratory
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    25

Ms. Janet Gellici, Chief Executive Officer, American Coal Council
Oral Statement...............................................    37
Written Statement............................................    38

Mr. Nick Akins, President, American Electric Power
Oral Statement...............................................    44
Written Statement............................................    46

Mr. David Foerter, Executive Director, Institute of Clean Air
Companies
Oral Statement...............................................    54
Written Statement............................................    57

Mr. Stu Dalton, Senior Government Representative-Generation,
Electric Power Research Institute
Oral Statement...............................................    62
Written Statement............................................    63

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Scott Klara, Deputy Director, National Energy Technology
Laboratory.....................................................    88

Ms. Janet Gellici, Chief Executive Officer, American Coal Council   107

Mr. Nick Akins, President, American Electric Power...............   110

Mr. David Foerter, Executive Director, Institute of Clean Air
Companies......................................................   112

Mr. Stu Dalton, Senior Government Representative-Generation,
Electric Power Research Institute..............................   117

ADVANCING COAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
FOR A SECURE ENERGY FUTURE

----------

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 13, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:22 p.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy
Harris [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. The Subcommittee on Energy and Environment
will come to order. Good afternoon. Welcome to today's hearing
entitled, ``Advancing Coal Research and Development for a
Secure Energy Future.'' In front of you are packets containing
the written testimony, biographies, and truth in testimony
disclosures for today's witness panel.
I now recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement.
I want to welcome everyone to this afternoon's hearing on,
``Advancing Coal Research and Development for a Secure Energy
Future.''
According to the Department of Energy, coal delivered 45
percent of America's electricity supply in 2010, totaling 22
quadrillion BTUs of energy. This output is expected to grow an
additional 25 percent by 2035. Dependence on coal is similar
outside the U.S., representing 40 percent of global electricity
generation.
Coal delivers plentiful, affordable, and reliable
electricity to millions of homes and businesses every day. It
provides power to the industrial and manufacturing sectors that
drive our economic engine. Rarely, however, has a beneficial,
life-improving resource upon which we depend so heavily been so
maligned.
Despite steadily improving efficiency and significantly
cleaner processes, coal suffers from a reputation that leads
many to think wrongly that we would be better off without it.
This animus seems to be at an all-time high. In recent
weeks, this Committee has spent considerable time examining the
pending onslaught of regulations aimed at energy producers but
particularly at coal energy producers. The review has
highlighted the immense challenges facing the coal sector in
light of EPA's dogged and scientifically questionable efforts
to order major changes to our electric generation system.
The widespread negative impact of EPA's forthcoming
regulations are acknowledged even at senior levels of the Obama
Administration. An analysis by the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission found that 40 gigawatts of coal-fired power
generation could be forced into retirement, and that ``could
have drastic consequences for many parts of the country.''
Similarly, DOE Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fossil Energy Jim
Wood has estimated that EPA rules could force up to 70
gigawatts of coal offline, adding:
``Number one, electric rates are going to go up. Number
two, whether or not construction jobs in the green industry are
created, I think there are virtually no manufacturing jobs that
are likely to be created from the replacement of coal. Three,
transmission grid stability is likely to emerge as a major
issue, both because of the shutdowns and because of the
intermittency of renewables.''
The impact of Administration policies on electricity prices
and coal plant shutdowns should come as no surprise. On the
campaign trail in 2008, then candidate Obama said openly and
clearly that his regulatory regime would bankrupt coal
companies and necessarily cause electricity prices to
skyrocket.
Fortunately, the President's wildly expensive vision for
cap and trade was also wildly unpopular with the American
people and, in fact, soundly rejected by Congress.
These concurrent events, the death of cap and trade and
EPA's bonanza of new air regulations, beg the fundamental
question before us at today's hearing. Does it make sense for
DOE to continue to focus its $400 million R&D effort almost
exclusively on carbon capture and sequestration, particularly
in light of the need for and potential of advanced technologies
to significantly increase coal utilization efficiency and thus
benefit the environment?
This exclusive focus certainly doesn't make sense to me.
Considering that DOE's goal is to find carbon capture and
sequestration technology that ``only'' increases electricity
costs by 30 percent, I have to question whether we should be
investing taxpayer dollars on a technology that likely never
will be commercially viable in the absence of carbon
constraints that Congress has already rejected. Perhaps instead
of exclusively pursuing what appears to be an expensive and
inefficient technology, we could facilitate the development of
technologies with greater thermal efficiency that could achieve
lower pollutant emissions.
To this end, I look forward to hearing witness
recommendations on potential coal technology R&D opportunities
that are not currently being addressed by DOE and how best to
prioritize those opportunities within the current budget
environment. I also hope to learn more about the status of,
outlook for, and lessons learned from the $3.4 billion in
Stimulus-funded coal sequestration, CO
2

sequestration demonstration projects.
I now yield back the balance of my time and recognize Mr.
Miller for his opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harris follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Andy Harris
I want to welcome everyone to this afternoon's hearing on Advancing
Coal Research and Development for a Secure Energy Future.
According to the Department of Energy, coal delivered 45 percent of
America's electricity supply in 2010, totaling 22 quadrillion BTUs
(``quads'') of energy. This output is expected to grow an additional 25
percent by 2035. Dependence on coal is similar outside the U.S.,
representing 40 percent of global electricity generation.
Coal delivers plentiful, affordable, and reliable electricity to
millions of homes and businesses every day. It provides power to the
industrial and manufacturing sectors that drive our economic engine.
Rarely, however, has a beneficial, life-improving resource upon which
we depend so heavily been so maligned.
Despite steadily improving efficiency and significantly cleaner
processes, coal suffers from a reputation that leads many to think--
wrongly--that we'd be better off without it.
This animus seems to be at an all-time high. In recent weeks, this
Committee has spent considerable time examining the pending onslaught
of regulations aimed at energy producers. The review has highlighted
the immense challenges facing the coal sector in light of EPA's
dogged--and scientifically questionable--efforts to order major changes
to the electric generation system.
The widespread negative impact of EPA's forthcoming regulations are
acknowledged even at senior levels of the Obama Administration. An
analysis by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) found that
40 gigawatts of coal-fired power generation could be forced into
retirement, and that ``could have drastic consequences for many parts
of the country.'' Similarly, DOE Deputy Assistant Secretary for Fossil
Energy Jim Wood has estimated that EPA rules could force up to 70
gigawatts of coal offline, adding:

``Number one, electric rates are going to go up. Number two,
whether or not construction jobs in the green industry are created, I
think there are virtually no manufacturing jobs that are likely to be
created from the replacement of coal. Three . . . transmission grid
stability is likely to emerge as a major issue, both because of the
shutdowns and because of the intermittency of renewables.''

The impact of Administration policies on electricity prices and
coal plant shutdowns should come as no surprise. On the campaign trail
in 2008, President Obama said openly and clearly that his regulatory
regime would bankrupt coal companies and necessarily cause electricity
prices to skyrocket.
Fortunately, the President's wildly expensive vision for cap-and-
trade was also wildly unpopular with the American people, and soundly
rejected by Congress.
These concurrent events--the death of cap and trade and EPA's
bonanza of new air regulations--beg the fundamental question before us
at today's hearing: does it make sense for DOE to continue focusing its
$400 million coal R&D effort almost exclusively on carbon capture and
sequestration (CCS), particularly in light of the need for, and
potential of, advanced technologies to significantly increase coal
utilization efficiency and benefit the environment?
This exclusive focus certainly doesn't make sense to me.
Considering that DOE's goal is to find CCS technology that ``only''
increases electricity costs by 30 percent, I have to question whether
we should be investing taxpayer dollars on a technology that likely
never will be commercially viable in the absence of carbon constraints
that Congress has already rejected. Perhaps instead of exclusively
pursuing what appears to be an expensive and inefficient technology, we
could facilitate the development of technologies with greater thermal
efficiency that could achieve lower pollutant emissions.
To this end, I look forward to hearing witness recommendations on
potential coal technology R&D opportunities that are not currently
being addressed by DOE, and how best to prioritize those opportunities
within the current budget environment. I also hope to learn more about
the status of, outlook for, and lessons learned from the $3.4 billion
in Stimulus-funded CCS demonstration projects.
I yield back the balance of my time and recognize Mr. Miller for
his opening statement.

Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In this Congress, my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle pound the drum on a
handful of themes they believe are consistent with conservative
dogma expressed in phrases like ``regulation kills jobs,''
``climate change is an unproven theory,'' ``government
shouldn't pick winners and losers.'' But, just repeating
something over and over does not really make it true. This
hearing gives us an opportunity to put a finer point on those
issues.
First, to have a stronger economy we do not have to
sacrifice cleaner air and a healthier and more productive
workforce. We will hear from Mr. Foerter--is that a correct
pronunciation--okay--the often-ignored perspective from the
side of the power industry that designs, manufactures, and
installs pollution control equipment.
Second, when it comes to DOE programs on emerging clean
energy technology: solar, geothermal, electric vehicle,
batteries, smart grid, efficient technologies, bio-based fuels,
and all the things that may one day make for a cleaner and more
sustainable energy economy, my Republican colleagues do not
hesitate to cry foul at any federal support that they consider
to be an inappropriate government intrusion into the energy
marketplace. To them these are mature industries in which free
market forces alone should push the frontiers of innovation,
and the Department of Energy investments in research just crowd
out what the private sector would otherwise do.
They say it is not the job of government to pick winners
and losers, and they say that government should never pick
winners and losers except sometimes. New renewable and
efficient technologies do not warrant government support, they
say, but conventional energy industries do. When it comes to
the most established and powerful industries in the world, the
same free market principles that my colleagues relentlessly
espouse apparently have no place.
More important I have some issues or some questions about
the manner in which this Committee conducts its hearings. We--
the reason we do these hearings, we have legislative hearings,
is to develop a factual record to support the decisions that
Congress has to make, and we need reliable, factual
information.
Last week my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
accused me of behaving inappropriately when I asked a witness
about his financial interests, the extent to which his income
was derived from the industry whose interests were at the
center of that hearing.
I ask those questions because that is the kind of
information that is necessary to evaluate anyone's testimony. I
think legislators should take a cue from the courts that have
for centuries recognized the importance of that information in
evaluating a witness's testimony. The questions I asked were
fundamental to our legal system, the federal rules of civil
procedure required that expert witnesses disclose any
compensation they get for their testimony not just in court but
outside of court. Those rules and principles are in place
because that information about financial interest is relevant
and essential to evaluating testimony and reaching a sound
decision.
Mr. Chairman, it is not accusing a witness of lying to say
they had a financial interest, but it may create a bias. It may
color how they see the world, how they see the facts, and we
are entitled to know that. We are entitled to know that as
Congress, and the American people are entitled to know that,
and this is an issue that I have raised from the first meeting
of this Committee. I raised questions about the financial
disclosure form, the truth in testimony form, and whether that
adequately discloses financial interest. Chairman Hall assured
me then that he would work with me. Mr. Rohrabacher, a Member
of this Subcommittee, said that I could use my five minutes of
questioning to raise those issues, and I said I would rather
use my five minutes to ask about the substance of witnesses'
testimony, not about their financial interest.
I later wrote a letter along with Ms. Edwards to Chairman
Hall about working with us on financial disclosures, and he
wrote back and said that upon reflection he decided that the
disclosures were perfectly fine, but I could use my five
minutes to ask about those financial interests. And then last
week I did, and leading the attack were Mr. Rohrabacher and Mr.
Hall, Chairman Hall, the very Members who had said I should use
my five minutes to inquire about witnesses' financial interest.
I do not plan today to ask those questions orally in my
five minutes, but I will submit questions for the record,
written questions afterwards, and in future hearings I may well
ask questions about financial interests in my five minutes
orally, but I intend to make it my practice to ask those
questions after the hearing in questions for the record.
And with that I yield back my time. It was one second when
I said that.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Brad Miller

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Miller. I will
just urge you to take a look at the witness list, and it is not
hard to figure out that if someone is the president of American
Electric Power, they are probably employed by them, and if
someone is from the American Coal Council which represents coal
producing companies, they are probably employed by them.
So with regards to this particular----
Mr. Miller. And----
Chairman Harris. Excuse me. With regards to this particular
panel I think it is pretty clear.
Mr. Miller. Perhaps with respect to this panel and that is
why I don't plan to ask questions, but we earlier had a witness
who listed his occupation as a professor at the University of
Houston. Upon questioning, his salary at the University of
Houston is $1 a year, and he makes $1 million a year as a
consultant to the very industries whose interests were at issue
in that hearing.
Chairman Harris. And again, I don't know about the past.
This panel it is pretty clear, and you know, as a physician,
you know, if somebody wants to know about obstetric anesthesia,
they are going to have to get someone, you know, they might
consult with me because you have to go to someone who actually
does it to be an expert on it as you can imagine. So a lot of
times it is pretty transparent, and I think it is pretty
transparent today.
But if you have any questions about that, of course, please
submit them, and thank you.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time I would like to introduce our witness panel.
Our first witness is Mr. Scott Klara, Deputy Director of the
National Energy Technology Laboratory. Mr. Klara has over 25
years of engineering and management experience that spans a
broad spectrum of technology areas including electric power
generation, advanced separation processes, coal conversion
processes, and simulation systems analysis.
Our second witness will be Ms. Janet Gellici, Chief
Executive Officer of the American Coal Council. Prior to her
work with the ACC she served as Communications Director of the
Colorado School of Mines Management Institute and is Public
Information Director of the Western Governors' Association.
Our third witness will be Mr. Nick Akins, President of
American Electric Power. From 2006 to 2010, he was Executive
Vice President for generation responsible for all generation
activities of AEP's approximately 40,000 megawatts of
Generation resources. Previously he was President and Chief
Operating Officer for Southwestern Electric Power Company,
serving 439,000 customers in Louisiana, Arkansas, and Northeast
Texas.
Next we have Mr. David Foerter, Executive Director,
Institute of Clean Air Companies. He has several decades of
experience advising the public and private sector on
environmental legislation, policy, rules, and technology issues
with a focus on air pollution control for stationary and mobile
sources. He is also currently a member of EPA's Clean Air Act
Advisory Committee and the Deputy of Commerce's Environmental
Technologies Trade Advisory Committee.
And our final witness today will be Mr. Stu Dalton, Senior
Government Representative for Generation of the Electric Power
Research Institute. He joined EPRI in 1976, focusing on
SO
2
control and later led this area for 20 years,
additionally working on integrated emission controls for NOx,
mercury, and particulates. Before joining EPRI Mr. Dalton
worked at Pacific Gas Electric evaluating new generation
options, coal gasification and conventional coal, refuse
biomass firing, and NOx control refits--retrofits.
Thank you all for appearing before the subcommittee today.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited to
five minutes each, after which Members of the Committee will
have five minutes each to ask questions, but we do have your
complete written testimony in front of us.
With that I now recognize our first witness, Mr. Scott
Klara, Deputy Director of the National Energy Technology
Laboratory.

STATEMENT OF MR. SCOTT KLARA, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, NATIONAL ENERGY
TECHNOLOGY LABORATORY

Mr. Klara. Thank you, Chairman Harris and Members of the
Subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the
Department of Energy's coal research and development
activities.
DOE continues to play a leadership role in the development
of clean coal technologies. The Clean Coal Research Program is
designed to enhance our energy security and reduce
environmental concerns over the future use of coal by
developing a portfolio of revolutionary clean coal
technologies.
The Clean Coal Program in partnership with the private
sector is focusing--focused on maximizing efficiency in
environmental performance while minimizing the cost of these
new technologies. In recent years the program has been
restructured to focus on clean coal technologies with carbon
capture and storage. The program pursues the following two
strategies. The first strategy is capturing and storing
greenhouse gases, while the second strategy is improving the
efficiency of fossil energy systems.
The first strategy aims to eliminate the concerns over the
emissions of greenhouse gases from fossil-fueled energy
systems. The second strategy seeks to improve the fuel-to-
energy efficiency of these systems, thus reducing the pollutant
emissions, water usage, and carbon emissions on a per-unit
energy basis. Collectively, these two strategies form the Clean
Coal Program within the Department of Energy.
More specifically, the Clean Coal Program is addressing the
key technical challenges that confront the development and
deployment of these technologies through research on such
things as cost-effective capture technologies, monitoring
verification and accounting technologies to ensure permanent
storage, permitting issues, and the development of advanced
energy system. Research is focused on technology options, for
example, that dramatically lower the cost of capturing carbon
dioxide from these fossil-fueled energy systems. This research
can be categorized into three pathways: what we call post-
combustion, which is pretty much standard PC technology, pre-
combustion, which is emerging gasification technology, and oxy-
combustion.
Another facet of the Clean Coal Program is the regional
carbon sequestration partnerships that were created in 2003.
The partnerships were designed to address a range of issues
associated with the geologic storage of carbon dioxide. The
Clean Coal Program has been performing capture and storage
field tests focused on things like monitoring verification,
accounting, and other aspects of geologic storage for many
years. And the seven regional carbon sequestration partnerships
are critical to this effort. These partnerships represent more
than 400 unique organizations in 43 states and four Canadian
provinces. Together the partnerships form a network of
capability, knowledge, and infrastructure that we believe will
help enable geologic storage technology to play a role in
future energy strategies.
These partnerships represent regions encompassing 97
percent of coal-fired CO
2
emissions, 97 percent of
industrial CO
2
emissions, 96 percent of the total
land mass of the United States, and essentially all the
geologic storage sites which could be potentially available for
geologic storage.
The success of the Coal Program also hinges upon whether
these technologies get deployed, and what we use for that is
we--the Clean Coal Program relies on commercial scale
demonstrations to help industry understand and overcome
technology issues such as start up, component integration,
early learning, commercial experience, et cetera, and some of
the panelists here have experience working with us in these
various programs.
Another aspect, important aspect of the Clean Coal Program
is what we call CO
2
utilization. The program
recognizes that technologies such as mineralization, chemical
conversion to useful products, algae production, enhanced oil
recovery, and enhanced coalbed methane recovery could play an
important role in pushing the technologies forward.
Other than enhanced oil recovery, the CO
2

reduction potential of these technologies is often limited due
to such factors as cost and market saturation of salable
byproducts, but even so these approaches are logical first-
entry candidates for validating this emerging technology.
So in conclusion, today nearly three out of every four
coal-burning power plant in this country is equipped with
technologies that can trace its roots back to the DOE Program.
For example, NO
X
control, SO
X
control,
particulate matter control and mercury control as we go
forward. These efforts helped accelerate the production of
these cost-effective compliance options to address these legacy
environmental issues associated with coal use.
Additionally, as I mentioned, these utilization
technologies are logical first market entry candidates to help
get the technology commercially ready. Enhanced oil recovery
particularly of the CO
2
utilization options will be
the dominant option into the near future and has a lot of
potential as I have indicated in my testimony.
I applaud the efforts of this Committee and the Members to
take on these important industry--these important issues and
look forward to responding to questions when we get to the Q
and A. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Klara follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Scott Klara, Deputy Director, National Energy
Technology Laboratory

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Klara.
I now recognize our second witness, Ms. Janet Gellici,
Chief Executive Officer of American Coal Council, and I just
ask you to take just 15 seconds to describe the American Coal
Council so that Mr. Miller understands where you are coming
from.
Ms. Gellici. Sure.
Chairman Harris. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF MS. JANET GELLICI, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
AMERICAN COAL COUNCIL

Ms. Gellici. Thank you. My name is Janet Gellici. I am CEO
of the American Coal Council. The ACC represents coal industry
interests from the hole in the ground to the plug in the wall,
so we represent companies that include coal producers,
transporters, and consumers of coal.
I would like to frame my remarks today based on two facts.
First, we have more coal in the United States than any other
country in the world, which means we have access to a 200-year
supply of affordable, reliable domestic energy.
Second, we have some of the most admirable and lofty
environmental goals of any nation on this planet. There are two
facts here. They are not at odds. It is not a matter of picking
one over the other. What we need is to bridge these two facts,
and that bridge is technology. Other nations are investing
heavily in building cleaner coal plants and in increasing their
use of coal resources. Here in the United States 44 percent of
our electricity comes from coal, but rather than upgrading
existing plants or building new clean ones, U.S. utilities are
planning to shut down their coal plants.
Projected retirements are now on the order of 50 to 100
gigawatts, representing 15 to 30 percent of our current coal
generation. These retirements are due in large part to an
inability to meet environmental regulatory requirements. They
will likely result in higher costs to consumers and
manufacturers and the potential to lead to generation
shortfalls.
So we are imposing more environmental regulations on coal
consumers, but we seem unwilling to commit the resources needed
to actually achieve those objectives. There is an interesting
conundrum going on here. Over the past few years our efforts to
enact environmental regulations have actually been hampered by
the lack of viable technology. The development and
commercialization of technologies will actually help us
facilitate environmental rulemaking.
You know, if we were to set down rules for our kids and did
not provide them with the time, training, and tools to follow
those rules, we would be called bad parents. Imposing
regulatory objectives without providing the time, training, and
technologies to meet them is just bad governance.
The good news is that we do have a history of success in
meeting environmental objectives through RD&D efforts. We have
installed advanced emission controls on 75 percent of U.S. coal
plants and achieved an average of 90 percent reduction in
criteria pollutant emissions. The National Academy of Sciences
reports that federally-funded RD&D provides a public benefit
that well exceeds the cost of RD&D, including much needed job
creation.
We need to focus our RD&D coal efforts going forward in
four areas: advanced energy systems, carbon capture and
storage, water use technologies, and demonstration projects. I
have addressed these in detail in my written testimony but
would like to highlight a few points.
Advanced energy systems can increase the thermal efficiency
of power plants from today's average of 33 percent up to 40
percent or more, and with each two percent increase in
efficiency we can reduce the cost--we can reduce fuel use and
CO
2
emissions by five percent. So more R&D will
obviously advance technologies that can help us achieve these
levels of efficiency in environmental gains, and this can be
done both at existing plants and at new power plants. In fact,
I believe we can extend the life of our current low-cost power
plants in ways that are economic and environmentally sound.
One way to do that is through the use of engineered coal
fuels. These are technologies that can be applied prior to
combustion that clean coal. They help remove pollutants, and
they improve the heat rate of coal so we don't have to burn as
much.
Now, I understand that given the uncertainty in Congress
right now that there will be any climate legislation passed in
the near future, it might be tempting to curtail funding for
carbon capture and storage. The reality is that while
greenhouse gas legislation may not be eminent, greenhouse gas
regulation is proceeding, and we need the technologies to meet
those long-term needs.
To be successful RD&D funding needs to be stable and
consistent. Curtailing CCS program technologies could have
potentially negative gains, could negate the gains that we have
had up to this point in time.
I get at least three to four calls a month from inventors
and entrepreneurs who think they have the be-all solution to
reducing CO
2
emissions and coal plant emissions, and
I don't know where to send these people. I suggest they go to
DOE or NETL, and they tell me they have already done that.
There is no interest there, there is no money, and they are
probably not all viable technologies, but I often hang up the
phone wondering if I have just hung up the phone on the next
inventor of penicillin for the global warming issues.
So we have a lot of coal, we have admirable environmental
goals, and I think we have a lot of innovators out there ready
to shine. I don't think the responsibility for effective
regulation ends once we publish the rule in the Federal
Register.
So I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gellici follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ms. Janet Gellici, Chief Executive Officer,
American Coal Council

Introduction

This statement is submitted on behalf of the American Coal Council
(ACC), a trade association dedicated to advancing the development and
utilization of American coal as an economic, abundant, secure and
environmentally sound fuel source. The ACC
(www.americancoalcouncil.org) represents the interests of 170 U.S. coal
suppliers, coal consumers and coal transportation companies. We
represent the coal industry from the hole in the ground to the plug in
the wall. The ACC welcomes the opportunity to present a perspective on
how to advance coal research and development to ensure our nation's
energy needs are met in an economic and environmentally sound manner.

Coal is Vital to U.S. Economy

Our nation's domestic coal resources are critical to our economic
well being, to ensuring our energy reliability and security, and to
meeting our environmental goals. Today, coal generates nearly 44% of
our nation's electric power; 36 states obtain at least 25% of their
electricity from coal and 26 states obtain at least 45% of their
electricity from coal. The Energy Information Administration (EIA)
forecasts that U.S. coal generation will increase by 25% between 2009
and 2035, with coal's share of the total generation mix remaining
steady at 43% in 2035. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Energy Information Administration, Annual Energy Outlook
2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
U.S. coal provides low-cost electric power and price stability
compared with other fuel resources. Between 2000 and 2009, natural gas
prices ranged from $3.10/million Btu (mm Btu) to $12.41/mm Btu. During
that same time period, coal never exceeded $2.28/mm Btu. Those states
that rely on coal for a majority of their electric power are the states
that have the lowest cost of electricity for their residents and
industries.
High energy costs disproportionately impact low income and fixed
income families. In 2001, the 50% of U.S. households making less than
$50,000/year spent an average of 12% of their after tax income on
energy costs. Today, those families are now spending 20% of their
household income on energy expenses. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Eugene M. Trisko, Esq. for American Coalition for Clean Coal
Electricity, January 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Industrial consumers are more likely to be price responsive than
any other customer group. There is a strong correlation between the
cost of electricity and the number of manufacturing jobs in the United
States. Between 2000 and 2008, industrial electric prices increased
from 4.6 cents/kWh to 7.2 cents/kWh. Over that same time period,
manufacturing jobs decreased from 17.3 million to 13.4 million. \3\
Low-cost electricity directly contributes to the competitiveness of
America in international markets.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Shively & Ferrare 2008 Enerdynamics.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Studies show that new coal plants create more construction and
permanent employment jobs than any other electric generation options.
Coal jobs created per billion dollars invested equal 9,166, versus
7,640 for natural gas and 1,053 for wind generation. One recent study
details the prospective loss of 1.24 million jobs as a result of new
coal power plants NOT being built. The National Mining Association
report details how the Sierra Club's ``Beyond Coal'' campaign has
targeted for destruction 116,872 permanent jobs and an additional 1.12
million construction jobs represented by the proposed power plants that
have been prevented from being built. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\  Energy Ventures Analysis, ``Employment Impacts Associated with
Electric Generation Options'' for National Mining Association,
September 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The U.S. has 29% of the world's recoverable coal reserves--more
than any other nation. Our nation has a 200 year supply of coal at
current annual production rates of about one billion tons. Globally,
coal is the fastest growing fuel source. World coal consumption is
projected to increase 50% from 139 quadrillion BTUs in 2008 to 209
quadrillion BTUs in 2035. U.S. coal suppliers expect to take a greater
role in international markets, welcoming the opportunity to contribute
to improvements in our nation's balance of trade. In 2010, U.S. coal
exports were up 36%, from 60 million tons in 2009 to 81 million tons in
2010. The forecast for 2011 coal exports is in the range of 100-105
million tons. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Cloud Peak Energy presentation, ACC Coal Market Strategies
Conference, August 23, 2011 & Fitch Ratings, U.S. Coal Producers
Outlook, August 17, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The growing demand for clean energy technologies for the world's
emerging economies will also provide U.S. technology transfer and
export opportunities if we are willing to invest now in clean coal
technology research development and deployment (RD&D). While other
nations are increasing their use of coal resources and their
installation of clean coal power plants, U.S. utilities are shutting
down their coal facilities. Currently, 23 GW of coal power generation
is slated to be shuttered in the next decade. Projected retirements are
on the order of 56-101 GW, representing 15-30% of current coal power
generation capacity. These retirements are due primarily to an
inability to meet environmental regulatory requirements at reasonable
costs within acceptable rate structures, as well as to economic demand
destruction, aging fleet attrition and competition from natural gas
fuels.
Meeting national environmental objectives continues to be coal's
greatest challenge, a challenge that has been in the past and can be in
the future addressed with technology applications. Significant progress
has been made over the past 3-4 decades to reduce air emissions. Since
1970, coal use has increased 183% while criteria pollutant emissions
have decreased 90% on average, including NO
x
reductions of
82%, SO
2
reductions of 88% and PM10 reductions of 96%. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ ``Benefits from Investments in Advanced Coal Technology,'' Coal
Utilization Research Council, National Mining Association, Edison
Electric Institute, et. al. fact sheet attached hereto.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The U.S. cannot achieve its economic, energy security and
environmental objectives without coal and the advancement of clean coal
technologies.

Opportunities to Advance the Use of Coal

The benefits of clean coal technology include cleaner air, reduced
pollution, increased energy efficiency, support for U.S. manufacturing,
increased U.S. exports, enhanced national security and job creation.
The role of the Federal government in RD&D is to develop technology
options that can benefit the public good. The U.S. Department of
Energy's Fossil Energy group carries out high-risk, high-value RD&D
that can:

Accelerate the development of new energy technologies
beyond the pace that would otherwise be dictated by normal market or
regulatory forces.

Expand the slate of beneficial energy options beyond
those likely to be developed by the private sector on its own.

Produce revolutionary ``breakthrough'' technologies that
achieve environmental, efficiency and/or cost goals well beyond those
currently pursued by the private sector.

Federally funded RD&D provides public benefits in excess of the
cost of RD&D. A National Academy of Sciences report noted that the
economic benefits in real dollars provided by Fossil Energy research
between 1986 and 2000 equaled $7.4 billion versus an investment by DOE
of $4.5 billion. \8\ The study noted that 600,000 jobs were created in
the U.S. power equipment industry, resulting from the more than 700
patents awarded through the Fossil Energy research program. Between
2000 and 2020, investments in coal RD&D are expected to create nearly
1.2 million jobs, with an average of 60,000 jobs created on an annual
basis. \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ National Academy of Sciences, ``Energy Research at DOE, Was It
Worth It? Energy Efficiency and Fossil Energy Research 1978 to 2000.''
2001.
\9\ ``Benefits of Investments in Clean Coal Technology'' Management
Information Services Inc., October 2009. Prepared on behalf of The
American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DOE's clean coal technology programs have resulted in over 30
successfully completed projects; more than 20 of the technologies have
achieved commercial success, including the installation of advanced
pollution controls on 75% of U.S. coal plants at one-half to one-tenth
the cost of older systems. A detailed overview of DOE Fossil Energy
RD&D technology achievements since the 1970s is attached. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ ``Benefits from Investments in Advanced Coal Technology''-
Fact Sheet Coal Utilization Research Council, et. al.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the success of the Fossil Energy RD&D program in terms of
economic and environmental benefits realized, it is disturbing that
investments in clean coal technology are not supported at levels
commensurate with other energy resources. A recent study by the U.S.
Energy Information Administration (EIA) estimated the value of federal
support for direct expenditures, tax expenditures, R&D funding, and
loans and loan guarantees for various energy resources. It noted that
in FY2010, renewable energy resources, which produce less than 5% of
U.S. power generation, received 45% of Federal electricity production
incentives. Coal, which produced 46% of U.S. electricity in 2010,
received just 10% of Federal electricity production incentives. \11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ ``Direct Federal Financial Interventions and Subsidizes in
Energy in FY2010'' U.S. Energy Information Administration, July 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During the past several years, the primary focus of DOE's coal RD&D
program has been on Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS). The coal industry
supports continued RD&D in this area. The U.S., however, faces
additional energy and environmental challenges that would benefit from
collaborative coal RD&D by the government and private sector. These
challenges are more immediate than CCS.
There needs to be a greater balance between support for CCS
initiatives and those for other coal RD&D projects that can advance
coal generation efficiency and enhance environmental compliance.
Our environmental rulemaking and legislative efforts of the past
few years have been hampered, in part, by the lack of economic,
commercial and technologically viable solutions. Environmental
regulations need to be supported by technologies that enable industry
to meet target objectives in a timely and economic manner. The
development of viable technologies will facilitate the establishment of
regulations to help us achieve our environmental objectives.
Regulations and technology development go hand in hand.
It is counterproductive to decrease Federal investment in coal RD&D
at a time when our nation needs low-cost electricity to support our
citizens and industries, at a time when we need all available means to
increase the competitiveness of America's goods in the international
marketplace and at a time when the security of domestic energy sources
is a high priority.
Current programs should be maintained and additional resources
appropriated to ensure utility and industrial compliance with both an
increasing number of environmental regulations and increasingly strict
targets for environmental objectives. We continue to impose more
environmental regulations on coal consumers but seem unwilling to
commit more resources to actually achieving those objectives. This is
akin to setting ground rules for our children but not providing them
with the tools and training to be able to obey the rules we set.
Why are we so amazed that coal generators are shutting down their
power plants because they can't meet environmental objectives? Why are
some folks gleeful about that? Where is the satisfaction in having our
nation's largest electric power providers shut their doors, stop
producing low-cost electricity, fire their employees, and still not
reach our environmental objectives?
There can be only one conclusion--that the real objective is not to
reduce emissions--that we are really not concerned with meeting
environmental objectives. It would appear that other agendas are in
play here, agendas to eliminate coal generation from our energy
portfolio simply because it is based on coal.
DOE's recently released Quadrennial Technology Review (QTR) notes
that the U.S. needs to be a leader in the development of a clean energy
economy and that ``our challenge is to provide electric power in
environmentally responsible ways that strengthen U.S. competitiveness
and protect the climate.'' These objectives can clearly be met through
the use of our nation's vast domestic coal resources in conjunction
with the advancement of clean coal technologies.
DOE has a proven track record of facilitating the development of
clean coal technologies that are cost-effectively reducing emissions
today and hold much promise for continuing to yield similar stellar
results in the future. Going forward, we need to focus our RD&D efforts
on:

Carbon Capture and Storage

Advanced Energy Systems

Engineered Coal Fuels

Water Use Technologies

Clean Coal Power Initiative Demonstration Projects

Coal RD&D Priorities

From an historical perspective, DOE's early clean coal technology
programs focused on advancing technologies that would achieve
reductions in criteria pollutants regulated under the Clean Air Act
(CAA) and Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA), including SO
2
,
NO
x
and particulate matter. Following many years of RD&D,
much success was achieved in reducing these emissions.
We should keep in mind that it was only a few short years ago when
the pendulum of DOE funding swung toward advancing carbon management
technologies. This was in response to the anticipation of legislation
and regulations for greenhouse gas (GHG) management and to the
increasing international focus on reducing CO
2
. GHG
regulations are proceeding and so should these technology development
efforts--even though U.S. GHG legislation is not imminent.
It takes substantial time to develop and deploy new technologies--
on the order of 10-20 years. We should anticipate a continued need for
CO
2
management technologies and stay the course. It is
difficult to turn technology development initiatives off and on and
still make cost-effective progress. If we shutter CCS or the Clean Coal
Power Initiative (CCPI) efforts today and decide in a few years to
resurrect them, we will be faced with the prospect of starting all over
again at ground zero, negating any earlier gains.
To be successful, RD&D funding needs to be stable and continuous. A
funding interruption or extreme swings of the funding pendulum are an
inefficient use of Federal funds.
We should avoid the knee jerk impulse to pull back CCS technology
development efforts as we refocus on addressing more near-term
regulations for energy efficiency improvements and compliance with
stricter criteria emissions targets. We should also keep in mind that
CCS stands for ``carbon capture and storage'' not ``coal capture and
storage.'' Development of CCS technologies is not a coal-only program.
Our fossil energy colleagues in the natural gas industry will
ultimately benefit from CCS developments as well.
Carbon Capture & Storage Priorities - Given the current uncertainty
that Congress will pass climate legislation in the near term, it would
seem easy to dismiss RD&D funding for CCS. In reality, however, the
U.S. EPA is regulating GHG emissions and industry is currently being
tasked with meeting compliance objectives for CO
2
reduction.
It is, therefore, imperative that RD&D funding support continue. A ``no
regrets'' approach to advancing technologies for carbon capture, carbon
storage and carbon utilization today, will ensure that industry can
meet current EPA regulations as well as prospective future legislation.
This longer-term technology need must, however, be balanced with
RD&D funds to pursue more immediate and near-term environmental
objectives with advanced energy technologies. While much work has been
done in this area and ASTM code certification is certainly needed to
advance commercialization, there still remains opportunities for
advances in monitoring and control technologies for advance combustion
systems. These technologies can help us produce coal-based electricity
more cleanly and more cost effectively. They also have the added
collateral benefit of reducing CO
2
when integrated with CCS
applications. Additionally, there may be broader applications for high-
temperature, high-pressure materials outside of coal generation, e.g.,
in the aircraft industry.
Advanced Energy Systems Priorities- Advanced technologies are
needed to enhance the thermal efficiency of power plants, which today
operate at an average efficiency of about 33%. Power engineers can
replace our aging coal plants with new clean plants exceeding 40%
thermal efficiency. This can be achieved in two ways:

1.  Advances in energy systems for new plants including:

The development and application of high-pressure,
high-temperature materials in boilers and steam turbines for new
supercritical and ultra-supercritical power plants. These high
performance materials would enhance the efficiency of power plants and
reduce emissions of criteria pollutants and GHG emissions.

Oxy-firing systems that replace combustion air in coal
power plants with pure oxygen to greatly reduce emissions.

Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) systems
which advance efforts to capture carbon.

Advanced turbine systems that can enhance plant
efficiency and help meet the demands of IGCC plants with high levels of
CO
2
capture.

Fuel conversion systems that facilitate the production
of liquid transportation fuels from coal and biomass.

2.  Efficiency upgrades and heat rate improvements for both
existing and new plants. New Source Review (NSR) constraints have
curtailed efforts to achieve efficiency improvements. A leading
combustion systems engineer, Richard Storm, PE, CEO, Storm Technologies
notes that we can achieve a 3-5% efficiency improvement at existing
plants by upgrading turbine rotors, installing new high capacity boiler
feed pumps and higher efficiency air heaters and ductwork, and by
upgrading boilers, condensers and feed water heaters. \12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Richard F. Storm, ``What can be done to improve the Thermal
Performance of the existing coal fleet?'', EPRI Heat Rate Conference,
January 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Storm notes that operations and maintenance improvements could
potentially increase heat rates up to 750 Btu/kWh and achieve fuel
savings of $2 million or more. Payback on a $5 million investment would
take two years. Capital projects that have a potential to trigger NSR
are deemed by industry to be very risky. Better clarity, and
potentially guarantees, are needed on what upgrades will not trigger
NSR.
Also of note is that capital investments to improve thermal
efficiency often compete with non-optional investments for
environmental compliance and other energy projects that offer high
returns on investment. While not a direct DOE RD&D funding need
consideration, these operations and maintenance improvements can
provide interim compliance with environmental requirements as we work
toward longer term solutions. Efficiency gains in the existing coal
power generation fleet can offset significant amounts of
CO
2
, setting a more achievable bar for us to overcome with
advanced technologies.
Engineered Coal Fuels Priorities- DOE's National Energy Technology
Laboratory (NETL) has noted that `` . . . increasing the average
efficiency [of power plants] from 32.5% to 36% reduces U.S. greenhouse
gases by 175 MMmt/year, or 2.5% of total U.S. GHG emissions in 2008.''
\13\ At NETL's February 2010 Technical Workshop (``Improving the
Thermal Efficiency of Coal-fired Power Plants in the United States''),
industry and government representatives identified more than 50
opportunities to improve thermal efficiency. One of these opportunities
included the ``use of low-grade heat for coal drying''--an example of
numerous Engineered Coal Fuels technologies available or under
development today to improve heat rate, advance power plant efficiency
and reduce emissions with prior-to-combustion treatments of coal.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ ``Improving the Efficiency of Coal-fired Power Plants for Near
Term Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions.'' DOE/National Energy
Technology Laboratory, April 16, 2010, DOE/NETL-2010/1411.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Engineered Coal Fuels (ECF) provide an opportunity to extend the
life of existing low-cost power plants in an economic, environmentally
sound manner. Given the current state of our economy and waning
competitive position in world markets, now is not the time to be
shuttering low-cost power plants. As noted earlier, low-cost
electricity supports domestic industries and manufacturing jobs,
advances the competitiveness of the U.S. in international markets and
provides for the well being of our nation's citizens.
ECFs treat and enhance coal prior to combustion, resulting in the
following benefits:

Reduced Fuel Consumption - increasing energy content by
30% results in less coal used.

Decreased Emissions of Criteria Pollutants - reductions
of SO
2
(10-80%), NO
x
(10-50%) and mercury (15-
99%).

GHG Reductions - increasing combustion efficiency by 2-4%
results is a 5-10% reduction in CO
2
emissions.

Increased Capacity - increased power output and improved
heat rate enable higher capacity utilization and efficiency at the
point of combustion.

ECFs represent low capital cost investments for utility and
industrial companies--an operations and maintenance expense versus an
intensive capital investment. Stricter pending regulations on
SO
2
, NO
x
, PM, mercury and HAPs are driving the
need for some of these more near-term solutions. There is a vital role
here for government to take assisting with the deployment of these
technologies through testing and evaluation. This type of a role for
government dovetails with the following recommendation from the QTR:

``The Department [of Energy] needs a professional group that
can integrate the major functions of technology assessment and cost
analysis, program planning and evaluation, economic impact assessments,
industry studies, and energy and technology policy analysis.''

A facility with the capability to test a broad range of
temperature, pressures, coals and methods would provide an opportunity
for companies that have developed advanced combustion systems and
engineered coal fuels technologies to verify the benefits and economics
of their solutions. It would provide an objective, third party
evaluation that would benefit all stakeholders, including industry,
policy makers and the environmental community.
In the case of Engineered Coal Fuels, we should also undertake RD&D
of coal/biomass fuels that can be used in the existing coal generation
fleet without significant power plant modification. DOE has committed
to fund coal/biomass development of coal gasification applications.
Extending the application to the existing coal fleet for purposes of
advancing coal/biomass applications would provide a near-term solution
to meeting environmental regulations.
Water Priorities- Water RD&D is critical for all energy
technologies, not just coal but nuclear, solar and natural gas as well.
We need to devote RD&D funding into technologies that can help us
reduce water consumption and increase reuse of water discharge.
A sole focus on basic engineering research will not advance
commercial technology to the marketplace. The CCPI demonstration
program needs to be continued and adequately funded. Previous lack of
funding for demonstration projects resulted in what has become well
known as ``The Valley of Doom''--a future in which no new coal
generation facilities are being planned to be built in the U.S.
Clean Coal Power Initiative (CCPI) Priorities- The Administration
has not requested funding for large-scale demonstration projects for
three years now. Demonstration programs are critical for the
commercialization of advanced coal, Engineered Coal Fuels and CCS
technologies, including the FutureGen project which has received
funding through the Recovery Act.
DOE's proposal to increase the use of computer modeling has
benefits in terms of reducing the amount of time and money to develop,
demonstrate and deploy new technologies. But at some point, we need to
build something to see how it actually works in real life. Modeling
cannot replace the value of practical demonstrations. Demonstration
projects validate the reality of technology applications and confer a
higher level of understanding, knowledge and acceptance of new
technologies. Computational modeling should be supported only to the
extent that it does not come at the expense of funding other RD&D and
demonstration activities.
Additionally, the $187 million rescinded from the AEP Mountaineer
Project should be reallocated for future demonstration projects.
Going forward, RD&D funding should focus on advancing higher
efficiency technologies, reducing capital costs associated with these
advanced technologies and increasing the commercial availability of
technology solutions. These efforts will help us achieve greater
reductions in criteria pollutants, as well as CO
2
and other
greenhouse gases.

Appended Materials:

``Benefits from Investments in Advanced Coal Technology''
- Fact Sheet Coal Utilization Research Council, et. al. http://
www.coal.org/userfiles/file/
FINAL%20Benefits%20of%20Investment%20in%20Coal%20RD&D.pdf

``Retrofit Programs Increase Generation Efficiency and
Decrease CO
2
Emissions'' - National Coal Council Fact Sheet.
http://www.nationalcoalcouncil.org/Documents/Advanced--Coal--
Technologies.pdf

``Engineered Coal Fuels Fact Sheet'' - American Coal
Council http://www.americancoalcouncil.org/associations/10586/files/
pre-combustion--Apr--2011.pdf

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize our third witness, Mr. Nick Akins,
President of American Electric Power.

STATEMENT OF MR. NICK AKINS, PRESIDENT,

AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER

Mr. Akins. Good afternoon, Chairman Harris, Ranking Member
Miller, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee on Energy
and Environment. Thank you for inviting me here today and for
this opportunity to offer the views of AEP on advancing
research and development for a secure energy future.
We applaud your efforts to examine DOE coal research and
development activities to ensure that coal fuel generation
remains an important part of this Nation's energy mix. AEP has
a long track record of accomplishments with the demonstration
of cutting-edge technologies.
In May of this year AEP successfully concluded a
demonstration of the world's first integrated CO
2

capture and storage project at an existing coal-fired power
plant using Alstom's chilled ammonia process, a 20 megawatt
scale carbon capture and storage project captured and
permanently sequestered nearly 40,000 tons of CO
2
in
deep saline reservoirs from our Mountaineer Power Station in
West Virginia. That was such an important accomplishment that
AEP has hosted visitors in the thousands from every continent
around the globe.
AEP also teamed with DOE to demonstrate the same
technologies at commercial scale. While funding challenges
caused the project to be suspended following the first project
phase, we now have the engineering design for a carbon capture
and storage facility that includes extensive geologic
characterization and a solid cost estimate. Robust and
affordable choices for CCS will not be available in the market
if the technology is not demonstrated. We believe DOE should be
bolstered in their efforts to develop viable and affordable
technology solutions.
AEP's Turk Power Plant in Southwest Arkansas represents
America's first deployment of ultra-supercritical technology, a
new high-efficiency design that uses less fuel to produce each
megawatt hour of electricity. This plant will go commercial in
mid 2012, and will result in a substantial performance
improvement over today's conventional sub-critical design. The
Turk Plant's efficiency is more than 11 percent greater than
the typical sub-critical coal power plant. Other advanced
technologies deployed at Turk will compound the benefits of
higher efficiency resulting in significantly lower emissions.
This is another case of advanced technology making coal
usage cleaner and more efficient. AEP has also completed front
end engineering designs for Integrated Gasification Combined
Cycle, IGCC technologies, as well.
The above examples illustrate that my company stands firmly
behind technology advancement. The DOE has shown its
effectiveness in advancing technology to commercial readiness,
and AEP's recent partnership with DOE resulted in meaningful
and important knowledge. In fact, some of DOE's project
management processes have been so effective that AEP has
adopted them on other major projects. This has truly been a
collaborative relationship.
Of greatest concern to me as I consider leading AEP through
unprecedented challenges is the recent regulatory actions of
the EPA. We strongly support the Clean Air Act and continued
reduction emissions from our power plants, however, AEP
believes that the current regulatory track being pursued by the
EPA will have damaging impacts on the reliability of our
Nation's electric system as well as broad or negative
employment and economic implications. Together CSAPR, the
Utility MACT, Clean Air Visibility Rule, Coal Combustion
Residuals Rule, and Cooling Water Intake Structures Rule will
require very large capital investments on a timeline that can
only be described as unrealistic.
Among AEP's most pressing concerns include infeasible
compliance deadlines, unprecedented capital expenditures,
abrupt and significant power plant retirements, electric grid
reliability problems, and very high electricity rate increases.
We believe that a more reasonable approach to energy and
environmental policy is needed and is discussed in greater
detail in my written testimony.
DOE is in a unique position to be a part of the solution
and should serve as a trusted advisor to the EPA in the
rulemaking process. They have the well-informed authority to
evaluate the electric power generation system and grid
stability and security risks and can assess the timelines
needed to deploy technology at the broad scale required under
EPA's Program.
In summary, continued research, development, and
demonstration must be supported and is essential to solving the
complex problems of energy security, climate change, and
environmental compliance. We must do more than simply call for
it. Private industry must complete their commercial plant
demonstrations, and our country must devote adequate financial
and technological resources to this enormous challenge. AEP is
committed to being a part of this important process and helping
achieve the best outcome at the most reasonable cost and
timelines possible.
Thank you again for this opportunity to share these views
with you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Akins follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Nicholas K. Akins,
President, American Electric Power
Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, and distinguished Members
of the Subcommittee on Energy and Environment of the House Science,
Space and Technology Committee, thank you for inviting me here today. I
appreciate this opportunity to offer the views of American Electric
Power (AEP) on advancing coal research and development for a secure
energy future.
My name is Nick Akins, and I am the President of American Electric
Power. Headquartered in Columbus, Ohio, we are one of the nation's
largest electricity generators--with more than 38,000 megawatts (MW) of
generating capacity--and serve more than five million retail consumers
in 11 states in the Midwest and South Central regions of our nation.
AEP's generating fleet employs diverse fuel sources--including coal,
nuclear, hydroelectric, natural gas, oil, and wind power. But of
particular importance for the Committee Members here today, AEP is the
largest consumer of coal in the United States and, as a result, our
company is an industry leader in developing advanced coal-fueled
electrical generation and emission reduction technologies, including
carbon capture and storage (CCS) and ultra-supercritical pulverized
coal (USCPC) technology.
I am here today to discuss AEP's experience with our CCS projects
and the development of the USCPC technology through the construction of
the J.W. Turk Plant. In addition, I will highlight the near term
challenges to new technology development associated with the recently-
announced EPA regulations.

AEP'S LEADERSHIP IN TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT

AEP has a long and proud history as a leader in our industry for
the development and deployment of new technologies. The first high- and
extra-high voltage transmission lines at 345 kilovolt (kV) and 765 kV
were developed by AEP and serve as the framework for our interstate
transmission system. AEP was among the first to develop large central
station power plants and to deploy more efficient supercritical
generating technologies. AEP recently celebrated its centennial by
reflecting on its century of firsts.
Most recently, we have built upon this history of innovation by
focusing our efforts on new clean coal technologies. These technologies
will enable AEP and our industry to meet the challenge of reducing
greenhouse gas emissions while optimizing the use of our nation's
plentiful indigenous coal resources. As concepts for effective CCS from
coal-fueled facilities are being talked about and debated around the
globe, AEP has been on the cutting edge with an aggressive plan to
commercialize advanced CCS technology. With the announcement of its
successful completion in May of this year, AEP demonstrated the world's
first integrated CO
2
capture and storage project at an
existing coal-fired power plant. Based on Alstom's chilled ammonia
process, a 20-MW-scale CCS product validation facility at our 1,300-
megawatt Mountaineer Power Plant in New Haven, West Virginia
permanently sequestered nearly 40,000 tonnes of CO
2
in deep
saline reservoirs located 1.5 miles beneath the surface. Just as we
were winding down that enormously successful demonstration, AEP and DOE
were in the final stages of a commercial-scale engineering study of the
same technologies. As a result, we now have a robust front-end
engineering design for a CCS facility that includes extensive geologic
characterization and a solid cost estimate.
In addition to CCS technology, construction currently is underway
in southwest Arkansas on the 600-megawatt J.W. Turk Plant that will
employ new ultra-supercritical coal-fired generating technology. Ultra-
supercritical technology uses high steam pressure and temperature to
increase operational efficiency. The Turk Plant represents a new
generation of power plant design that uses less fuel to produce each
megawatt hour of electricity. This means that all emissions, including
sulfur dioxide (SO
2
), nitrogen oxides (NO
x
),
mercury, and carbon dioxide (CO
2
), will be lower than
conventional coal-combustion processes per unit of electricity
produced. Once operational, the Turk Plant will be the first commercial
scale ultra-supercritical plant to operate in the United States.
AEP also has pursued the development of Integrated Gasification
Combined Cycle (IGCC) technology. IGCC represents a major breakthrough
in efforts to improve the environmental performance of coal-based
electric power generation. IGCC technology integrates two proven
processes--coal gasification and combined cycle power generation--to
convert coal into electricity more efficiently and cleanly than any
existing uncontrolled power plant. IGCC also has the potential to be
equipped with carbon capture technology at a lower capital cost and
with less of an energy penalty than traditional power plant designs,
but only after the carbon capture technology has been proven at a
commercial scale. We still strongly endorse the advancement of this
technology in the future.

AEP'S EXPERIENCE WITH CCS AT MOUNTAINEER

As noted previously, AEP recently completed a CCS validation
project at our Mountaineer Power Plant using Alstom's chilled ammonia
process. This recently completed project treated approximately 20 MW,
or 1.5 percent, of the total plant flue gas flow. The CCS validation
project was privately funded by AEP and partners, started capturing
CO
2
in September 2009, and initiated CO
2

injection in October 2009. The project was designed with the capability
of capturing and storing approximately 100,000 metric tons of CO
2

annually. Captured CO
2
from the project was injected through
two onsite wells into two geologic formations (Rose Run and Copper
Ridge) located approximately 1.5 miles below the plant site. The
project also included three deep wells for direct monitoring of
geologic conditions and assessing the suitability of the geologic
formations for future storage. Consistent with the Underground
Injection Control (UIC) Class V Permit, AEP continues to monitor these
wells. The project supplied data to support the design and engineering
of the commercial-scale CCS demonstration at the Mountaineer facility
and thereby has laid the technical groundwork to enable
commercialization of complex technology. Without these demonstrations,
there is no chance that CCS will become robust and commercially viable
at a reasonable cost for end users of electric power.
The CO
2
capture system proposed for the Mountaineer
commercial-scale demonstration project is similar to the Alstom
chilled-ammonia system operated at the initial validation project, but
at approximately 12 times the scale. As with the initial validation
project, the process uses an ammonia-based reagent to capture CO
2

and isolate it in a form suitable for geologic storage. The captured
CO
2
stream is cooled and compressed to a supercritical
(liquid-like) state for pipeline transport to the injection well sites.
The process is designed to remove approximately 90 percent of the
CO
2
from the 235 MW slipstream of flue gas.
Subsurface geological investigations of the Mountaineer site and
surrounding sub-region were conducted during 2010-2011 and built on a
large amount of work done at the site over the last eight years under
two separate projects. First, from 2002 to 2007, the DOE and others
provided funding for Battelle to conduct detailed geologic
characterization under the Ohio Valley CO
2
Storage Project,
which included a seismic survey and drilling of one well in 2003
followed by reservoir testing, modeling, and conceptual CO
2

injection simulations. Second, AEP hired Battelle in 2007 to construct
the geologic sequestration systems for the 20 MW CCS validation
project. This included completion of the original well and drilling of
four new wells on the Plant site. Extensive evaluation of voluminous
data from the projects along with the drilling of an additional
characterization well some 2.5 miles south of the validation project
site, indicate that the Copper Ridge Formation has significant
reservoir storage potential. Additional injection potential has been
identified in the Rose Run Sandstone and other zones.
While the success of the Mountaineer Plant validation project
proved that CCS is viable at a coal-fired power plant and also
demonstrated that CO
2
could be safely injected into deep
saline reservoirs in that region, the commercial-scale demonstration
has been put on hold. An agreement for DOE funding of the commercial-
scale project was finalized in early 2010, allowing for a combination
of DOE CCPI Round 3 and American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
funds to provide 50 percent of the cost of the project up to $334
million. AEP was responsible for securing the other 50 percent of the
cost. This seemed very plausible at the time of the grant application
due to the House's passage of the Waxman-Markey climate legislation and
the Senate's serious consideration of similar legislation at that time.
Both bills, as well as other legislative proposals, contemplated
significant economic incentives to develop CCS projects and a
regulatory justification for approval by State Commissions. However,
during the balance of 2010, as the U.S. economy remained sluggish and
prospects for climate legislation dimmed, it became clear to AEP that
cost recovery for the expense of a CCS project would not be approved by
state regulatory agencies. Therefore, AEP was unable to move forward
with the commercial demonstration and has placed the project on hold.
The agreement with DOE was terminated following the completion of
project Phase 1 and plans to complete the project are on hold.
Even though the Mountaineer commercial-scale project has been
postponed, there is still enormous value in the efforts and investment
by AEP and DOE. Prior to this project, much of what has been publically
discussed and debated regarding performance and cost was based upon
crude estimates and extrapolations from petro-chemical processes that,
at best, bore no more than a simplistic resemblance to CCS on coal-
fired power plants. Because of the work done through Phase 1 of the
commercial-scale project, an engineering package has been developed
specifically for a retrofit of post-combustion CO
2
capture
installation on a coal-fired power plant. Detailed process
understanding and performance knowledge was collected from the
validation project and applied at full-scale. Optimization of process
elements and individual pieces of equipment has yielded a state-of-the-
art design. As a result, we now have a robust front-end engineering
package that includes extensive geologic characterization and a solid
cost estimate. While certain aspects of the information gained through
years of technology development at Mountaineer belong to Alstom as
intellectual property, a wealth of knowledge has been publically
disclosed at conferences and other venues, with even more to come
through relationships with DOE, the Global CCS Institute, and others.
Hundreds of tours and literally thousands of visitors have come through
Mountaineer Plant over the past several years. Clearly this work has
been recognized and appreciated on a global scale.
AEP's work on CCS is a critically vital step, but only the
beginning of a long path toward broad deployment of CCS technology.
AEP's work has not yet produced a commercial scale demonstration of the
technology for capturing and sequestering CO
2
at an
affordable cost. AEP's work is merely the first of multiple steps in
the maturation of a widely-deployable technology. Much like the power
industry's experiences with sulfur dioxide scrubbers in the 1970's,
much optimization remains to be done. With real demonstrations,
brilliant minds working together will identify improvements and process
optimizations that will eventually simplify designs, drive down costs,
reduce energy consumption, and make the technology more affordable. Now
is not the time to ease up on CCS development and demonstration
efforts. On the contrary, the industry, with government support, must
continue to march together down the path of progress. The DOE program
of technology development and commercial-scale demonstration is
critical to making this happen. DOE's technology roadmap and planned
demonstration projects are essential for commercial technology
advancement.

AEP'S EXPERIENCE WITH ULTRA-SUPERCRITICAL PULVERIZED COAL TECHNOLOGY

The J.W. Turk Plant is a 600 megawatt (MW) net, ultra-supercritical
unit designed to fire subbituminous coal. The Turk Plant cycle is
classified as advanced coal generation technology primarily because of
the use of an ultra-supercritical steam cycle. The ultra-supercritical
cycle is a technology advancement of the supercritical steam cycle. The
term ``supercritical'' steam cycle means that the water/steam pressure
used in this technology is above critical pressure of water (3,208.2
psi). Water above the critical pressure does not boil, but makes a
transition from the properties of liquid water directly to the
properties of superheated steam. Superheated steam provides a higher
efficiency heat transfer mechanism and serves to increase the overall
efficiency of the steam cycle. While a supercritical plant cycle uses
high pressure, it uses steam temperatures only as high as 1,050F-
1,080F. The Turk Plant's main steam temperature will be 1,110+F and
its reheat steam temperature will be 1,125F. These very high
temperatures, coupled with operation at these high pressures, produce
higher cycle efficiency, and thus the term ``ultra-supercritical.'' In
addition, Turk uses advanced equipment design features, such as axial
flow air and gas fans, pulse jet fabric filters, spray dryer absorber
(SDA) technology, and a steam turbine driven boiler feed pump to drive
down auxiliary loads (power used by plant equipment) which also improve
the overall efficiency of the generating unit.
AEP led the industry in the deployment of supercritical pulverized
coal technology. The first commercial supercritical unit in the world
was AEP's Philo Unit 6, built in 1957. Since then, AEP has constructed
20 supercritical units and is currently operating 18 supercritical
units. These units range in size from 500 MW to 1,300 MW, with a total
generating capacity of over 17,000 megawatts.
The advancement to ultra-supercritical has been made possible by
recent ASME-approved, cost-effective high temperature chrome and
nickel-based alloys in the steam generator, piping, and turbine
systems. This development signals a degree of maturity which allows for
minimal risk in deployment of this advance technology.
The use of high steam temperatures and pressures at the Turk Plant
will result in a steam cycle that is one of the most efficient in the
industry. In addition, the use of high efficiency equipment allows the
Turk Plant to have one of the lowest heat rates in the world. Turk's
full load higher heating value (HHV) net heat rate will be 8,992 Btu/
kWh, which converts to an overall net efficiency of 38%, HHV. As
reported by the DOE Energy Information Administration in January 2009,
for 2007 the industry average full load net heat rate is 10,114 Btu/
kWh, HHV, or an average efficiency of 33.7%, HHV. The high efficiency
of the Turk Plant results in very low emissions per megawatt hour, in
comparison with those generating units with average efficiency rates.
To give some perspective, the following is a comparison of Turk
Plant's ultra-supercritical benefits when compared with a same-sized
unit using conventional subcritical technology, based on an 85%
capacity factor, per year basis:

180,000 tons less coal consumed (1,500 fewer coal train
cars)

1,600 tons less lime consumed

Reduction of 14,000 tons ash and FGD waste

360 million gallons less water consumed

320,000 tons less CO
2
emitted

150 tons less SO
2
emitted

100 tons less NO
x
emitted

Achieving higher efficiency performance is limited by the available
materials to handle extreme temperatures and pressures, and is also
limited by approved methods for welding the materials. Simply put,
there are no available materials or approved welding procedures in the
U.S. that enable higher temperature steam cycles than those installed
today at Turk Plant.
The Turk Plant received regulatory approval in Arkansas, Louisiana,
and Texas in 2007-2008. Construction of the plant began after AEP
Southwestern Electric Power Company (SWEPCO) received the Clean Air Act
construction permit in 2008. Since that time, SWEPCO has encountered
some challenges to the various permits and regulatory approvals.
Construction of the Turk Plant continues, with key milestones
approaching that include the boiler hydro test, followed by the first
combustion of coal to take place in late spring of next year. The first
planned synchronization of the generator to the electric grid is
planned for mid-2012.

AEP'S PERSPECTIVE ON THE RECENT EPA REGULATIONS

AEP strongly supports the Clean Air Act and continued reduction in
emissions from our power plants. However, AEP believes that the current
regulatory track being pursued by the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) will have damaging impacts on the reliability of our nation's
electric system, as well as broader negative employment and economic
implications. Together, the federal Cross-State Air Pollution Rule
(CSAPR)--formerly known as the Transport Rule, the Utility Maximum
Achievable Control Technology Rule (Utility MACT), the Clean Air
Visibility Rule, the Coal Combustion Residuals Rule (CCR) as well as
the Cooling Water Intake Structures Rule under section 316(b) of The
Clean Water Act (316(b) rule) will require very large utility capital
investments on a timeline that can only be described as unrealistic.
CSAPR and the Utility MACT alone, according to EPA's own estimates,
will impose massive costs within the next 3 to 4 years, the vast
majority of which will be borne by coal-fired generators and their
customers.
This follows two decades during which generators within these same
areas have invested billions of dollars to achieve reductions of over
70 percent in emissions of both SO
2
and NO
x
.
Electricity rates in states where these investments have been made have
already risen. For most coal-reliant states, the CSAPR will require
additional substantial emission reductions starting in January of 2012.
In several of these states, these represent reductions of more than 30
percent below actual emissions in 2010. Further even more substantial
reductions are required in 2014, with Ohio, Pennsylvania, Indiana,
Kentucky and Virginia required to make 60-76 percent reductions below
2010 actual levels. This is also the same year EPA proposes to make the
Utility MACT effective for sources nationwide. There is simply not
enough time to get regulatory approvals, design, permit, and construct
scrubbers, SCRs or other major pollution control investments to achieve
those levels of reductions. As a result, they will force a large number
of premature power plant retirements where investments are uneconomical
given the remaining useful life of the plants. Where such investments
are the most cost-effective compliance option, plants may have to be
idled or significantly curtail production for two or more years in
order to complete installation of the necessary controls. These power
plant operational outcomes raise significant policy, economic, and
energy issues that Congress should carefully examine.
AEP has achieved very substantial SO
2
and NO
x

reductions over the past two decades. Our efforts began with a series
of cost-effective measures to cut SO
2
and NO
x

emissions in the 1990's under the Acid Rain program, including
installing SO
2
scrubbers and NO
x
combustion
controls, as well as blending lower sulfur coals into the fuel mix at
plants that could accommodate such coals. The past decade has seen a
continuation of AEP's program to transform our fleet of coal-fired
generating units. This transformation included the installation of
state-of-the-art control technologies at many of our generating
stations in order to meet the steep NO
x
reduction
requirements of the NO
x
SIP Call in the early part of the
decade. It has continued with a third wave of emissions controls being
installed to achieve additional NO
x
and SO
2

reductions required under the Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR), which
CSAPR would replace. As a result of these efforts, over the last 20
years, our annual SO
2
emissions have declined by about 1.1
million tons (a 73 percent reduction) and our annual NO
x

emissions have been reduced by about 450 thousand tons (an 80 percent
reduction).
Over that same period, AEP has invested more than $7 billion in
emissions control equipment on our coal units to reduce SO
2

and NO
x
emissions and to comply with the NO
x
SIP
Call and CAIR programs. AEP has spent several additional billions of
dollars on low sulfur fuel, chemical reagents, and other pollution
control operations and maintenance costs. Most of these investments and
the emission reductions have occurred in the Eastern portion of the AEP
system. About 80 percent of AEP coal-fired capacity is located in AEP's
Eastern footprint, which includes coal-fired plants in Virginia, West
Virginia, Ohio, Kentucky, and Indiana. Annual SO
2
and
NO
x
emissions have been reduced at AEP plants in these
states by 64 percent and 84 percent, respectively, in the last decade
alone. About two-thirds of the AEP Eastern coal-fired fleet is now
equipped with the most advanced SO
2
controls--Flue Gas
Desulfurization (FGD) which reduces SO
2
emissions by about
95 percent. Similarly, about three-quarters of the AEP Eastern coal-
fired fleet is equipped with the most advanced NO
x

controls--Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) which reduces NO
x

emissions by about 90 percent. Two projects were completed in the last
18 months at our Amos Plant, and we are preparing to submit
applications for regulatory approvals to install additional controls in
Indiana. All of these efforts have also been consistent with an
agreement we signed in 2007 with EPA and other plaintiffs to settle an
enforcement action under the New Source Review Provisions of the Clean
Air Act. But EPA's new rules impose more obligations, sooner than
required under that Consent Decree.
We expect this transformation of our coal fleet to continue in the
coming decade. Two of our newer coal plants in our Western states were
originally constructed with FGD controls, and we expect to reduce
SO
2
and NO
x
emissions further at units that are
regulated under the Clean Air Visibility Rule in Arkansas and Oklahoma.
CSAPR will impose additional obligations on our units in Texas,
Arkansas, Oklahoma and Louisiana as well.

The EPA Rules Threaten Electric Grid Reliability, Create Higher
Unemployment, and Result in Much Higher Electricity Rates for States
Reliant on Coal Fired Generation.

Although AEP is committed to working with EPA in the development of
future control requirements under its proposed Utility MACT, CCR and
316(b) rules, the final Clean Air Visibility Rule, and the final Cross-
State Air Pollution Rule, we nonetheless have major concerns with these
new EPA rules, including the following:

1.  Infeasible Compliance Deadlines. EPA is simply not providing
sufficient time to design, permit, and install major emissions control
technologies on large amounts of existing coal-fired capacity that are
necessary to comply with EPA's Cross-State Air Pollution Rule
(beginning in 2012, with more stringent limits in 2014), the proposed
Utility MACT Rule (by the end of 2014 or by end of 2015) and the
proposed Federal Visibility Rule in Oklahoma (end of 2014).

2.  Multiple Major Regulatory Programs Resulting in Unprecedented
Capital Expenditures, Mostly Before 2015. There would be two to three
times as much capital spent in the U.S. to comply with these new EPA
rules by 2020, compared with the amounts that were spent cumulatively
on all utility air pollution controls during the previous 20 years.

3.  Abrupt and Significant Power Plant Retirements due to the
Combination of the High Costs of Compliance and the Infeasible
Deadlines. Recent studies have suggested that between 50 and 110
gigawatts of coal-fired capacity will be forced to prematurely retire
due to proposed EPA rules, impacting the reliability of the grid, jobs,
taxes, and utility rates. The un-depreciated balances associated with
these retirements will place greater pressures on utility rates.

4.  Unanticipated Electric Grid Reliability Problems Particularly
during 2014-2016. Because many generating units provide system security
and reliability to the grid (e.g., black start, voltage support, etc.),
this impact will be exacerbated by the large number of premature
retirements; substantial idled capacity arising from insufficient time
to design, permit, and install major emissions controls; and the
necessarily wide-scale unit outages required to ``tie-in'' these major
new emission controls. The greatest capacity reductions will occur in
the PJM (i.e., Pennsylvania New Jersey Maryland Interconnection)
region, a very large power pool which serves the Mid-Atlantic states
(NJ, PA, DE, MD), plus several states just to the west (including WV,
OH, IN, MI and parts of IL) as well as in the SERC (i.e., Southeast
Reliability Coordinating Council) region, which includes most of the
Southeastern U.S., with additional localized reliability issues in
these regions and ERCOT and SPP (the Electric Reliability Council of
Texas and Southwest Power Pool, respectively).

5.  Very High Electricity Rate Increases Due to High Capital Costs
of Compliance and New Replacement Capacity. These rate increases will
hit electricity-intensive manufacturing in the Appalachian Region as
well as other parts of the Midwest and Southeast particularly hard,
leading to industrial plant shutdowns and substantial job losses. They
will also be disproportionately borne by consumers in some of the
poorest rural counties in these same states where there are many
customers who are unemployed or on fixed incomes.

There is Not Enough Time to Comply with EPA's New Rules for Controlling
SO
2
, NO
x
, and HAP Emissions from Power Plants.

EPA's Cross-State Air Pollution Rule and Utility MACT Rule will
require installation of a large amount of SO
2
scrubbers and
other capital intensive air emission controls. In particular, under the
Cross-State Air Pollution Rule, the SO
2
caps become
significantly more stringent in 2014 for more than two-thirds of the
States covered under the SO
2
portion of the rule. \1\ These
States are those most reliant on coal and they will bear the major
portion of the compliance burden for limiting SO
2
emissions.
The SO
2
budget limits in Eastern states, specifically states
in the Appalachian Region, are equivalent to an average emission rate
of approximately 0.20 to 0.30 lbs SO
2
per million Btu. Such
very low emission rates can only be achieved at power plants burning
Eastern bituminous coals by adding scrubbers. As such, these limits
would require most all of AEP's coal-fired power plant units in these
states to either install FGD, switch to natural gas or significantly
curtail operations in order to comply.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Specifically, 16 states, out of the 23 states covered under the
Cross-State Air Pollution Control Rule program for SO
2
,
would be subject to more stringent SO
2
reduction
requirements starting in 2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to the massive SO
2
emission reductions
required in 2014, the emission reductions slated for 2012 are very
significant as well. These new emission requirements will be enforced
less than three months from now, with little advanced notice, as the
final requirements of the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule are
significantly more stringent than those of the proposed Transport Rule.
EPA's proposed revisions just announced last week do not result in
appreciable changes in allowance allocations. For example, Ohio,
Pennsylvania and Indiana are required respectively to make 46 percent,
33 percent and 31 percent reductions in SO
2
emissions from
2010 levels by next year. Other states outside of the Appalachian and
Midwest Regions are also hit hard with stringent SO
2

reduction requirements. For example, Texas, even after EPA's proposed
revisions to the budgets, is still required to reduce 2012 SO
2

emissions by 21 percent, as compared to actual 2010 levels.
These ``new'' reduction requirements in just three months (first
known with the issuance of the final rule just two months ago) are
particularly problematic because utilities are largely unable to make
modifications to existing power plants in this time frame to
substantially reduce emissions. Also, as most utilities procure most of
their coal on a contractual basis well in advance, a major switch to
lower sulfur coals is often not a realistic option. As a result, coal-
fired power plants will likely have to be significantly curtailed.
Replacement electricity is likely to come in the form of more expensive
gas-fired generation. Additionally, the replacement capacity might not
be located in areas critical to transmission reliability, or able to
provide voltage support or black start capability, creating further
risks to reliability and increasing the costs of maintaining the
electric grid.
In addition to the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule, the proposed
Utility MACT Rule requires compliance on a plant by plant basis with
three separate emission limits (1) a very low mercury limit, (2) a PM
limit (as a surrogate for non-mercury metals), and (3) a hydrogen
chloride limit (as a surrogate for acid gases, or an optional stringent
SO
2
limit as a surrogate at certain units). These limits
will have to be met by the end of 2014 with a possible one-year
extension allowed to the end of 2015. Based on a thorough review of
these limits (when combined with the requirements of CSAPR), we believe
AEP will be required to retrofit SO
2
scrubbers on most of
the remaining Eastern fleet, and at a minimum, install a combination of
baghouses, carbon injection and DSI (dry sorbent injection) at our
plants in Texas, Arkansas and Oklahoma. For our Western fleet, some of
these same units are affected by EPA's Clean Air Visibility Rule
(CAVR), and thus could be required to retrofit scrubbers on the same or
a slightly longer schedule.
Compliance with the final Cross-State Air Pollution Rule and
proposed Utility MACT Rule, plus the existing Clean Air Visibility
Rule, will effectively require AEP to install scrubbers at almost all
of its unscrubbed units or retire the plants altogether, and to do so
for virtually all of these plants by the end of 2014 (or perhaps the
end of 2015 if a one year extension is granted). This allows between 2
+ and 3 + years for compliance with at most 4 + years in a few cases.
This time frame is completely infeasible to get regulatory approvals,
design, permit, fabricate, and install a retrofit scrubber as shown in
Figure 1 below:

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Figure 1 shows that the average time needed from project
commencement to completion for a retrofit scrubber is five years for a
regulated electric utility. (The time frame is similar if a unit is
retired and replaced on site with a new combined cycle gas plant). This
figure is based on the actual average time period needed during 2003-10
when AEP added scrubbers at 7,800 MW of capacity or--more installations
than anyone else in the industry. Given that the EPA rules will require
a greater number of retrofit projects and/or plant replacements and
other related environmental investments across our industry within the
same three to five year window, compliance with the Utility MACT Rule
and Cross-State Air Pollution Rule is simply infeasible within this
very short compliance period.

High Costs and Infeasible Deadlines Will Lead to Substantial Coal Plant
Retirements and Significantly Compromise Electric Grid Reliability.

Due to the high costs of compliance and infeasible time deadlines,
a large amount of coal unit retirements at AEP and across the industry
is expected in the 2014-15 time period. In addition, a large number of
units that are complying by retrofitting will have to be taken out of
service, mothballed, or significantly curtailed during the 2014-16 time
period as well.
AEP estimates that in its own coal fleet about 6 GW of its coal
fired capacity (or about 25 percent of the company's coal-fired
generating capacity) would retire by the 2014-15 time period under the
EPA rules. We recognize that certain of our units are also subject to
the requirements of our New Source Consent Decree, but only 615 MW is
required to comply with those requirements before 2015. Other major
coal-fired utilities such as Southern Company and DTE Energy Company
have estimated that a similar 20 to 30 percent of their coal-fired
capacity would retire in the period before 2015. AEP also estimates
that 1.5-5 GW of coal-fired capacity would be temporarily out of
service or severely curtailed during 2014-16 as retrofit pollution
controls are being completed.

There is A Better Way

The combination of EPA's new rules for power plants will result in
a series of relatively inflexible and stringent air pollution and other
environmental regulations with infeasible timelines and unnecessarily
high compliance costs. In addition to high costs borne by our
electricity customers, these new rules could also result in many
premature plant retirements and over 1 million net jobs lost in the
U.S. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ NERA (2011). A loss of one job-year is equivalent to a loss of
one job for a period of one year. Job-years are commonly used by
economists, CBO, OMB and others in reporting employment statistics.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We believe that a more reasonable approach to energy and
environmental policy is needed. AEP has been working on these issues
with the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW); the
United Mine Workers of America (UMWA); and the International
Brotherhood of Boilermakers, Iron Ship Builders, Blacksmiths, Forgers,
and Helpers.
A comprehensive analysis of the economic impacts of the proposed
regulations as well as the feasibility and timing of their
implementation is needed. While we continue to support sound policy
aimed at improving air quality and public health, numerous economic
studies and modeling analyses have demonstrated that the implementation
of these major EPA requirements occurring in the same narrow time
period will have major adverse economic repercussions. More time for
phasing in the new control requirements is required to smooth the
impacts associated with power plant closures and electricity rate
increases, as well as to allow for the construction and installation of
major environmental retrofit controls. Longer time frames also would
enable better planning, ensure electricity grid reliability and avoid
many premature plant shutdowns or excessively high costs for pollution
controls due to supply constraints.
Given the multi-dimensional nature of major environmental policy
initiatives and the immediacy of the compliance deadlines, we believe
that Congress must intervene and assure that a sensible multi-pollutant
environmental program is developed on a rational schedule and that this
schedule is coordinated with the other new EPA rules. We believe that a
legislative approach can continue to promote the air quality and public
health goals set forth in EPA's regulatory initiatives while ensuring
that adequate emphasis is focused on the employment, economic and
reliability impacts of the program.
The challenge of EPA's current regulatory approach is not a
technology issue requiring the Department of Energy to venture down the
path of R&D or major demonstrations. On the contrary, there is simply
no time to develop new technologies, demonstrate their viability, and
engineer these systems. We believe the technologies exist today to
enable AEP and the larger US fleet to comply with increasingly
stringent environmental requirements while maintaining a robust and
reliable electric power infrastructure. However, timing is the limiting
factor in enabling a viable path toward compliance. The role we see for
DOE, and it is a vital role indeed, would be to become engaged in a
thorough analysis of EPA rules impacts and deployment timelines. In
short, DOE should serve as a trusted advisor to the EPA in the
rulemaking process.
DOE has expertise in all the areas of power generation and
electricity transmission and distribution. They have the well-informed
authority to evaluate the electric power generation system and grid
stability/security risks and can make a non-biased assessment of the
timelines needed to deploy technology at the broad scale required under
EPA's program. It is AEP's preference that DOE be engaged in this
process.

CONCLUSION

In summary, American Electric Power has an established history as
an industry leader in technology development and deployment. We were
the first in high voltage transmission of electricity and have blazed
trails in the development of smart grid technologies. Supercritical
steam generation was first put into utility power production by AEP
more than a half-century ago, and many of our units operating today
represent new benchmarks in performance and efficiency at the time they
were commissioned. We carry forward that proud tradition even today
with deployment of the nation's first ultra-supercritical unit, which
will come on line less than one year from now. We embrace technology as
the means to produce and deliver clean and affordable electricity to
our customers. We share much of our knowledge with the industry because
we believe everybody benefits when technology is allowed to flourish.
This philosophy of living on the cutting edge of technology advancement
has its risks and uncertainties, as is most evidenced with our
extensive work on CCS. While many were hoping and waiting for others to
deliver a solution to CO
2
emissions, AEP boldly pursued the
path of developing and demonstrating CCS technology. Our shareholders
have shown the vision to support this approach by shouldering the
burden of extraordinarily-expensive demonstration projects when other
means have not been available.
We believe DOE should be bolstered in their efforts to develop
viable and affordable technology solutions. While legislative activity
on CCS has diminished and some key government-funded demonstration
projects, like AEP's, have been cancelled or are currently at risk of
being cancelled, now is not the time to divert DOE's attention from
further advancement of CCS technology. Robust and affordable choices
for CCS will in fact NOT be available in the market for installation on
coal-fired power plants if the technology is not demonstrated in the
meantime. AEP is ready and eager to reenter the demonstration phase of
our CCS program at such a time when adequate funding of demonstrations
enables successful completion of projects.
In this same spirit of ingenuity, AEP urges the new EPA rules be
structured in a way to allow for cost-effective implementation on a
reasonable schedule so as to minimize the impacts on our residential
customers, local businesses, and the reliability of the electricity
grid. It is also critical that the emissions reduction levels of the
program be set at levels that are technically feasible to achieve over
the given time frame and are in fact necessary to fulfill the air
quality goals and requirements of the Clean Air Act. As a nation, we
must ensure our future energy security and reliability by using
domestic resources such as coal, while continuing to advance
technology. AEP would like to thank the Committee for the opportunity
to present our views on the issues of advanced coal research and a
secure energy future.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize our fourth witness, Mr. David Foerter,
Executive Director, Institute of Clean Air Companies.

STATEMENT OF DAVID FOERTER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,

INSTITUTE OF CLEAN AIR COMPANIES

Mr. Foerter. Thank you for inviting the Institute of Clean
Air Companies or ICAC or Institute to testify and present its
perspectives on what motivates the air pollution control and
measurement industry to innovate and deploy commercial-ready
technologies and enable power generators and manufacturers to
operate responsibly and ensure cleaner air to the pollutions
they serve.
To provide some perspective about our industry, we are a
growing number of technology manufacturing and service
companies that have a sustainable industry due to the demand of
our technologies and services. And that demand comes from clean
air regulations and policies. This industry has great--has
matured greatly in the more than a half century ICAC has been
its public representative, and we are proud of having met and
often exceeded the regulatory control and measurement
challenges of the industries we serve.
It should come as no surprise that the air pollution
control industry is well prepared with suites of affordable
technologies and eager and experienced workforce to achieve the
air quality improvements needed to deliver healthy air.
The science of air pollution control and measurement are
well understood by our industry, and technologies are
continuously refined through healthy competition if the demand
is there. Our industry's impact on jobs is well documented, and
I have included insights into my written testimony. For brevity
I won't go into some of those issues.
Air pollution control and measurement technologies are
available to meet the upcoming regulations for hazardous and
conventional air pollutants emitted by firing coal, and we are
confident that these--that any issues that still exist can be
addressed within the framework used to develop regulations and
do not require any priority for R&D funding.
Therefore, as an industry largely made up of engineers, we
are ready to innovate and build equipment that our clients need
in the marketplace.
R&D is best used judiciously to develop and test
technologies where none already exist, and this is clearly not
needed to effectively address the air pollutant emissions of
conventional pollutants such as criteria and hazardous
pollutants in the electric power sector. Probably the best
example of this is mercury control technology, which about ten
years ago didn't exist to an R&D Program that was developed,
and it is now probably one of the easiest pollutants to deal
with under the Hazardous Air Pollutant Control requirements.
Because of the diversity of control and measurement
technologies and the offerings of multiple vendors and mature
industry, there are many choices available to sources affected
by regulations. For example, some of the largest SO
2

scrubbers may have a large capital cost but also allow sources
to take advantage of cost savings and using higher sulfur coal
that is often much cheaper, less expensive to use. Therefore,
it is possible that for some of the facilities cost savings on
coal can cover most, if not all, of the technologies that are
being put in place.
But there is also other opportunities because there is less
resource and time-intensive technologies are available to be
quickly deployed and offers the power generation industry the
needed flexibility it may need to comply with upcoming
regulations.
For example, direct sorbent injection, another type of
scrubbing technology, and circulating and dry scrubbers are
technology options with costs and install times less than the
larger Wet FGD types of programs.
Today I have in my comments nearly two-thirds of the coal-
fired electric power plants are controlled. I am going to have
to review that to 75 percent based on two witness testimonies,
leaving approximately another 25 percent of the fleet
substantially uncontrolled. Decisions to control much of the
power fleet generally installed controls on units that were
most cost-effective to control.
Plant retirements are inevitable, even in the absence of
regulations. Building new plants is problematic, and so I just
add that as some of the witnesses already.
As an industry built on innovations, we seek new challenges
and opportunities, particularly those that serve the public
health and industrial progress. There are certainly challenges
for all fossil fuels, particularly coal, which will benefit
from well-spent R&D dollars. Chief among those challenges and
right for R&D investments is carbon capture as part of a
CO
2
control strategy. Here the challenge and the
opportunity is to enable coal to be a more sustainable fuel
choice whereby emissions are well controlled.
In our industry it is clear that regulations designed to
improve air quality for public health is the primary driver for
much of the technology development and innovations. For
example, as the understanding of particulate control emissions
we moved from a very coarse type of particulate control
emissions to coarse, fine, and even condensables. In the amount
that we have been doing this there has been cost and benefit
analysis done, and the benefit-cost analysis prepared by EPA
shows that for every dollar spent there was as much as $4 to
$20 that comes back to direct public health benefit, and that
includes the prevention of pre-mature mortality. From our
industry's perspective, this is comforting.
The biggest challenge that we see is not the hazardous and
criteria pollutants. It is in CO
2
capture and
thermal efficiency. So we look forward to seeing work more in
that field, not on criterion, hazardous pollutants.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Foerter follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. David Foerter, Executive Director, Institute
of Clean Air Companies

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize our final witness, Mr. Stu Dalton, Senior
Government Representative for Generation of the Electric Power
Research Institute.

STATEMENT OF STU DALTON, SENIOR GOVERNMENT

REPRESENTATIVE-GENERATION, ELECTRIC POWER RESEARCH INSTITUTE

Mr. Dalton. Thank you, Chairman Harris, Congressman Miller,
and Members of the Committee. I appreciate the opportunity to
give this testimony today.
The U.S. DOE has a significant R&D effort as you have
heard, developing technology for coal and a long history of
doing that work with an important program in place. We have
worked independently as well as collaboratively with the DOE
over several decades in many of the areas you have heard talked
about today on SO
2
, NOx, mercury control, as well as
on advanced technologies.
But the changing regulations and demands of the system are
requiring or creating new challenges which are, indeed, calling
for new R&D, and that is what I will talk about today.
Based on our review there are three major areas that are
not sufficiently covered in the current R&D Program. One is
high-efficiency combustion plants. We have heard a little talk
about that today. Another area is water management, we have
also heard that mentioned. The third area is new implications
of the recent work on hazardous air pollutants. We have worked
on hazardous air pollutants for two decades at least.
These technologies are needed to meet the global challenges
in advanced coal-powered technology as well as the domestic
regulatory compliance schedules. A fourth area of gasification
would also benefit from additional R&D.
The first area involves high-efficiency steam cycles based
on American advanced alloy steels that have been developed
largely with funding from the DOE. The need is to accelerate
the pace from successful component fabrication and testing to
in-service boiler and turbine testing that includes operation
of a complete integrated demonstration plant. This RD&D would
put American technology and suppliers in the lead worldwide for
high-efficiency technology and low-emission use of coal.
The DOE has been a major sponsor of this work, along with
the Ohio Coal Development Office. They have supported a public,
private, federal, and state effort across the U.S. Industry and
national lab participants have worked for almost a decade on
this area to create, fabricate, and weld these alloys with work
done in six states--in Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, West
Virginia, and Wisconsin. We have done work with a number of
these organizations.
We have shown that high-temperature materials can work for
tens of thousands of hours in the lab. You need to take it to
the full scale. The very high-temperature steam pressures and
temperatures that are used to get this high efficiency requires
some new novel technology. I am holding a report that is
actually entitled, ``U.S. Department of Energy and Ohio Coal
Development Office Report on Advanced Ultra-Supercritical
Materials Project for Boilers and Steam Turbines.'' This report
has a lot more details on the timing and the content of that
work.
The second area I would like to mention is water
management. We are seeing new barriers to siting plants as well
as barriers for continued operation from some of the new
regulatory requirements. Water management needs to reduce
consumption, accommodate lower water quality supplies, and
address more complex waste water treatment. Solid management
issues need to be addressed, partly because there are
requirements that cover all aspects of water management, not
just water but air and solids as well. Use of degraded waters
and recovery of water from power are also issues. There are
many different ideas out there, and EPRI is working with
industry right now to create a water research center in this
area.
A third area is in hazardous air pollutants. Not just in
capturing Mercury but looking at other compounds like Selenium,
Arsenic, Hydrochloric acid, Hydrofluoric acid, and things of
that sort that are--that might be cross-media. You catch it
from the air, it goes somewhere.
The variety of coal and power plant types, and emission
control configurations require different controls because of
the new regulations. It is urgent because firms are starting to
design and purchase equipment, yet we believe not all these
issues are resolved.
The fourth area, gasification is one where DOE has an
ongoing program and has been doing a lot of work. We need to
accelerate work on synthesis gas cleanup, higher temperatures,
larger turbines, lower oxygen costs for the supply, and better
plant controls.
Finally, I would like to say that EPRI has been working
cooperatively in the area of CO
2
control with the
Department of Energy. The heavy focus on CO
2

capture, utilization, and storage we think is worthwhile and
now utilization might be possible for enhanced oil recovery to
bootstrap CO
2
demonstrations and improve the
domestic oil capabilities as well.
We see that the sustained work on integrated demos is
important because it is a very broad issue. We thank you for
the opportunity to address the Committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dalton follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Stuart Dalton Senior Government
Representative, Generation Electric Power Research
My name is Stuart M. Dalton. I am the Senior Government
Representative, Generation, for the Electric Power Research Institute
(EPRI, www.epri.com). EPRI conducts research and development relating
to the generation, delivery, and use of electricity for the benefit of
the public.
As an independent, nonprofit corporation, EPRI brings together its
scientists and engineers, as well as experts from industry, academia,
and government, to help address challenges in electricity, including
reliability, efficiency, health, safety, and the environment. EPRI also
provides technology, policy, and economic analyses to drive long-range
research and development planning, and supports research in emerging
technologies. EPRI's members represent more than 90 percent of the
electricity generated and delivered in the United States, and
international participation extends to 40 countries. EPRI's principal
offices and laboratories are located in Palo Alto, California;
Charlotte, North Carolina; Knoxville, Tennessee; and Lenox,
Massachusetts. EPRI appreciates the opportunity to provide this
testimony today.

Introduction and summary

EPRI analysis including our Prism/MERGE reports shows multiple
future scenarios in which coal will be an important fuel in the US
generation mix. In the wake of recently proposed environmental rules
and other regulations, U.S. power producers have estimated that tens of
thousands of megawatts of coal-fired power generation capacity could be
retired prematurely. At the same time, studies by EPRI, the
International Energy Agency and others demonstrate that in order to
reliably and affordably meet the nation's energy needs and
environmental goals all types of power plants--from renewables to
advanced coal and natural gas to nuclear--are needed to provide a
secure energy future.
For coal-based generation to fulfill its potential to contribute to
the nation's clean energy supply, new technologies and practices must
be developed and demonstrated to address concerns over air, water, and
thermal emissions, as well as secure solids disposal and CO
2

storage.
The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) has excellent research,
development, and demonstration (RD&D) programs in place on CO
2

capture and storage and conducts significant work on advanced coal
generation technology; these were preceded by a long history of
successful RD&D on criteria pollutant, particulate, and hazardous
pollutant controls for coal power plants.
RD&D on stronger and more durable high-temperature materials as
well as improved integration and process configurations for increased
plant efficiency have paralleled environmental control technology
development. EPRI has worked independently, as well as cooperatively,
with DOE and other government agencies to help attain many of these
research objectives.
The needs of the electric power industry are evolving rapidly
because of changing emission regulations and power grid system
requirements. The continued alignment of RD&D efforts to reflect these
latest priorities is necessary to help ensure that the nation's coal-
based power plants can continue to supply affordable electricity.
Based on EPRI's analysis, three major areas not sufficiently
covered by current DOE coal RD&D need additional support and these
areas currently compromise the power industry's ability to meet both
global competitive challenges in advanced coal power technology and
domestic regulatory compliance schedules. A fourth area is relatively
well addressed, but would benefit from additional RD&D on basic
gasification and power block technology improvements. These areas are
listed below and discussed individually in further detail:

1.  Ultra-high-efficiency steam power cycles based on American
advanced alloy steels: we need to accelerate the pace from successful
component fabrication and testing to in-service boiler and steam
turbine testing and a complete integrated demonstration plant

2.  Improved water management to reduce consumption, accommodate
lower-quality/degraded water supplies, and address more complex
wastewater treatment and solid by-product management challenges

3.  Workable solutions to proposed hazardous air pollutants (HAPs)
emission standards accounting for real-world operational issues, flue
gas constituent interactions and cross-media impacts, and measurement
capabilities

4.  Efficiency and cost improvements for gasification power plants
independent of CO
2
capture processes: we need to accelerate
scale-up, testing, integration engineering, and demonstration of
fundamental improvements in synthesis gas cleanup at higher
temperatures, higher gas turbine firing temperatures and larger
turbines (and associated blade temperature control), lower-energy
oxygen supply technologies, and better plant controls

EPRI would like to stress that these areas are identified as
necessary to augment, not supplant, DOE's current RD&D programs
focusing heavily on CO
2
capture, utilization, and storage
(CCS). Continued and sustained support for CCS development and
integrated demonstration is essential to success in this most
overarching of issues facing coal power plants.

Advanced ultra-supercritical steam cycle development using nickel-based
alloys: In-service test facility and fully integrated demonstration

Higher plant efficiency reduces the amount of fuel consumed and
associated emissions and water consumption per megawatt hour of
electricity generated. Notably, CO
2
reduction is
significant, up to 20-25% per megawatt hour and the avoided cost per
ton of CO
2
is estimated both by DOE and EPRI as being one of
the lowest avoided costs compared to any technology for CO
2

capture and storage. This is a win-win approach for utility customers
and the environment. Thermodynamics dictates that increasing the
efficiency of a steam cycle requires hotter and higher pressure steam
conditions known as ultra-supercritical (USC) at the turbine inlet.
Maintaining boiler, piping, and turbine safety and longevity at steam
temperatures of up to 1400F (760C) requires a new class of high-
nickel-content steel alloys and, in some cases, coatings, several of
which have been pioneered in the United States under a research program
sponsored by DOE and the Ohio Coal Development Office (OCDO).
Despite this successful record of fabrication and testing of key
boiler and steam turbine components by American manufacturers, the
program faces federal funding uncertainties at a time when European
competitors have advanced to an in-service boiler test loop and Asian
firms are looking to move to higher temperature and pressure cycles. To
reach DOE and industry goals for improving coal plant efficiency, EPRI
recommends a ``managed risk'' series of demonstration elements embedded
in commercial power projects, concluding with a fully integrated plant
(dubbed UltraGen) featuring nickel-alloy high-temperature components,
superior environmental controls, and CO
2
capture and
compression.
The foundation has been laid with earlier DOE/OCDO materials work
managed by Energy Industries of Ohio and EPRI (one team focused on
boilers, one on steam turbines), with a joint vision for future scale-
up and demonstration established by DOE, EPRI, and the Coal Utilization
Research Council. The most developed alloys are Inconel 740, a product
of Special Metals Corporation in West Virginia, and Haynes 282 alloy by
Haynes International, headquartered in Indiana.
Large-diameter pipe extrusions have been made by Wyman-Gordon in
Texas, and Haynes alloy 282 castings have been made by MetalTek in
Wisconsin and Flowserve in Ohio. The project also conducted powder
metallurgy work at Carpenter Technology Corporation in Pennsylvania.
Some of these firms are already receiving inquiries for use of these
materials overseas. To reap the benefits of this technology research
domestically, we need to adequately fund the next stages of
development, namely in-service test and demonstration to allow for
commercial deployment.
At a cost of about $50M over three years, an in-service component
test facility at an existing plant would lay the groundwork for the
design and installation of a demonstration unit, possibly in later
phases of DOE's Clean Coal Power Initiative or via other risk-sharing
mechanisms for first applications in the United States. Under this
scenario, advanced USC plants would become commercially available after
2020, following successful operation of a demonstration plant. This
recommended path to commercialization and prior work on advanced
materials development are described in EPRI brochure 1022770, U.S.
Department of Energy and Ohio Coal Development Office Advanced Ultra-
Supercritical Materials Project for Boilers and Steam Turbines (March
2011).
Such a commitment would return the United States to the forefront
in thermodynamic efficiency, building upon the legacy of the world's
first plants with USC steam conditions-AEP's Philo Unit 6 in 1957 and
Exelon's Eddystone Unit 1, in service from 1960 until its retirement
this year. Finally, given the prospect of future CO
2

regulations (and efforts by power producers to demonstrate voluntary
CO
2
reductions), the impetus for higher efficiency in future
coal-based generation units has gained traction worldwide. Many new
coal plant projects announced over the last two years will employ
supercritical steam cycles, and several will use high-efficiency
``moderate USC'' steam conditions, building a logical progression
toward advanced USC plants with the help of financiers, state
regulators, and other key stakeholders.

Improved water management to reduce water consumption, accommodate
degraded water supplies, and address wastewater treatment and solid by-
product disposal challenges

Water withdrawals and discharges by the power industry are falling
under new regulatory requirements, and are posing new engineering
challenges, as the sources and composition of water available to power
plants are changing, along with restrictions on its discharge.
Water is the lifeblood of a power plant, serving both as the
working fluid that converts combustion heat to turbine shaft power and
as the cooling medium that allows high-purity steam cycle water to
circulate continuously from boiler to turbine and back. Accordingly,
water quality and cost are major factors in plant economics.
Cooling water is a power plant's largest use. There are proven low-
water-use cooling options--developed in the arid western states and
other locations where power plants have faced water limitations for
decades--providing a technical foundation for new innovations. However,
these alternative cooling options normally require more space than
traditional ``once through'' river, lake, or ocean water cooling, which
can create significant challenges when existing plants are compelled to
retrofit recirculating cooling systems in response to Clean Water Act
Section 316 rules on intake structures and thermal discharges. Thus,
there is an RD&D need for retrofit cooling options, as well as designs
for new plants.
Even in areas of the United States with historically adequate water
supplies, reducing water use is a growing issue for the power industry,
so the need is now national rather than regional. Compounding the
challenge is the prospect of future regulations limiting CO
2

emissions. Virtually every type of CO
2
capture technology
requires steam use for the process and additional cooling. CO
2

compression for sale or geologic storage also requires additional
cooling. DOE research in this area will be especially important if
CO
2
capture, utilization, and storage become widespread
because power plant cooling demand will increase substantially.
In many cases, power plants are finding the only (or most economic)
new source of water is from lower-quality and/or degraded supplies,
such as municipal wastewater treatment plant discharge. These less-pure
waters require different treatment methods and more blowdown (a
slipstream sent to the plant's wastewater treatment equipment) than
conventional water supplies.
Wastewater treatment also faces new engineering challenges due to
tighter air pollution requirements, which result in greater amounts of
trace species such as mercury, arsenic, selenium, and acid gases being
removed from flue gases and transferred to wastewater streams. These
may need to be treated differently before discharge than under prior
practices. The particular wastewater treatment needs and available
technology options depend on the coal and boiler type and the type and
configuration of air pollution equipment used (e.g., wet vs. dry
scrubbing for SO
2
, different types of particulate and
NO
x
controls, and different sorbents or additives for
mercury control). EPRI in conjunction with industry is developing an
initiative to address plant water management and welcomes further
collaboration with DOE.
Additional information is being developed in a draft roadmap by
EPRI and the Coal Utilization Research Council. Some of the R&D goals
being addressed are:

Demonstrate reduced water consumption technologies

Improve wet, hybrid, and dry cooling testing in
conjunction with water balance modeling

Moisture/water recovery

Test membrane, liquid desiccants, cyclic reheat and/or
other new approaches, as well as low-temperature heat recovery plus
water capture on coal gasification/combustion

Demonstrate integrated treatment, quality management,
and moisture recovery

Create an industry water research center to demonstrate
methods for reduced water consumption and improved water management

Researching solutions to hazardous air pollutants issues in a real-
world deployment setting: flue gas constituent interactions, cross-
media impacts, and measurement capabilities

In the same manner that tailpipe emissions from new cars are a
minuscule fraction of the emissions from cars of the 1960s, new coal-
fired power plants are vastly cleaner than plants from a generation
ago. In addition, many existing plants have been retrofit with
technologies to capture SO
2
, NO
x
, mercury, and
SO
3
and fine particulates.
New regulations have been proposed for hazardous air pollutants and
the power industry is currently looking at process and operational
alternatives for the coal fired stations as well as weighing options to
retire plants where compliance with this plus other pending
requirements for criteria emissions, water limitations , and solids
management is not practical. In the timeframe required it will also be
difficult to plan, permit, fabricate, install and place in service the
equipment necessary to meet the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's
Maximum Achievable Control Technology (MACT) rule proposed in 2011, and
the Cross-State Air Pollution Rule (CSAPR) rule finalized in July 6,
2011.
As the government, industry, and EPRI have tested the various types
of plants and process configurations and their emissions, real-world
issues and unintended consequences of HAPs reduction methods have been
identified. The issues vary, and the solutions have required additional
R&D to resolve concerns about water and solid by-product changes that
would make current management practices unsuitable. Conditions can vary
widely because coals can contain virtually any of the constituents of
the earth's crust. Because coal and ash compositions vary, plants must
have different plant configurations, firing equipment, and processes
existing on the units to operate properly. Testing, modeling, and
limited experience has identified a wide variety of issues. Some of
these issues are cross-media (i.e., between air, aqueous, solid release
streams) and can cause currently useful materials such as fly ash or
gypsum used in aggregate, concrete, or wallboard to be questioned or to
make them unusable. Research is needed in this area to verify and
resolve potential impacts to enable reliable, operable units that
consistently meet regulations for criteria air emissions, HAPs, as well
as water and solids limits, and allows beneficial use of coal
combustion by-products whenever possible.
Current emissions controls reduce criteria pollutant emissions to
very low levels, and often capture a significant fraction of mercury in
the process. Nonetheless, new regulations call for further reductions
in NO
x
, SO
2
, SO
3
, fine particulates,
and mercury emissions, with an added focus on other HAPs, including
selenium. Chief among these regulatory drivers are the utility HAPs
MACT and CSAPR rules. EPRI has commented on the HAPs MACT in a
submission dated August 4, 2011, and identified some of the challenges
in measurement and compliance that make power company compliance
difficult within the proposed timeframe and implies urgent R&D is
needed. Some of the summary comments related to the need for additional
R&D are quoted below, followed by a comment regarding R&D needs. The
entire EPRI submission is available to the public at the following
site:

http://mydocs.epri.com/docs/CorporateDocuments/SectorPages/Environment/
hapsicr/EPRI--HAP s--Comments--08-04-11.pdf

EPRI comments on the difficulty of meeting proposed limits and the
issues with data collection

``No coal-fired EGU (new and existing coal- and oil-fired
electric utility steam generating units) tested in the ICR (EPA's
Information Collection Request)would likely meet the new unit MACT
limits for all three regulated HAPs-total particulate matter, mercury,
and hydrogen chloride (or the alternative acid gas surrogate, sulfur
dioxide). The new unit limits are very challenging to achieve as few
EGUs have multiple ICR measurements that are consistently below the
proposed new unit limits. The use of the lowest test series average
introduces biases, and EPA should use the average of all ICR data for
setting the HAPs standards for both new and existing EGUs.''

The proposed regulations for new and existing coal- and oil-fired
electric utility steam generating units (EGUs) have very low limits
which have been set based on, in many cases, erroneous data and a
limited number of data points. Despite the values that are eventually
established, additional R&D will be needed to ensure that the new
limits can be met on an ongoing basis and for the variety of coals and
plant designs in operation.

EPRI comments on dry sorbent injection and the ability to use the
technology without power plant impacts in other areas

``Additional data are required to evaluate the use of dry
sorbent injection as a control for removing hydrochloric acid (HCl) and
hydrofluoric acid (HF). Based on the limited available data, there are
concerns about whether EGUs firing medium- to high-chloride coals can
achieve the HCl standard using dry sorbent injection, and whether there
would be impacts to balance-of-plant operations.''

A number of firms are considering dry sorbent injection to manage
hydrochloric acid (HCl) and hydrofluoric acid (HF). Because data are
limited it is unclear the range of coals and conditions which may be
able to use this control technique and the type of sorbent that will be
effective and able to avoid cross media issues after use (not making an
air issue into a solid waste or water issue). R&D is needed to test
alternate sorbents and their fitness for the purpose of acid gas
control and the cost effectiveness of their use.

EPRI comments on the data not representing the range of operating
conditions and the ability to comply under all normal and transient
conditions.

``The ICR did not require EGUs to test over the full
range of operating conditions, and therefore the ICR data do not
represent the entire range of emissions variability from power plants.
Additional measurements are needed to adequately characterize the
variability of HAPs and surrogate emissions during normal plant
operations. Sources of emissions variability include fuels burned,
startup and shutdown conditions, partial load operation, and other
reasonably foreseeable changes to operating conditions. Limited
measurements at one facility indicated that trace metal variability was
comparable to the variability of filterable PM measurements.''

The EPA's Information Collection Request (ICR) collected data for a
number of static conditions but data is not available to assure power
plants can comply with a range of operating conditions typical of coal
plant operation. In order to retain reliable grid operation and
maintain the obligation to serve customers with economic, secure power,
it is normally necessary to vary load from different types of
generation sources. Now that more ``non-dispatchable'' power such as
wind is generated in certain areas of the country such as the upper
Midwest and Texas, power companies are seeing added requirements to
turn down or reduce coal generation periodically and bring it back if
those non-dispatchable sources cannot generate. This variation in
demand will mean chemical and physical processes may be called on to
operate out of their most efficient or effective ranges and it may be
difficult to meet the emission standards during transients or at
partial loads. R&D is needed to evaluate and test, understand, model
and provide guidelines for design and operation in these instances.
As regulations become more sweeping, with less flexibility in terms
of time averaging and emissions banking and trading, fuel-specific
nuances become magnified in their impact on compliance assurance, as do
the relative effects of emissions from transients (startups, shutdowns,
and load changes), seasonal variations, effects of one emission control
device (or new additive) on another device, and measurement
reliability. Compliance timetables are short and coal plant ``back
ends'' are packed with emissions control devices so many strategies for
capturing trace toxics involve modifications to existing systems or
operations. A major industry concern is unintended consequences that
could risk noncompliance or lead to premature corrosion or other
failure of emissions control equipment.
In the near term, EPRI notes particular technology development and
demonstration needs as follows:

Controls consistent with 90%-plus mercury reduction for
all applications and fuels

Managing acid gas removal including HCl and SO
2

as surrogates for acid gases

Model, test, and develop operation and maintenance
practices for wet and dry scrubbers which are also used to remove HAPs,
and how to best manage cross-media impacts and implications for
operations, such as corrosion due to high levels of chlorides or
halogens in plant process water

Selective catalytic reduction (SCR) NO
x

control catalyst regeneration strategies, as well as SCR catalyst
management systems consistent with year-round system operation at >90%
NO
x
removal, minimum SO
3
generation, and maximum
oxidation of elemental Hg in the flue gas

Robust, reliable FGD systems for all coals

More wear-tolerant, low-pressure-drop, ultra-high-
efficiency baghouses for control of particulates from a wide range of
fuels; improved performance of electrostatic precipitators (ESPs) for
applications not suited to baghouses or amenable to upgrading in
existing power plants; and demonstrated wet ESPs for acid mist and fine
trace metal particulate capture

Resolution of balance-of-plant issues and long-term
operability issues for recently installed environmental controls.

Recent Testimony by J. Edward Cichanowicz an independent consultant
based in Saratoga, California before this Subcommittee October 4, 2011
is available on line at the following url (http://science.house.gov/
sites/republicans.science.house.gov/files/documents/hearings/100411--
Cichanowicz.pdf) his testimony identifies issues with the short time
for compliance being proposed under MACT and CSAPR. We agree with the
concerns addressed by Mr. Cichanowicz and suggest that this creates an
urgent need to get DOE support for understanding the HAPs issues and
solutions. We need to understand unintended consequences, the ability
to comply under all conditions, and the ability of the planned
equipment to address varying coals and water compositions. Given the
tight schedule the power industry faces for compliance, DOE could best
support industry RD&D efforts by building upon previous work for
mercury controls, including management of HAPs control processes to
minimize water and/or solids contamination. In other words, power plant
operators need help identifying and testing approaches to managing HAPs
issues holistically for the variety of plant types and conditions. To
summarize, specific areas the industry needs support in are:

1.  Understanding HAPs control (mercury, HCl, trace metals)
balance of plant issues such as corrosion, increased PM emissions,
solid by-product disposal/use, leaching, and wastewater treatment

2.  Development of lower cost HAPs control options to maintain
the viability of coal-fired power plants

3.  Understanding the variability of long term HAPs control
effectiveness (startup, shutdown, cycling)

4.  Understanding the underlying mechanisms for HAPs formation
and control, as well as independent assessments of emerging emission
controls

Efficiency and cost improvements for gasification power plants:
synthesis gas cleanup at higher temperatures, higher gas turbine firing
temperatures and larger turbines, lower-energy oxygen supply
technologies, and better plant controls

Gasification technology uses heat and pressure to partially oxidize
a carbonaceous fuel to create a combustible ``synthesis gas,'' which
can be fired in a highly efficient combined cycle (gas turbine and
steam turbine) power block. In the power industry, gasification plants
are used with inexpensive solid fuels, such as coal or petroleum coke,
or sustainable fuels such as biomass, and in some cases, the plants
sell steam or hydrogen as well as electricity. Gasification technology
is also offers a relatively lower incremental cost for incorporation of
CO
2
capture and compression, relative to other fossil power
technologies. However, a ``base'' gasification combined cycle power
plant (i.e., one without CO
2
capture and compression)
usually costs more than other types of fossil power plants. Hence there
is an RD&D focus on improving gasifier, power block, and auxiliaries
performance and cost by equipment improvements and improved
integration. DOE has long and active history in coal gasification RD&D,
providing a knowledge and experience base to manage an accelerated
program of competitiveness-driven gasification combined cycle
technology development and demonstration, which would parallel ongoing
efforts on integrating CO
2
capture and compression.
The synthesis gas, or syngas, produced in a gasifier consists
chiefly of CO, with varying degrees of methane and heavier
hydrocarbons, hydrogen, water vapor, CO
2
, nitrogen, and H2S,
COS, and other sulfur compounds. To prevent erosion and corrosion in
the gas turbine and associated heat exchangers and ducting, and to
limit stack emission of sulfur species, the ``raw'' syngas is cleaned
of particulate matter and sulfur compounds. Traditionally, this is
accomplished by cooling the syngas with a water quench and/or a series
of heat exchangers, and treating it with sulfur removal processes
commonly used in the petrochemical industry. Because cooling reduces
the thermodynamic properties of syngas, plant designers would prefer a
reliable and effective ``warm gas'' cleanup process (which is actually
quite hot). This has been the subject of numerous DOE RD&D efforts, and
new technical options are ready for pilot- and demonstration-scale
testing so this needs to be emphasized in the DOE portfolio.
To capture CO
2
from a gasification combined cycle power
plant, an additional step (known as water-gas shift) is added to the
syngas cleanup train, in which water vapor and syngas react in the
presence of a catalyst to form hydrogen and CO
2
. Established
chemical industry processes can remove the CO
2
, leaving a
high-hydrogen content that can be combusted in the gas turbine with
little CO
2
formation. Emerging technologies, such as
membranes, may be able to separate the hydrogen from CO
2

with less energy and in more compact vessels. One promising approach
couples the membrane with the water-gas shift reaction, saving
additional equipment, space, and cost and could benefit from additional
support.
Gas turbines designed specifically to combust high-hydrogen-content
syngas are being built, tested, and commercially introduced. These will
be essential to reliable and efficient gasification power systems with
CO
2
capture and compression. DOE development and
demonstration funding has contributed to success in this area. Equally
important in EPRI's view is RD&D to move gas turbine technology to
higher firing temperatures to improve efficiency and output--for both
conventional and high-hydrogen syngas. EPRI economic analyses show
larger and more efficient gas turbines to be perhaps the single most
important step to improving integrated gasification combined cycle
power plant economics. Although the commitment of gas turbine
manufacturers is essential to ultimate success in realizing new
commercial offerings, advances in the underpinning materials, design
concepts and integration engineering can advance with DOE and industry
cooperative efforts.
Many gasifier designs use a nearly pure oxygen input to the
gasification reaction. That oxygen has traditionally been produced by
cryogenic air separation units, which tend to be large, expensive, and
large energy consumers. DOE has been funding lower-energy alternative
oxygen production technologies, and EPRI has assembled an industry team
to participate in one such effort, the scale-up and testing of Air
Products' ion transport membrane (ITM) technology. EPRI is assisting in
assuring that the product design and test program meet power company
``real world'' operation and maintenance criteria and also in
gasification plant integration engineering.
EPRI believes that this model of cooperative DOE, industry team,
and technology developer RD&D speeds the path to successful deployment
and attainment of electricity cost reductions for the American economy.
EPRI is also investigating whether a variation in the process can be
used for supplying oxygen to future oxygen-fired systems (an early
example of an oxygen-fired system is the FutureGen 2.0 project).
Additional development and demonstrations in this area can support
cost, efficiency and energy security from a variety of coal utilization
processes.
Gasification power plants will also benefit substantially from
improvements in process measurement and control. For example, durable
fast sensors that provide real-time readings of temperatures and gas
composition within the gasifier would provide operators with more
accurate and timely measurement of syngas heating value, which in turn
could be fed forward to power block controls. For the last several
years, an EPRI program has been investigating the use of laser-based
sensors for this purpose, and scale-up and demonstration funding is
still needed.

For additional information on gasification power plant
RD&D opportunities, refer to EPRI publication 1023468, Advanced Coal
Power Systems with CO
2
Capture: EPRI's CoalFleet for
Tomorrow Visionr - 2011 Update.

Sustaining vital DOE RD&D on CO
2
capture, utilization, and
storage

EPRI's analysis of options needed for the future validates DOE's
high prioritization of RD&D to establish effective, economical, and
publicly acceptable technologies to reduce atmospheric greenhouse gas
buildup. This supports DOE's work on coal-based technology including
CO
2
capture at power plants, cost-effective cleanup and
compression for on-site geologic injection or transportation off-site,
CO
2
utilization where economical, and secure long-term
storage away from the atmosphere. In particular, EPRI identifies the
following current work as warranting continued RD&D to achieve the cost
and efficiency improvements necessary to allow viable commercial
deployment:

1.  R&D, scale-up, and integrated operation of coal power systems
based on gasification and oxy-combustion technologies (presently
through Clean Coal Power Initiative and American Reinvestment and
Recovery Act funding, loan guarantees, and other mechanisms plus base
program DOE funding)

2.  CO
2
capture, compression, and storage RD&D to seek
breakthrough innovations for low-cost capture, lower-energy
compression, and for larger scale integrated projects, to understand
operational flexibility, cost reduction options, and techniques to
verify long-term storage

3.  CO
2
utilization: because CO
2
used for
enhanced oil recovery (or other means of generating revenue) will be
essential to jump-starting CCS deployment, and may also help in
reducing dependence on foreign oil, additional geologic
characterization of areas near concentrations of power plants may be a
logical follow-on under the DOE regional carbon sequestration
partnerships programs

Chairman Harris. Thank you, and I thank the panel for the
testimony. Reminding Members Committee rules limit questioning
to five minutes.
The chair at this point will open the round of questions,
and I recognize myself for the first five minutes.
Mr. Klara, let me just ask a question. The CCS projects
that were funded from the first Stimulus Bill, was the total
allotted around a little over $3 billion? Is that correct?
Mr. Klara. The Stimulus Bill provided $3.4 billion but not
all that went to demonstrations.
Chairman Harris. How much of that----
Mr. Klara. Probably about a little more than $2 billion
went to demonstrations.
Chairman Harris. And of that $2 billion how much has been
spent in the last year and a half?
Mr. Klara. The spending on the Stimulus so far is probably
in the neighborhood of $500 million.
Chairman Harris. So the Stimulus Bill passed a year and a
half ago, which was supposed to provide immediate jobs
obviously at least $1-1/2 billion of that is sitting around,
something that you are waiting to spend.
Mr. Klara. Well, the----
Chairman Harris. Or can be spent but has not been spent,
hasn't created a job.
Mr. Klara. No. There have been some jobs created with----
Chairman Harris. Out of that $1-1/5 billion that hasn't
been allotted. Is that an accurate representation of the
timeline of things?
Mr. Klara. Yes.
Chairman Harris. Okay. Those projects, of the ones that are
going to be, that were funded, what is your belief, how many of
those will be successfully implemented to the point where all
that money will be spent?
Mr. Klara. Well, we have had one project drop out which was
indicated by Mr. Akins.
Chairman Harris. Okay.
Mr. Klara. Our AEP project. We have seven projects
currently being funded with Stimulus dollars, and right now all
of those projects continue to go forward in a positive
direction.
Chairman Harris. Now, was there any project further along
than the AEP project?
Mr. Klara. Yes. We actually have three projects that are--
have already started construction. One is with Southern
Company, another is with Archer Daniels Midland, and another
with Air Products. So, yes, three of the projects are actually
starting construction, and I would add, too, that the Stimulus
requirements were pretty specific on putting a lot of the money
on what we call these demonstration projects, and I think what
you will hear from members of the panel is when you deal with
building demonstration projects, retrofitting a plant or
building an entirely new plant----
Chairman Harris. Right.
Mr. Klara. --that the spending profile was such that it
takes a couple----
Chairman Harris. Yes. They are not shovel ready, are they?
Mr. Klara. No. Correct.
Chairman Harris. Right, and so that is what I thought.
Let me ask a question, Mr. Dalton, I guess if I summarize
your testimony, you kind of believe that we really ought to
have a diversified approach to research on these coal-related
areas.
Mr. Dalton. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Harris. Okay.
Mr. Dalton. Absolutely. We need all the options, coal,
nuclear, renewables, several options.
Chairman Harris. So that the movement in certainly with
regards to the Stimulus Bill and in the President's budget
toward really a concentration on just CCS with really decreased
funding to the other areas is probably in your opinion might
not be the right direction to go.
Mr. Dalton. Well, we see that the addition of work on very
high efficiency, getting that to the----
Chairman Harris. Right.
Mr. Dalton. --demonstration stage is critical, and there
are new areas that are opening up partly due to regulation, on
water and HAPs--that are requiring some additional----
Chairman Harris. Right. There might be very useful places
for that funding. Yes. I can understand that.
What is the--and a question to Mr. Akins and Ms. Gellici, I
mean, what is the future for, the outlook for building new
power plants? Mr. Akins, you have said you have one, the ultra-
supercritical plant under construction. If I could just ask
about how much more does that cost to build than a regular
plant in a conventional, I guess we call them sub-critical
plants.
Mr. Akins. Typically a sub-critical plant would probably be
on the order of $1.5 billion, maybe $1.6 billion. This one is
around $2.1 billion to $2.3.
Chairman Harris. And it consumes how much less fuel is your
consumption per----
Mr. Akins. Eleven percent.
Chairman Harris. Eleven percent less, and of course, with
that it is also less pollution because you are burning less
fuel I take it----
Mr. Akins. Yes. Absolutely.
Chairman Harris. --with that. Okay, and so to the rate
payer, I mean, what is your estimate of how much that increases
the cost of the electricity?
Mr. Akins. Generated?
Chairman Harris. Yes.
Mr. Akins. For the power plants?
Chairman Harris. You go to the ultra-supercritical versus
the conventional.
Mr. Akins. Over the lifetime of the plant----
Chairman Harris. Yes.
Mr. Akins. --it will be relatively negligible compared to
the sub-critical.
Chairman Harris. Negligible.
Mr. Akins. And from an environmental standpoint you----
Chairman Harris. Beneficial. So the testimony we have
heard, and well, I guess we didn't hear it but I was going to
ask Mr. Klara actually to substantiate that, is it true that,
in fact, a goal is only a 30 percent increase in costs?
Mr. Klara. Well, we have two pathways.
Chairman Harris. Right.
Mr. Klara. The one pathway is for new plants gasification
which would be 10 percent----
Chairman Harris. Right.
Mr. Klara. --and the other is for pulverized coal-based
systems, which is what you are talking about with Mr. Akins,
and yes, there is a 35 percent increase with the cost of
adding----
Chairman Harris. For the CCS technology.
Mr. Klara. Correct.
Chairman Harris. Right, but when you are talking about
ultra-supercritical, that is not--that has nothing to do with
CCS. Right? That is just thermal.
Mr. Klara. That is correct.
Chairman Harris. Right. So, in fact, if what you are
looking to do is decrease pollution and keep the costs over
the--of the lifecycle of the plant relatively stable, you
wouldn't pick a CCS technology, I mean, because, I mean, if
our, I mean, I can guarantee that if our research goal is to
only increase the cost by 30 percent, it is going to increase
at least 30 percent. Is there any reason to believe, Mr. Klara,
that we are going to hit below that target in the next few
years for increased costs? Well, we won't know until the
demonstration projects are done, I guess.
Mr. Klara. Well, yeah. You are correct that when you add
CCS to a plant that it adds cost. Within our program we are
trying to look at a no-regrets path forward, and part of that
no-regrets, for example, is that if you could use the carbon
dioxide that is captured for valued-added stream back such as
enhanced oil recovery, now you can potentially have a scenario
where it is----
Chairman Harris. Sure. A win-win.
Mr. Klara. --neutral. Yeah. Win-win.
Chairman Harris. Right.
Mr. Klara. Right.
Chairman Harris. Thank you.
Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was Chair of the
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight of the Science
Committee in the two previous Congresses to this one, and
questioned and criticized the Bush Administration for pulling,
without explanation, the funding for Future Gen, which was the
principal, very ambitious carbon sequestration effort for coal.
So I do support R&D for the coal industry.
Mr. Dalton urged DOE to help the coal power industry meet
competitive challenges. Ms. Gellici, Ms. Gellici, by the way, I
appreciate your using, speaking slowly and using--avoiding big
words in your testimony so I could understand it. You said that
the sole focus on basic engineering and research will not
advance commercial technologies to the marketplace, and the
Department of Energy funding of late-stage, large-scale
demonstration activities advances the efficiency, reduces
capital costs, and increases the commercial availability of the
advanced coal technologies.
Do all of you agree with those statements? Do any of you
disagree with those statements? I am not seeing any movement at
all. Either heads up or down. I assume no one disagreed at
least.
Why does, again, I supported research, R&D funding for
Future Gen but why is the coal industry not capable of doing
that research themselves? The basic research, to applied
research, to demonstration on their own. What are the reasons
that justify government funding for research that helps that
industry?
Mr. Akins.
Mr. Akins. Sure. I will be happy to answer that. You know,
when you start with these technologies, it is basically bench-
top scale, and then it moves to more proving the technology.
Moving to commercial scale is an entirely different approach
where the magnitude of the dollars associated with it are
important to be able to deal with from a cost-recovery
perspective. In our business we have to be able to recover our
costs from someone, and we invested over $100 million dollars
on the integrated carbon capture and storage project I talked
about, and our shareholders wound up footing that bill.
For--to upscale this project to another CCS project would
be on the order of $700 to a billion dollars, and when you talk
about that kind of dollar commitment, there has to be some
sense of certainty around not only legislation or regulation
but also for us to be able to recover from our costs from the
customers. We have to be able to have some requirement to do
so.
Mr. Miller. So the funding for that research and
development does not crowd out private investment in
innovation?
Mr. Akins. The funding for the research if the government
were to fund it?
Mr. Miller. Right.
Mr. Akins. If the government were to fund that type of
research, we could advance the technology.
Mr. Miller. And it wouldn't discourage private investment.
It wouldn't crowd out private investment.
Mr. Akins. I think at the demonstration scale you could
have private investors involved with that as well.
Mr. Miller. Okay.
Mr. Akins. I think it is a public-private partnership.
Mr. Miller. All right. Well, do you think that the same
arguments apply to the less mature technologies? One of you
suggested we should be doing all coal and nuclear and the newer
technologies as well. Do the same arguments not apply to them,
and if not, why not?
Mr. Akins. Are you asking me?
Mr. Miller. Yes, sir. You were--you volunteered earlier
so----
Mr. Akins. Okay. Yeah. I think the advancement of the
technology is needed regardless. If we are going to have a
secure energy future in this country, it includes all
resources, and the government has to be very selective about--
and make sure we maximize the value of taxpayer funds to
support these kind of investments, but it is clearly important
to advance the technologies on all fronts.
Mr. Miller. Mr. Foerter, the industry often has estimates
on what compliance with EPA regulations will cost, and it
usually assumes the worst possible case, the most expensive,
the most time consuming, retrofits, wet scrubbers, cooling
towers. All that will be required. But it appears in most cases
there are other technological--there are other technology
options that are less costly and can be implemented more
quickly.
Could you describe the options the power companies might
have and what the biggest factors are in how they choose
between technologies, how to proceed, what the technological
readiness is of those various options?
Mr. Foerter. Yes. In fact, that is an astute difference
between the difference of trying to predict what is going to go
into the marketplace and what the marketplace actually creates.
When EPA makes predictions, they use big monolithic type of
technologies, and that is where the big costs come out.
But when you get into the marketplace and there is--it is
quite different, and quite frankly, our industry moves with
that market, what the demands are and what the changes are.
Things like ash handling and water cooling issues. All those
things start to come in. We start looking towards dryer
systems, so a wet scrubber becomes not the favorite, and you
start moving down that same chain and looking at dry systems or
direct sorbent injection kind of systems. Direct sorbent
injection installed in a couple of months. A wet scrubber takes
30 plus months to install it.
So it is very different in that kind of thing. Wet
scrubbers, very expensive, direct sorbent injection, relatively
inexpensive. Your cost--the biggest cost there is going to be
the reagent that you are continually feeding into the system.
You turn it on, and you turn it off, and that is where your
costs begin and end.
So we have really diversified within our system, and I,
when I talk about our pollution control technologies, if I
started to move towards saying just wet FGD for scrubbing, you
know, there would be a lot of my members who would be very
unhappy because they are all out there competing in the
marketplace to sell all the different suites of technologies,
and the same thing happens with NOx and every other pollutant
that is out there.
Mr. Miller. My time has expired.
Chairman Harris. Okay. Thank you. The gentleman from
Maryland.
Mr. Bartlett. The other gentleman from Maryland. Thank you
very much.
We use energy in basically two different forms. We use
electrical energy for a great variety of things, and we use
liquid fuels, and it is hard for us to compare the relative
costs of those because they are used in very different domains.
But when we can use them for the same thing like in an
electric car, we find that you have about half the cost per
mile in the electric car that you do in a car using liquid
fuels. So we know that the electric power is much cheaper per
unit of power than liquid fuels. The average American should be
a big fan of coal because the electricity is so cheap largely
because coal is the source of the base load production for most
of our electricity.
Ms. Gellici, you said that we have 200 years of coal. Is
that a current use rate?
Ms. Gellici. That is correct. Yeah.
Mr. Bartlett. Okay. Be careful when you hear somebody say
we have so many years of something at current use rates. Do you
suspect that we will increase the rate at which we use coal?
Ms. Gellici. Yeah. The latest projections are that we will
probably increase our use of coal by about 25 percent.
Mr. Bartlett. Twenty-five percent. Wow. Do you know what
that does? If you increase the use of coal only two percent----
Ms. Gellici. Uh-huh.
Mr. Bartlett. --two percent growth of something, it doubles
in 35 years. It is four times bigger in 70 years, it is eight
times bigger in 105 years, it is 16 times bigger in 140 years.
That means that your 200 years of coal, if we increase its use
only two percent, you suggested 25 percent, that dramatically
reduces the time. But if the increase is only two percent, that
200 years now shrinks to 70 years. So be very careful when you
hear somebody say we have so many years of something at current
use rates, because our economy is growing, our use of energy is
growing. That is very likely to increase.
You know, that is not a very long time, is it? Seventy
years. And then it is all gone if we increase its use only two
percent. You said we might increase its use 25 percent, which
would dramatically reduce the time that it is available to us.
I would ask to have a couple of slides loaded into our
little magic system. I don't know if it did or not but--oh,
there they are up there. Okay. Well, I can't read the end of
that. Does that say 35 years or 30 years? That one says 35
years. Okay. We are talking about secure energy future, and
this is a chart produced by the IEA. This is a creature of the
OECD, one of the two best entities in the world tracking the
use and predicting the continued production of liquid fuels.
If you look at that, you will see if--I am sure that is--
yes, that is the one that ends in '35. They are predicting that
by '35, we will have, will be producing only 96 million barrels
a day. Now we are producing 84 million barrels a day. Just two
years before this their prediction had us in--by 2030,
producing 106 million barrels a day.
Notice the dramatic reduction in the production of
conventional oil. That is the dark blue on the bottom. It is
now plateaued for four years at 84 million barrels of oil a
day. That plateau was reached in our country in 1970.
With everything we have done since then since like finding
a lot of oil in Alaska and the Gulf of Mexico and drilling more
oil wells than all the rest of the world put together, today we
produce half the oil that we did in 1970. The United States
certainly has to be a microcosm of the world, and you see those
two big wedges in there? The medium blue wedge and the light
blue wedge, the light blue wedge is oil that we are going to
get from fields that we discovered that are too tough to
develop like under 7,000 feet of water and 30,000 feet of rock
out in the Gulf of Mexico. The medium blue field there is
fields yet to be discovered. Those two wedges, if the United
States is any indication what will happen, will not occur.
So we are talking about a secure energy future. The
production of liquid fuels for the future is going to do in the
world what it has done in the United States, and it is
inexorable. We could not turn it around with all of our
creativity and innovation, and so this is where the world is
going, and we are talking about a secure energy future since
that was a part of the title of our hearing, I just wanted to
use this opportunity to present those graphs to show that we
have got some big challenges facing us.
Thank you all for what you are doing to help us have more
energy.
[The slides follows:]

Slides Presented by Mr. Roscoe Bartlett, Committee on Science Space and
Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I recognize the chairman, the gentleman from Texas.
Mr. Hall. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to talk a
little about the EPA's war on energy, which is really the
President's war on energy, which this Committee and this
Chairman has devoted a lot of time and effort to examine over
the last few months.
Specifically, with regard to coal, we have looked at the
science behind the whole package of Clean Air Act rules EPA's
pursuing, and we held a hearing in September on the Cross-State
Rule. I don't know if you all know about that or you remember
about it or you read the reports within it, which would force
the closure of significant coal-fired electricity capacity,
even in my State of Texas, as close to me as I know about, and
I don't know how much other all over the country. But we would
lose 500 jobs in one plant, in one little district there.
EPA announced revisions to this rule last week after some
weaknesses in the technical assumptions were exposed and after
Dr. Broun and this chairman, Dr. Harris, and other subcommittee
chairmen and Congressman Rohrabacher had raised that Billy
Graham preaches against all the time on it, and I don't think
that is enough. And I have called for EPA to simply scrap the
rule and start all over.
My question is this, primarily Mr. Akins, but I welcome
thoughts from anybody else that wants to chime in on it. How do
the compliance deadlines under mercury MACT and the Cross-State
rules compare with the time it takes to install the emissions
control equipment necessary to achieve compliance with these
rules?
That is a question, and what happens when you can't install
equipment in time under these rules?
Mr. Akins. Chairman Hall, it is something we have done
quite a bit of analysis on. It typically takes us about five
years to put a scrubber in, and I think EPA had assumed three
years. I don't know where their numbers come from. I will let
them cover their numbers, but with our numbers they are based
upon substantial amount of work done. We spent $7.2 billion in
the last--over the last decade putting in scrubbers and SCRs,
Selective Catalytic Reduction devices. It typically takes about
five years because we have to go through regulatory approvals
with the In-State Commissions before we are able to move
forward with the projects. And then by the time you get through
with engineering, project design, construction, those types of
things, a procurement of supplies, you are talking about five
years.
So--and as what we have looked at is the staging of all
those projects, it is just impossible to get the number of
projects done in that amount of time. If we--for AEP it would
force the retirement of about 6,000 megawatts of generation. If
you impute that, we are about ten percent of the coal-fired
capacity in the country. That would be about 60,000, which is
right in line of many of the studies that have been done.
So if we can't get the projects done, we either retire the
units or we put them on idle. I mean, we just don't run them
for a period of time, but then that capacity is not available
to customers during peak periods like in Texas over the summer.
Mr. Hall. Well, listening to your figures I think in the
Cross-State rule I think they gave from now to the first of the
year----
Mr. Akins. That is right.
Mr. Hall. --to correct that. Just impossible. Absolutely
impossible to do that. Impossible even to plan it probably.
Mr. Akins. That is right.
Mr. Hall. And yes, ma'am.
Ms. Gellici. Yes. I think this is one of other major
differences between the current regulations as proposed and the
ones that we had seen in the past. We have much success in
meeting the SO
2
and NO
X
reduction
regulations that have been imposed in the past because we had a
five to ten year compliance schedule. The Acid Rain Program was
passed in 1980, and we had five years, five to ten years for
compliance.
What we are looking at now is extremely truncated
compliance deadlines, sometimes three years if we are lucky but
oftentimes much shorter. So----
Mr. Hall. Well, thank you for that, and Mr. Akins, another
thing. Can you explain how the new EPA rules could threaten the
electric grid reliability? Just address that. I think I have--
--
Mr. Akins. We have done----
Mr. Hall. --about 30 seconds left.
Mr. Akins. --an extensive amount of analysis. When you look
at the security of the electric grid, these plants are located
in particular areas for reasons, and primarily they supply
black start which restarts the system in a blackout or voltage
support, which supports the voltage so that, basically so power
could be delivered where it needs to be delivered.
So you look at these plants in these localized areas, if
you truncate all these units at one time, then we are
essentially shutting them down, and they are not available to
the grid. And in that context you are dealing with serious
reliability implications, and we have looked at it on our
system in a lot of detail and have confirmed that is the case,
and in fact, the regional transmition organizations like ERCOT,
Southwest Power Pool, and PJM have verified that.
Mr. Hall. I thank you, and my time is up. I thank you for
your service, each of you, and for coming here today, and I
thank the chairman for holding this hearing.
I yield back.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, and we still have
time before we have to go to see the President of Korea, so we
will have another round of questioning.
I will recognize myself for the first five minutes.
Mr. Klara, let me ask you, is--if those additional projects
fail to be--to reach completion, the CCS projects with the
Stimulus money, what happens to that money that is not spent?
And I guess we can just ask upfront, you know, the AEP project
that is not--it looks like it is not going to continue. I mean,
is that money going to come back to pay down the deficit, does
it--what does it do? What happens to that money?
Mr. Klara. Well, what we know or what I know is that any of
the Stimulus funds will go back to the Treasury. Where it goes
from there is beyond my ability to know, but, yes, any of the
Stimulus funding that is not used will go back to the Treasury.
Chairman Harris. Okay. So that is your belief. Okay. Very
good. I am glad to hear that because we got a little deficit
running.
I am going to ask you also, you know, I think everyone kind
of acknowledges cap and trade isn't going anywhere, and in the
absence of cap and trade, you know, they probably--I would
imagine there is really no economic way that you could have
carbon restrictions that wouldn't make electricity rates
skyrocket.
So given that what is the Administration's position on the
future of coal in America? I mean, is it--is CCS really going
to be financially viable at all unless you had a cap and trade
system? I mean----
Mr. Klara. Well, we have tried to design the program as a
no-regret strategy as I somewhat inferred earlier, and what I
mean by that is we have tried to design it such that the key
developments that come out of the program are going to be
valuable whether there is a carbon----
Chairman Harris. Well, let us assume that that is not
scalable. Let us just make the assumption that we are not going
to grow enough algae to use the CO
2
, and we are not
going to, you know, that, yes, there will be some secondary oil
recovery, but let us assume that that is a minimal benefit. Or
is that what the Administration is banking on, that we are
actually going to have some incredible breakthrough, and we are
going to be able to use every molecule of CO
2
from a
burnt piece of coal to do something else?
Mr. Klara. Well, we believe, looking at the R&D portfolio
and if it is successful. So if you make the assumption that it
can be successful----
Chairman Harris. I know, but Solyndra made the assumption,
too, and it is a lot of money and a lot of effort that it goes
to the negation of other efforts. It is really the bottom line
of the hearing. So--but I think you have answered the question,
so thank you for that.
Mr. Foerter, you made the statement that building new
plants is problematic, but Mr. Akins sitting next to you said,
wait a minute. They just built an ultra-supercritical plant,
and it is going to have negligible effect over its lifetime on
the cost of energy, and it is going to burn cleaner, it is
going to burn more efficiently. Why do you say it is
problematic?
Mr. Foerter. Well, and we agree on the thermal efficiency
and it is a better, you know, it has an upfront CO
2

benefit from it as Janet Gellici kind of talked about in the
different levels, and if you ask Mr. Akins about how long it
took to go through that permit and how problematic that process
may have been, it was very, very difficult.
Chairman Harris. So it is the regulations you mean?
Mr. Foerter. It was a process of trying to get--there is no
infrastructure right now that allows for power plants to be
built without sort of a CO
2
kind of issue. So the
real issue comes back to CO
2
.
Chairman Harris. Right. So if we negated the CO
2

issue, let us say we put it on hold for awhile, we could build
plants that actually are more efficient and cleaner and could
supply energy from coal.
Mr. Foerter. Well, the idea was that we were going to build
new plants that could be retrofitted with a technology which
would be proven, and that that is what AEP and others were
trying to do. But building new plants, there is an upfront----
Chairman Harris. Let me just clarify something because the
plant Mr. Akins is building actually produces less CO
2

per unit of energy.
Mr. Foerter. But they go through permit processes which are
strenuous----
Chairman Harris. Right, but it--just so, I mean, there are
ways to do it without sequestration I guess is what I am
getting to with that.
Mr. Foerter. Well, up front you do get the reduction.
Eventually you are--if you are trying to look to a 70 or 90
percent reduction on the CO
2
, you are going to start
using like a technology they were trying to demonstrate fully,
scale, and that is the chilled ammonia chilled ammonia process
which was working well at a smaller scale.
Chairman Harris. Right.
Mr. Foerter. They are getting ready to go to the next
level.
Chairman Harris. I don't know. It sounds like an ultra-
supercritical might be the next level. I mean, your testimony
did mention the availability of dry sorbent injection as a
technology option, pollution control, but as you know, EPA's
proposed utility rule relies heavily on this technological fix.
Which coal-fired units in the United States utilize that
dry sorbent injection to capture more than 90 percent of acid
gases?
Mr. Foerter. Well, the dry sorbent injection and EPA's--we
even commented on this. We think they have overused the DSI
part of it. We think they will go drier systems, which are dry
scrubbers and circulating dry scrubbers. We don't think we are
necessarily going to see the wet type scrubbers that Mr. Akins
was talking about that take five years to put in place. We will
see something that takes a lot less install time, permits still
have to be found, but we think that EPA, and we have told them
we----
Chairman Harris. Those permits again. Thank you very much.
I am out of time.
Mr. Foerter. Those permits are always there. Yeah.
Chairman Harris. I recognize Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have questions that kind of pursue the line of
questioning I had earlier for Mr. Foerter. Critics of the EPA
regulations say that the regulations will cause, will force a
number of coal plants to close and even compromise the
reliability of our electric system, but the projections of the
number of retirements do vary greatly, and the estimates as Mr.
Foerter said of costs also vary greatly. And it appears that
some that are supposedly going to close because of EPA
requirements were scheduled to retire anyway. That happens.
Plants wear out and also technology becomes obsolete. It is
replaced by other technologies.
Do any of you see the likely coal plant retirement rates--
or, how do you see the likely coal plant retirement rates under
current expectations, business as usual, versus that under EPA
regulations?
Mr. Foerter. If I could, if you have been watching, you
sort of have a trend of what the announcements are for
retirements and what the predictions are. I just saw one
yesterday. ICF had said 68 megawatts or gigawatts in
retirement, have now revised that down to around 40. There has
been--so you start putting more and new information in,
including final rules, not proposed rules, information. You
start seeing those numbers of retirements come down quite a
bit.
But on these plants we have 50 and 60-year-old air
pollution control technologies on some of these plants. So, the
technologies wear out, the boilers can wear out, the
technologies are put on them, wear out. They lack any useful
life in them.
So some of these are not even supplied with coal anymore,
and so they are just sitting there waiting for a decision to be
made, and decisions are starting to be made.
Mr. Miller. Okay. Can the rest of you kind of roughly
describe what plants you think might be retired and how they
compare in age and efficiency and the environmental profile
compared to the rest of the coal fleet?
Mr. Akins. Well, typically, I can speak for our system. We
have several of the 50, 60-year-old units, and the units
continue to operate fine. You have made a lot of capital
commitments associated with the continuing operation of those
plants.
One thing I wanted to clarify was when we talk about--they
were slated to retire anyway, that is true. We plan on retiring
several of these units through the 2020 timeframe and beyond.
The issue is the compliance time that forces those retirements
on an earlier basis.
So if we are talking about 2014, or 2015, you are
effectively truncating all of these units at the same time, and
that is the part that we have an issue with. These units are
going to gradually retire. They are intended to do that. We
will make decisions on the scrubber technology, on whatever,
dry sorbent injection or whatever, but many of these units will
probably not survive, but we know that, and we are making that
transformation to a new energy future, I think. My biggest
issue is that people need to have the patience to get there. I
mean, this is a heavy capitalized industry, and when we talk
about retiring units, they are done over time, they are done in
the manner to preserve the reliability of the system, and to
mitigate cost increases to customers.
So those are the kinds of things we look at.
Mr. Miller. Do the regulators, in fact, have the authority
to disallow closing a plant if it would threaten reliability,
electrical reliability?
Mr. Akins. Yes. They do. The in-state regulator would have
to give approval for retirement of the units.
Mr. Miller. Right.
Mr. Akins. And reliability of--the priority in that, they
have the resource requirements within the state, the regional
transmission organizations, they also have the authority which
is an extension of FERC, and then obviously if the EPA requires
something, then we are stuck between three agencies trying to
determine what the heck to do.
Mr. Miller. Okay. Mr. Foerter, you said that some of the
estimates of cost were high because they assume that the most
expensive technology would have to be used, but do you think
the estimates about forcing plants to close would change when
the industry really did look at the technological, regulatory,
and financial options available to them?
Mr. Foerter. Yeah. I think it would change because they
were looking at it like the example I would use with Mr. Akins
was five years for building this scrubber. Well, we are not
building any big scrubbers like that anymore, and for that
first 75 percent, we were building lots of big wet scrubbers. I
mean, that is what we spent our last five to seven years doing.
As we move into the future, we are moving towards things
that have less capital cost, so if you got an old car, and you
want to--you try to fix it up a little bit, you are not going
to go in there and put a new engine, a new transmission and
everything else. You are going to try to do what you can with
less capital costs. It might mean you use some fuel additives,
some things to keep it going, and that is exactly what is
happening, could happen in this industry. We can keep these
things running as long as we can.
There was a good testimony in another hearing where they
said they tried to close down a power plant, and then they went
through this due diligence process, took 29 months for
everybody to agree this is how they were going to do a closure
on that plant for reliability issues. So it does work really
well. We have a lot of confidence. In fact, we have heard that
reliability card used many, many times before and it just
doesn't happen, and we have done some very, very big capital
projects like SCR where the boiler goes out for quite a bit and
FGD, where these are much bigger tax construction projects.
So it hasn't happened in the past. I am not exactly sure
why I think it is going to happen in the future.
Mr. Akins. If I could respond to that, is it okay?
Mr. Miller. Sure. It is up to the chairman. My time has
expired.
Chairman Harris. Sure.
Mr. Akins. Okay. The first thing is we have spent $7.2
billion on investments in scrubbers and SCRs. We continue to
build large scrubbers and SCRs throughout out system. For 500
megawatt units, for 1,300 megawatt units, and we have achieved
over 80 percent reduction in SOx and NOx emissions from our
power plants.
To get the other 20 percent or 15 to 20 percent is another
$6 to $8 billion, and that is what we are slated to spend in
the future on these plants. So, there are smaller, more elegant
solutions that are cheaper, that are less efficient, but
scrubbers and SCRs continue to be built.
Mr. Foerter. If it is helpful, as they start building--that
means that these units they expect to keep around for a long
time, and they are willing to make the large capital
investments, and the way that the Clean Air Act is set up and
particularly the max standards is there is more time than is
provided there. In fact, we have used that more time in many
other industries. Someone was telling me about metal smelters.
You can't just shut a unit down and not have, you know, you
still have to have the capacity.
Same thing happens here. There is lots of flexibility, and
EPA has reached as hard as they can finding that flexibility,
and I think they have done a pretty good job. No one is going
to shut down units that are critical to reliability in the
Nation's power.
Chairman Harris. Thank you. Let me just take 30 seconds for
a follow-up with Mr. Akins.
The--with regards to the dry sorbent technology, is that an
answer for a lot of your plants? That is something that you
are----
Mr. Akins. Yeah. We are utilizing dry sorbent technology,
but in a lot of cases you get the maximum benefit for scrubber,
for removal efficiencies you are going to the larger scrubbers,
and for the larger units that is what you put in place.
Chairman Harris. The dry sorbent? Not--you can't do it.
Mr. Akins. We have dry scrubbers, we have wet scrubbers
but--and the dry sorbent injection is a smaller, less----
Chairman Harris. Smaller scale.
Mr. Akins. --efficient solution.
Chairman Harris. Thank you, and before we--and in the
last--if you would in the last minute, I am just going to ask
each of you if--we are going to, obviously going to spend money
on CCS. We are going to spend research money that is in the
pipeline. What should our number two priority be with regards
to government-funded coal research?
Just go down the line. Mr. Klara. What do you think? You
had a chance, all of you had a chance to look over what you
think we--where you think we should be spending the money.
Mr. Klara. Well, I think many of the things that were
mentioned here, for example, water management is a key.
Chairman Harris. You think water management.
Mr. Klara. And you have heard that time and time again.
Chairman Harris. Okay. Ms. Gellici.
Ms. Gellici. Efficiency improvements. I think even just
through simple operations and maintenance techniques we can
pick up three to five percent efficiencies at our existing
power plants. We have got some new source review issues that
are preventing us from doing that, but there is still quite a
bit of low-hanging fruit out there that we can reduce not just
criteria, pollutants, but SO
2
as well.
Chairman Harris. Okay. Mr. Akins.
Mr. Akins. Yeah. I would agree efficiency improvements.
Chairman Harris. And including thermal energy----
Mr. Akins. Yes.
Chairman Harris. --improvements?
Mr. Akins. Yes.
Chairman Harris. And Mr. Foerter?
Mr. Foerter. Yeah. The thermal efficiency of new power
plants as I previously had talked about. There is--you need to
test these things out. I mean, the TURK Plant is an ultra-
supercritical or supercritical, so we want to keep pushing that
envelope. You can get up to 50, maybe 51 percent. Those are
huge benefits as you get out there. They do need to be tested
and maybe not through the public permitting process.
Chairman Harris. Mr. Dalton.
Mr. Dalton. All of the above. Actually, efficiency and
water both----
Chairman Harris. Okay.
Mr. Dalton. --are----
Chairman Harris. Listen, thank you very much to the panel
for your testimony. It has been very eye opening. If any
Members have additional questions for the witnesses, we ask you
to submit them, and we are going to ask you to respond to them
in writing. The record will remain open for two weeks for
additional comments from Members. The witnesses are excused,
and the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:43 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix I:

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Mr. Scott Klara, Deputy Director,
National Energy Technology Laboratory

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Ms. Janet Gellici, CAE,
Chief Executive Officer, American Coal Council

Question Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

Q1.  As we examine the future of coal in America, it is important to
consider what the President said in November 2008 about the outlook for
coal under his Administration. He said that ``if somebody wants to
build a coal-powered plant, they can. It's just that it will bankrupt
them.'' The American Coal Council's member companies are in the
business of building and operating coal plants. What is the status of
and outlook for building new plants? And if new power plants do not
move forward, what does that mean for electricity supply and
reliability?

A1. In response, I would reference a recent Burns & McDonnell which
evaluated the existing coal fleet in compliance with various EPA
regulations, including a) the proposed Clean Air Transport Rule
(CATR)--now known as the Cross State Air Pollution Rule (CSAPR), b)
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollution (NESHAP)--
utilizing the proposed Industrial Boiler MACT rule as a proxy since the
proposed Utility MACT had not been introduced yet at the time, c) Coal
Combustion Residue Regulations and d) Clean Water Act Cooling Water
Requirements under sections 316(a) and 316 (b).
B&Ms analysis indicated that these regulations would require
approximately $135 billion in retrofit capital costs and $8 billion/
year in additional O&M expenses. The additional costs associated with
retrofit equipment are expected to increase the U.S. average
electricity price by approximately 8%. These costs would force high-
cost, smaller units to retire and would force some mid-cost, mid-sized
units to retire with most to be retrofitted with compliance pollution
control equipment. Most low-cost, large units would be retrofitted.
Announced coal-fired plant retirements as of the summer 2011, total
161 units = 26.5 GW; this represents 7% of the fleet on a capacity
basis and 14% of the fleet on a unit basis. B&M believes that 40-50 GW
of coal generation will be retired due to low utilization, current coal
and gas costs, and upgrade investments. Other industry analysts have
projected retirements on the order of 60-80 GW this decade.
Another study prepared by NERA Economic Consulting examined the
same EPA regulations and concluded that these policies would lead to 39
GW of prematurely retired capacity by 2015, about 12% of 2010 U.S.
coal-fired electricity generating capacity. Compliance costs were
projected to be approximately $21 billion (in 2010$) per year over the
period from 2012 to 2020. Capital costs for environmental controls and
replacement capacity are about $104 billion.
According the NERA study, ``Coal-fired generation is projected to
decrease by an average of 11.1 percent over the period from 2012 to
2020. The reduction in coal demand is projected to decrease coal prices
by 5.7 percent on average. In contrast, the regulations are predicted
to increase natural gas-fired generation by 19.7 percent on average
over the period and increase Henry Hub natural gas prices by 10.7
percent on average. The increase in natural gas prices would lead to an
estimated average increase in costs of about $8 billion per year for
residential, commercial and industrial natural gas consumers, which
translates into an increase of $52 billion over the 2012-2020 period
(present value in 2010 as of 2011 discounted at 7 percent). Average
U.S. retail electricity prices are projected to increase by an average
of 6.5 percent over the period.''
The study further notes that ``Over the period from 2012 to 2020,
about 183,000 jobs per year are predicted to be lost on net due to the
effects of the four regulations. The cumulative effects mean that over
the period from 2012 to 202, about 1.65 million job-years of employment
would be lost.''
With regard to potential job losses, another report released in
September 2011 indicates that efforts to curtail development of new
coal plants are contributing to potential job losses of 1.24 million
jobs in 36 states.
The intent of the Clean Air Act was to ensure that new units met
technology limits (New Source Performance Standards - NSPS), while
existing units were regulated by air quality standards. Overtime, the
fleet would get cleaner. EPA has changed the rules by forcing existing
units to meet limits on a schedule which cannot be met without closing
those units. Previous CAA programs made it possible to invest in
emission controls at the economic units to obtain the greatest
reductions. The newest, large units got NSPS technology while allowing
the older units to continue to run, enhancing reliability of the
electric supply grid. EPA used trading to allow for the most efficient
investments to reduce emissions. New EPA programs require technology at
all plants with limited trading.
Previous EPA programs provided a 5-10 year compliance schedule,
e.g., acid rain regulations were passed in 1990 and required compliance
at points in 1995 and 2000; CAIR was promulgated in December 2003,
requiring compliance at points in 2010 and 2015. New EPA programs allow
less than three years to comply, e.g., HAPS final rule is expected in
December 2011 with compliance required by 2014; CSAPR final rule
anticipated in August 2011 requires compliance in 2012 and 2014. It is
reasonable, therefore, to assume that EPA is interested in closure of
coal units, not control of coal-fired emissions.
A combined reduction in coal-fired electricity and a greater
reliance on natural gas is likely to result in an increase in the cost
of electricity and a loss of jobs. Additionally, prospective coal power
plant closures may result in significant challenges for the
transmission and power system reliability. As noted by ICF
International Inc. ``Because system reliability must be ensured during
these retirements, many plants slated for closure likely will be put
into reliability must run (RMR) status, delaying their decommissioning
timelines. Furthermore, significant challenges loom for plants in RMR
status. RMR rules are not designed to support multi-year, high-capital
retrofit investments but rather temporary status quo operations to
address reliability concerns. Plants that fail to retrofit or retire by
the deadlines specified in the EPA rules could incur heavy civil and
criminal penalties. They could also affect market prices as uneconomic
supply is kept on line.''
ICF's analysis indicated that the location of the prospective power
plant retirements could significantly impact system reliability, not
just from a resource adequacy perspective, but with transmission
security in mind as well. Among the key study results:

1.  Event retiring moderate amounts of capacity can incur the risk
of transmission security problems.

2.  Demand-side management can help mitigate a low-voltage
situation, but cannot solve the problem when load reduction
requirements are up to the 30 percent level.

3.  Sufficient replacement capacity is only part of the solution.
The location of this capacity is also important.''

``Removing up to nearly one-sixth of the nation's coal-fueled
generation in a geographically concentrated manner, i.e., concentrated
in MISO, PJM, and SERC from the power system has billion-dollar
implications, and decisions are very difficult to reverse once the
train has left the station.''

Q2.  In the current budget environment, it is imperative that DOE
improves prioritization and pursue only the most important and
impactful R&D. With that in mind, what would you change about the
current DOE R&D portfolio? Specifically, what at the 1-2 areas that you
believe deserve highest priority within DOE coal R&D? What are the 1-2
areas or activities currently supported that may warrant cuts in order
to pay for the highest priority?

A2. I will stand by my testimony in addressing this question. We need
to focus our coal R&D efforts going forward in four areas:

Advanced Energy Systems

Carbon Capture and Storage

Water Use Technologies and

Demonstration Projects

Given the current uncertainty that Congress will pass climate
legislation in the near term, it might be tempting to curtail funding
for Carbon Capture and Storage RD&D. The reality is that while GHG
legislation may not be imminent, GHG regulation is proceeding and we
need technologies to meet our long-term CO2 reduction goals. To be
successful, RD&D funding needs to be stable and consistent. Curtailing
the CCS technology program today could potentially negate gains we've
made to date and impair our ability to meet future requirements.

Q3.  The National Coal Council is a Federal Advisory Committee tasked
with advising the Secretary of Energy--at his request--on general
policy matters relating to coal. The last three NCC reports focused
exclusively on CCS and the Committee has not weighed in on non-CCS coal
issues in over five years. As a member of the NCC, and in light of the
increasing need to prioritize R&D efforts, do you believe there would
be value in an NCC report detailing a long-term roadmap to advance
entire system-wide advancements of a coal-fired unit to put DOE on a
path towards facilitating a new fleet of coal plants? Would it be
similarly beneficial if the NCC reviewed how best to meet stringent air
toxics rules or handle toxic waste byproducts?

A3. I believe an NCC report detailing a long-term roadmap to advance
clean coal technology developments would be duplicative of the efforts
historically and presently being advanced by the Coal Utilization
Research Council (CURC www.coal.org), in cooperation with EPRI and
other industry associates.
Does ``toxic waste byproducts'' refer to coal ash? Perhaps not
since coal ash is not ``toxic.'' If the question does relate to coal
ash, I feel again that others, such as the American Coal Ash
Association (www.acaa-usa.org) and the Utility Solid Waste Group
(www.uswag.org) are already presently addressing these issues and that
effort in this area by NCC would be duplicative.
In keeping with its charter, I believe there may be a role for the
National Coal Council to advise the Secretary on plans, priorities and
strategies to more effectively address technological, regulatory and
social impacts of current issues relating to coal production and use.
This would include addressing how to facilitate advancement of
tomorrow's clean coal fleet.
Responses by Mr. Nick Akins, President and
Chief Executive Officer of American Electric Power

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

Q1.  As we examine the future of coal in America, it is important to
consider what the President said in November 2008 about the outlook for
coal under his administration. He said that ``if somebody wants to
build a coal-powered plant, they can. It's just that it will bankrupt
them.''

American Electric Power is in the business of building and operating
coal plants. What is the status of and outlook for building new plants?
And if new power plants do not move forward, what does the mean for
electricity supply and reliability?

A1. AEP has a long history in building and operating coal plants and is
completing our Turk plant, a brand new ultra-supercritical coal plant
in Arkansas, which will be among the most efficient and cleanest coal
plants in the U.S.
In the near term, there are many uncertainties associated with
building new coal fired power plants, including stagnant growth
prospects in an already depressed economy, the currently low natural
gas prices, and future environmental regulations to name just a few. As
a result, AEP will mostly be building new natural gas plants over the
next few years to replace retiring existing coal fired units as well as
to meet additional demands for power. Furthermore, the addition of new
gas-fired capacity will provide for a more diverse portfolio in the AEP
generating fleet, which historically has been powered predominantly by
coal.
However, over the longer term, we believe that a portfolio of
different generating options will be essential in meeting future
demands for electricity. This includes coal, natural gas, nuclear and
renewable energy. To ensure affordable and reliable electricity, we
cannot entrust our future electricity supply to only one fuel or source
of power. While generating plants fueled by natural gas look
particularly attractive today due to the currently low natural gas
prices and the apparent plentiful supply of shale gas in the U.S. due
to the advent of natural gas fracking, in the long run, being overly
reliant on natural gas for electric power is not a wise strategy. Such
a dependence on natural gas has many inherent risks due to real
possibility of supply problems, price volatility, and higher prices--
all of which have occurred in the recent past. America's coal resources
remain plentiful and low cost and need to play an important role in
U.S. electricity supply in the future.
Regarding reliability, our greatest concern in the near term is
that the new EPA regulations that I discussed in my testimony will
force a significant number of coal fired plants to retire prematurely
in just the next 2-3 years. This could pose significant local and
regional reliability problems because new replacement capacity,
transmissions improvements and other measures to address reliability
problems cannot be completed in that short a period of time. As I have
noted, these reliability problems (along with adverse impacts on jobs
and the economy) can be largely resolved simply by extending the
compliance time frames through federal legislation.

Q2.  In the current budget environment, it is imperative that DOE
improves prioritization and pursue only the most important and
impactful R&D. With that in mind, what would you change about the
current DOE R&D portfolio? Specifically, what are the 1-2 areas that
you believe deserve highest priority with DOE coal R&D? What are the 1-
2 areas or activities currently supported that may warrant cuts in
order to pay for the highest priority?

A2. AEP believes that the Department of Energy (DOE) should focus its
coal R&D efforts on developing advances in ``next generation''
technologies to address the high cost and energy penalty concerns
associated with the reduction of CO2 emissions from coal fueled power
plants. Such technologies could include the following:

Advanced oxygen production systems;

oxy-combustion systems;

coal gasification systems with CO2 capture and
sequestration, including polygen systems that produce high value
products in addition to electricity; and

post-combustion CO2 capture systems that employ
catalysts, advanced enzymes or emerging membrane separation
technologies as a means to reduce dramatically energy penalties
associated with the operation of CO2 capture technology.

These next generation technologies hold out the promise of
generating electricity with very low emissions of both CO2 and other
conventional air pollutants at much lower energy consumption and
operating costs than currently available technologies. AEP believes
that the development and deployment of these technologies is critical
to ensure that coal, with its relatively low cost and abundant domestic
supply, remains a viable and important component of a portfolio of
domestic generation sources.
AEP generally does not favor in the near term federal expenditures
for additional large scale demonstration projects beyond those that are
already underway for deploying existing CO2 capture technologies.
However, federal investments that encourage early commercial deployment
of these CO2 capture technologies could be warranted for those projects
that use the captured CO2 for enhanced oil recovery (EOR) due to their
very large economic, energy independence, and energy security benefits.
DOE studies have identified 45-67 billion barrels of domestic oil
resources, most of which can only be produced if additional volumes of
CO2 from fossil fueled power plants and industrial sources become
available. At current prices for oil, these resources have an estimated
direct economic value of $5-7 trillion, and would provide important
energy independence, energy security, and employment benefits to the
nation. In the near-term, development of this domestic energy resource
may best be fostered by favorable federal policies to encourage the
deployment of these CO2 capture technologies for EOR purposes. In the
longer term, the federal coal R&D efforts recommended above for
developing next generation technologies would support development of
this domestic energy resource by lowering energy consumption and
overall operating costs of generating electricity while capturing CO2.

Questions Submitted by Ranking Member Brad Miller

Q1.  Please provide your name and employing organization(s).

A1. Nick Akins, President and Chief Executive Officer of American
Electric Power.

Q2(a).  Are you an officer or employee of, or otherwise compensated by,
any other organization(s) that may have an interest in the topic of
this hearing?

A2(a). No

Q2(b).  If the answer to question 2a is ``yes,'' please specify the
organization(s) and the nature of your relationship with the
organization(s).

Q3(a).  In the last three calendar years, including this one, have you
been a registered lobbyist?

A3. No

Q3(b).  If the answer to question 3a is ``yes,'' please list all of
your client(s) that may have an interest in the subject matter of this
hearing, and the dates between which you represented that client or
those clients.

Q4.  If you have worked as an attorney, contractor, consultant, paid
analyst, or in any other professional services capacity, please provide
a list of all of your firm's clients who you know to have an interest
in the subject matter of this hearing. These should be clients that you
have personally worked with in the last three calendar years (including
the present year). Provide the name of the client, the matter on which
you worked and the date range of that work. If there was a deliverable,
please describe that product.

A4. I have only been an employee of American Electric Power during the
specified 3-year period. I have not worked as an attorney, contractor,
consultant, paid analyst, or in any other professional services
capacity for any other company or firm during the last 3 years.

Q5.  Please provide a list of all publications on which you have
received an author or coauthor credit relevant to the subject of this
hearing. If the list is extensive, the 10 most recent publications
would be sufficient.

A5. Not applicable. I am not an author of publications relevant to the
subject of the hearing. This does not include any other publications of
American Electric Power related to our business, such as annual
reports, etc. Those are publications of the corporation, and not
written by me personally.
After several attempts by the Committee staff to obtain responses to
post-hearing questions, Mr. Foerter refused to furnish answers for the
record.

Questions submitted to Mr. David Foerter,
Executive Director,
Institute of Clean Air Companies

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. Stu Dalton,
Senior Government Representative-Generation,
Electric Power Research Institute

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


