- IMPACTS OF THE LIGHTSQUARED NETWORK ON FEDERAL SCIENCE ACTIVITIES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPACTS OF THE LIGHTSQUARED NETWORK ON FEDERAL SCIENCE ACTIVITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 8, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-33

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

68-227 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
Tennessee                        FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY

C O N T E N T S

Thursday, September 8, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Ralph M. Hall, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    12
Written Statement............................................    13

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking
Minority Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
U.S. House of Representatives..................................    14
Written Statement............................................    15

Witnesses:

Mr. Anthony Russo, Director, the National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    19

Ms. Mary Glackin, Deputy Under Secretary, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    29
Written Statement............................................    30

Mr. Victor Sparrow, Director, Spectrum Policy, Space
Communications and Navigation, Space Operations Mission
Directorate, National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    34
Written Statement............................................    36

Hon. Peter H. Appel, Administrator, Research and Innovative
Technology Administration, Department of Transportation
Oral Statement...............................................    39
Written Statement............................................    40

Dr. David Applegate, Associate Director, Natural Hazards, U.S.
Geological Survey
Oral Statement...............................................    43
Written Statement............................................    44

Mr. Jeffrey J. Carlisle, Executive Vice President, Regulatory
Affairs and Public Policy, LightSquared
Oral Statement...............................................    46
Written Statement............................................    48

Dr. Scott Pace, Director, Space Policy Institute, George
Washington University
Oral Statement...............................................    75
Written Statement............................................    77

Discussion.......................................................    88

Appendix 1: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Anthony Russo, Director, the National Coordination Office for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing................   106

Ms. Mary Glackin, Deputy Under Secretary, National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration.....................................   115

Mr. Victor Sparrow, Director, Spectrum Policy, Space
Communications and Navigation, Space Operations Mission
Directorate, National Aeronautics and Space Administration.....   132

Hon. Peter H. Appel, Administrator, Research and Innovative
Technology Administration, Department of Transportation........   141

Dr. David Applegate, Associate Director, Natural Hazards, U.S.
Geological Survey..............................................   147

Mr. Jeffrey J. Carlisle, Executive Vice President, Regulatory
Affairs and Public Policy, LightSquared........................   151

Dr. Scott Pace, Director, Space Policy Institute, George
Washington University..........................................   164

Appendix 2: Additional Material for the Record

Prepared Statement of Mr. Randy Neugebauer, U.S. House Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology..............................   172

Letter from Members of Congress to Hon. Julius Genachowski,
Chairman, Federal Communications Commission, Washington, DC....   173

Response to Hon. Randy Neugebauer from Hon. Julius Genachowski,
Chairman, Federal Communications Commission, Washington, DC....   178

Written Statement of the Coalition to Save Our GPS, Presented to
the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology..........   179

Letter to Hon. Ralph M. Hall, Chairman, U.S. House Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology from Mr. Malcolm D. Jackson,
Assistant Administrator and Chief Information Officer, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency................................   196

Letter to Hon. Ralph M. Hall, Chairman, U.S. House Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology from Mr. Michael W. Locatis III,
Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department of Energy...........   197

Letter to Hon. Ralph M. Hall, Chairman, U.S. House Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology from Mr. Subra Suresh, Director,
National Science Foundation....................................   198

Letter to Mr. Larry Strickling, Assistant Secretary of Commerce,
U.S. Department of Commerce from NASA..........................   199

Federal Aviation Administration: LightSquared Impact to Aviation:
FAA Perspective: PowerPoint Presentation to U.S. House
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology....................   204

Letter to Mr. Karl B. Nebbia, Associate Administrator, National
Telecommunications and Information Administration from Mr. Joel
Szabat, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Transportation Policy,
U.S. Department of Transportation..............................   219

Memorandum for Mr. Karl Nebbia, Associate Administrator, National
Telecommunications and Information Administration from Deanna
Archuleta, Senior Advisor to the Secretary, Department of the
Interior.......................................................   252

IMPACTS OF THE LIGHTSQUARED NETWORK ON FEDERAL SCIENCE ACTIVITIES

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 8, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 2:19 p.m., in Room
2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ralph Hall
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Impacts of the LightSquared Network on Federal Science Activities

wednesday, september 8, 2011
2:00 p.m.--4:00 p.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

Hearing Purpose

The purpose of this hearing is to examine the concerns and issues
associated with interference on the Global Positioning System (GPS)
signal from the proposed LightSquared LLC terrestrial broadband network
related to federal scientific activities.
The committee will review the results of recent testing on the
impact of the LightSquared network on the GPS signal. Potential
interference could disable the GPS signal used for critical U.S.
Government services and science missions such as the Next Generation
Air Transportation System, Earth and space science missions,
communications and navigation, space mission operations, weather
predication and climate observation, search and rescue, disaster
response and public safety, navigation, geodesy, and marine research
platforms and services. In addition, the Committee will examine
measures and costs necessary to implement and prioritize mitigation
strategies at federal departments and agencies.

Background

LightSquared is a Mobile Satellite Service (MSS) telecommunication
company owned by Harbinger Capital Partners Funds that was formed in
2010 with plans to provide a wholesale, nationwide 4G wireless
broadband network through their existing mobile satellite
communications services and a ground-based wireless communications
network that uses the same L-band radio spectrum as their satellites.
LightSquared's predecessor companies include SkyTerra Communications,
Inc. (SkyTerra), Mobile Satellite Ventures (MSV), Motient Services Inc.
and American Mobile Satellite Company (AMSC). \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  FCC DA 11-133, January 26, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
LightSquared operates its satellite service using two geostationary
satellites that cover North America and is also authorized to operate a
``next-generation'' satellite called SkyTerra-1, launched on November
14, 2010.
The new LightSquared terrestrial network will be located in the
same frequency band as their satellite service, which is adjacent to
existing GPS spectrum, and transmitted through approximately 40,000
base stations located primarily in major city markets. A number of GPS
stakeholders have raised concerns with the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) that the proposed LightSquared business plan will
interfere with existing GPS-based services.
In 2003, the FCC adopted initial rules allowing commercial
satellite service providers to operate a ground network integrated with
their satellite service. These integrated ground networks are referred
to as an Ancillary Terrestrial Component (ATC) of a Mobile Satellite
Service (MSS) and were intended to ``fill in'' gaps and boost the
penetration of the original satellite signal within dense urban
environments. The integrated ATC network would simply augment the
satellite signal.
The initial ATC ruling permitted MSS providers to enhance their
satellite service but was not intended to become an independent
terrestrial network. The FCC stated in the 2003 ruling:

The purpose of our grant of ATC authority is to provide satellite
licensees flexibility in providing satellite services that will benefit
consumers, not to allow licensees to profit by selling access to their
spectrum for a terrestrial-only service. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  FCC 03-15, February 10, 2003.

In 2004, the FCC granted LightSquared (then known as MSV)
conditional approval to build its integrated ATC ground-based wireless
network using its satellite spectrum near the GPS signal. \3\ At that
time, the GPS industry concluded that interference with GPS signal
would be manageable as the ATC would simply augment the satellite
signal.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  FCC DA 04-3553, November 8, 2004.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
MSV changed its name to SkyTerra in 2008. \4\ In 2010, Harbinger
Capital Partners Funds became the principal owner of SkyTerra, \5\ and
subsequently renamed the company LightSquared. The newly formed company
also developed a new business plan to provide a wholesale, nationwide
4G wireless broadband network through their existing mobile satellite
communications services and an integrated ground-based wireless
communications network that uses the same L-band radio spectrum as
their satellites.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\  ``Notice to Noteholders--Name Change,'' SkyTerra Press
Release, December 8, 2008.
\5\  FCC DA 10-535, March 26, 2010.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On January 26, 2011, the FCC granted LightSquared a conditional
waiver of its ATC authority ``integrated service rule'' meaning its
customers could offer terrestrial only services. \6\ LightSquared
maintains that its network will continue to offer both satellite and
terrestrial services bundled together but that its wholesale customers
could sell smartphones and similar devices that are only capable of
transmitting and receiving with the terrestrial base stations. \7\ The
approval also required LightSquared to form a Technical Working Group
(TWG) and issue a GPS interference assessment report, due to the FCC on
June 15, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  FCC DA 11-133, January 26, 2010.
\7\  Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In March 2011, LightSquared formed the TWG with industry
representatives and government officials to conduct testing and report
the results of impacts on the GPS signal. Comments and responses on the
TWG report were due on August 15th. Recent congressional testimony on
the report's findings indicate significant interference between the
LightSquared signal and the GPS signal. \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\  Hearing titled ``GPS Reliability: A Review of Aviation
Industry Performance, Safety Issues, and Avoiding Potential New and
Costly Government Burdens,'' Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure, U.S. House of Representatives, June 23, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Independent of the FCC-ordered study, the U.S. Government's
National Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Systems
Engineering Forum (NPEF) conducted its own testing of the potential
interference to military and civilian GPS users from LightSquared's
terrestrial network. The NPEF completed its report on June 1, 2011, and
concluded that harmful interference to the GPS signal would result from
the LightSquared network. The NPEF report recommended that the FCC
withhold authorization for LightSquared to commence commercial
operations and stated:

The U.S. Government should conduct more thorough studies on the
operational, economic and safety impacts of operating the LightSquared
Network.

In light of the test results from the TWG and the NPEF reports,
LightSquared has proposed a new plan to initiate commercial operations
utilizing the lower 10 MHz of its L-band spectrum that the company
believes will minimize interference with the GPS signal. \9\ While
LightSquared maintains its new proposal will significantly reduce
interference to a large percentage of the GPS user community, its
impact on aviation, space-based, and high precision users, such as the
FAA NextGen, NASA Earth Science missions, GPS meteorology, seismology,
and NOAA weather satellites and marine surveyors remains uncertain.
While these users represent a small percentage of the overall GPS
community, their services are critical to U.S. government operations
and science missions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\  FCC Proceeding filing 11-109, June 30, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The latest LightSquared proposal would first utilize the lower 10
MHz of its L-band spectrum allocation that is the farthest away from
the GPS signal at reduced power. Over time, provided interference
concerns with the GPS signal could be sufficiently mitigated,
LightSquared would then start operations across its entire upper and
lower spectrum allocation. Although not specifically tested, the TWG
report contains numerous recommendations (see Appendix 1) to conduct
additional testing on the impact on the GPS signal if the FCC were to
authorize LightSquared's latest commercial operations proposal. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\  Final Report of the Technical Working Grouup, June 30, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On July 6, 2011, the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration (NTIA) sent a letter to the FCC stating that, based on
the government testing and analysis, earlier concerns about GPS
interference remain unresolved and additional testing is necessary.
NTIA recommended that the FCC continue to withhold authorization for
LightSquared to commence commercial operations, stating:

NTIA supports the [National Executive Committee for Space-Based
Positioning, Navigation, and Timing] EXCOM's recommendation that
additional tests be performed and recommends that the FCC continue to
withhold authorization for LightSquared to commence commercial
operations until all the available test data can be analyzed and all
valid concerns have been resolved. \11\&
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\  NTIA Letter to FCC, July 6, 2011.

On May 11, 2011, the National Executive Committee for Space-Based
Positioning, Navigation, and Timing requested Departments and agencies
assess the impacts of LightSquared's concept for operations. The PNT-
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NCO asked Departments and agencies to answer the following questions:

Summarize and quantify current and future benefits
provided by use of GPS-based application and any cost-benefit analyses.

Summarize and quantify total sunk costs in GPS-based
infrastructure (prior years to date) and planned investments going
forward.

To the extent possible, qualify, quantify, and describe
risks to your agency's GPS-based mission capability, including ``lost
benefits'' if GPS performance were degraded (or lost) due to
LightSquared's signals including the costs to modify (or replace) GPS
receiver infrastructure and the time frame required to replace that
infrastructure.

As stated previously, comments on the TWG report were due on July
29, 2011, and responses to comments were due on August 15, 2011. At
this point, the FCC can rule on whether to approve LightSquared's
proposal at any time. While it is possible that the FCC could approve
LightSquared's proposal, the Commission has stated that it ``will not
permit LightSquared to begin commercial service without first resolving
the Commission's concerns about potential widespread harmful
interference to GPS devices. The FCC International Bureau's Order of
January 26, 2011 (Order), outlines our interference concerns and
unambiguously conditions LightSquared's commercial operation on first
resolving those challenges to our satisfaction. Under no circumstances
would I put at risk our nation's national defense or public safety.''
\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\  Letter from Chairman Genachowski, FCC, to Senator Grassley,
May 31, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Issues

Mitigation

While LightSquared announced that their new proposal (which offers
to delay the use of the upper band of their spectrum) mitigates
interference with 99 percent of GPS receivers, the GPS industry has
challenged these claims.
13,14
There would still be
interference, however, with high precision&ers--the primary users of
GPS that the Committee is concerned with. Recent statements by
LightSquared indicate that the remaining interference can be minimized
by the use of filters. Questions remain as to whether this is actually
possible, whether such a plan would require additional testing, how
much this would cost, who would bear the costs of developing these
filters, and who would be responsible for retrofitting impacted
receivers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ FCC filing, Recommendation of LightSquared LLC, June 30, 2011.
\14\ http://www.saveourgps.org/ pdf/TWG_Final_Report_2_Page_
Summary.pdf. &

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spectrum Use

LightSquared's new proposal also states that they will, ``delay
incorporating into its terrestrial network the upper 10 MHz of its
frequencies in which transmissions may jeopardize legacy GPS usage,''
but will ``work with the FCC, NTIA, and other government agencies to
explore all options for using a full complement of terrestrial
frequencies.'' \15\ Assuming LightSquared's proposal is allowed by the
FCC, it is uncertain whether the FCC will prevent LightSquared from
operating in the upper 10 MHz, or if this prohibition will be self-
imposed. Issues also exist relative to how to determine an acceptable
level of interference, who makes this determination, and when this
determination can be made.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\  FCC filing, Recommendation of LightSquared LLC, June 30,
2011.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spectrum Encroachment

High precision GPS receivers utilize a technique that receives
augmentation signals over a wide swath of Global Navigation Satellite
System (GNSS) spectrum in order to achieve sub-centimeter accuracy.
\16\ These receivers also ``look'' across the spectrum allocated to
LightSquared. While regulations exist to restrict broadcasts to certain
portions of the spectrum, no regulations exist related to receivers.
Therefore, LightSquared argues that interference ``is not caused by
emissions from LightSquared's base stations into the GPS band, but from
the failure of these legacy GPS receivers to reject transmissions from
LightSquared's licensed frequencies, which are adjacent to the spectrum
allocated for use by GPS.'' Conversely, the GPS industry argues that
the LightSquared spectrum was originally planned to be for a Mobile
Satellite Service (MSS), which, by design, can coexist with the GPS
signal since it is of a similar strength. Furthermore, the GPS industry
claims that the out-of-band spectrum that high precision GPS receivers
use in LightSquared's spectrum can coexist without interference as long
as the signal strength used by LightSquared in its spectrum remains
predominately satellite based as originally planned. Although FCC
waivers have allowed satellite providers to operate ancillary
terrestrial components (ATC) to augment satellite signals, agreements
were made to prevent interference with not only other bands, but also
interference with a provider's own satellite signal. \17\ With
LightSquared's proposal to operate a predominately terrestrial network,
bundled with a satellite service, adjacent to a low-level GPS signal,
these interference issues have now become problematic.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\  FCC Filing SAT-MOD-20101118-00239, Feb. 25, 2011.
\17\  Letter to the Office of Spectrum Management, NTIA, from
Mobile Satellite Ventures L.P. and the U.S. GPS Industry Council, July
25, 2002.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Witnesses

Mr. Anthony Russo, Director, National Coordination Office
for Positioning, Navigation and Timing

Ms. Mary Glackin, Deputy Under Secretary, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

Mr. Victor Sparrow, Director, Spectrum Policy, Space
Communications and Navigation, Space Operations Mission Directorate,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration

The Honorable Peter Appel, Administrator, Research and
Innovation Technology Administration, Department of Transportation

Dr. David Applegate, Associate Director, Natural Hazards,
U.S. Geological Survey

Mr. Jeffrey J. Carlisle, Executive Vice President,
Regulatory Affairs and Public Policy, LightSquared

Dr. Scott Pace, Director, Space Policy Institute, George
Washington University
Appendix 1
GPS Technical Working Group (TWG) Final Report--6/30/2011 (Excerpts)
2.7.5 Space-based Receivers

In NASA`s view, the interference to space-based GPS
receivers used for [radio occultation (RO)] RO would be severely
disruptive to NASA`s science missions based on the test and analysis
conducted in the TWG. Space-based GPS receivers used for navigation and
precise orbit determination would receive a lesser amount of
interference, though interference would occur.

NASA is of the view that, although the TWG members worked
diligently and in good faith throughout the period prescribed by the
FCC, it was impossible to adequately evaluate and thoroughly
investigate potential interference mitigation options for space-based
and high precision science receivers.

3.1 Aviation Sub-Team

Compatibility of aviation GPS operations with a single
lower 10 MHz channel could not be determined definitively without
additional study.

3.4 High Precision, Timing, and Networks Sub-Team

1.1 GPS Community Positions

(5) In the lower 10 MHz channel configuration, 31 of 33
High Precision and Network GPS receivers tested experienced harmful
interference within the range of power levels that would be seen inside
the network. High precision receivers fielded today would experience
harmful interference at up to 5 km from a single LightSquared base
station.

With respect to possible mitigations:

(4) We believe more study is required on the
feasibility of building future wideband High Precision, Network, and
Timing receivers and augmentation systems that would be compatible with
LightSquared terrestrial signals and which would provide the same
performance as today`s receivers and systems. We do not foresee any
possibility that LightSquared signals near the GPS band could ever be
compatible with wideband receivers.

(6) The viability of proposed future concepts to
accommodate high precision GPS and MSS augmentations in the presence of
interference from LightSquared terrestrial operations only in the lower
10MHz band has not been tested or validated as part of this study.
Appendix 2--Legislation
HR 2596. Commerce, Justice, Science Appropriations Act

Committee Report 112-169: Spectrum interference issues.--
The Committee is aware that NTIA and the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) are in the midst of a regulatory process with respect
to the Global Positioning System and that a technical working group is
reviewing potential interference issues. NTIA is directed to report to
the Committee following completion of the technical working group
activities, but no later than August 1, 2011, regarding the discoveries
of this technical working group and the scientific steps necessary to
address any potential interference concerns.

HR 2434. Financial Service Appropriations Act

Section 633: None of the funds made available in this Act
may be used by the Federal Communications Commission to remove the
conditions imposed on commercial terrestrial operations in the Order
and Authorization adopted by the Commission on January 26, 2011 (DA 11-
133), or otherwise permit such operations, until the Commission has
resolved concerns of potential widespread harmful interference by such
commercial terrestrial operations to commercially available Global
Positioning System devices.

Committee Report 112-136: The Committee is aware of
concerns related to possible interference to Global Positioning System
(GPS) devices due to terrestrial broadband service. The Committee
remains engaged on this issue and awaits the final report by the
Technical Working Group.

HR 1540. National Defense Authorization Act, 2012

Committee Report 112-78: The committee is aware that the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) issued a conditional order to a
commercial communications company on January 26, 2011, authorizing it
to provide broadband voice and data communications services that
potentially interfere with GPS. The committee recognizes that the Armed
Forces are highly dependent on GPS capabilities and services. The
committee believes that any space-based or terrestrial-based commercial
communications service that has the potential to interfere with GPS
should not receive final authorization to provide service within the
United States by the FCC unless and until the potential interference
with GPS is resolved. Such commercial services are planned to be
transmitted from 40,000 land-based towers across the United States. The
committee understands, based on information received from the Air
Force, that the signal strength of such service is estimated to be one
billion times more powerful than the GPS signal. Though the commercial
service would broadcast on a frequency adjacent to GPS, it may still
overwhelm GPS receivers, potentially causing a denial of service for
millions of users in the United States relying on GPS navigation and
timing services. Such users included the military, emergency
responders, maritime and aeronautical emergency communication systems,
banking transactions, air traffic and ground transportation systems,
and myriad commercial applications. The committee understands that the
Deputy Secretary of Defense sent a letter to the Chairman of the
Federal Communications Commission on January 12, 2011, highlighting the
``strong potential for interference to . . . critical national security
systems,'' and ``strongly recommend[ing] deferral of final action on
[the FCC order and authorization] until the proper interference
analysis and mitigation studies can be conducted.''

HR 2112. Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration,
and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2012

Committee Report 112-101: GPS Interference.--The
Committee recognizes that the use of the Global Positioning System
(GPS) is critical to USDA's mission, including natural resource
monitoring, forest firefighting, law enforcement, and research. In
addition, precision agriculture would not be possible without GPS. It
is estimated that U.S. farmers and ranchers have invested more than $3
billion in GPS technologies.

The Committee is aware of a decision by the Federal
Communications Commission that may disrupt the use of GPS, causing
significant problems for USDA and our Nation's farmers and ranchers.
The Committee directs USDA to ensure the FCC is aware of these concerns
and to work with other Federal agencies, such as the Department of
Defense and the Department of Transportation, to address them.
Appendix 3--International Perspective
European Commission
On July 19, 2011, the head of the European Commission's Directorate
General for Enterprise and Industry, Heinz Zourek, the agency that
oversees all operations of the Galileo program, has filed an official
comment with the FCC regarding the proposed LightSquared network. The
Commission expressed grave concern over interference with GPS and the
future European Galileo satellite navigation system. The filing states:

``I am writing to express our deep concerns about the
LightSquared system that is proposed for operation in frequencies
immediately below the radionavigation-satellite service (RNSS)
allocation at 1559-161O MHz. This band is the core band used by global
satellite navigation systems including GPS and you are no doubt aware
that Europe is at the advanced planning stage for its own system,
Galileo, which will be operational by 2014/15, and that will also use
this RNSS allocation. The LightSquared proposal for a terrestrial
network deployment in MSS spectrum would completely change the nature
of radio transmissions in the band.''

EUMETSAT

The European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological
Satellites (EUMETSAT) is an intergovernmental organization to
establish, maintain and exploit European systems of operational
meteorological satellites.
On July 26, 2011, EUMETSAT filed a comment with the FCC in response
to the LightSquared proposal. The filing stated:

``In reviewing the results and conclusions of the
Technical Working Group Report regarding space-based GPS receivers in
section 3.5 of the report, EUMETSAT shares the concerns expressed by
NASA, that interference to space-based GPS receivers used for Radio
Occultation (RO) would be severely disruptive also to the GRAS
instrument on Metop.''

``Furthermore, the initial assessment of interference
mitigation options have shown that even a restriction of the
LightSquared operations to the lower 10 MHz channel would not mitigate
the amount of interference to an acceptable level. Thus, EUMETSAT
supports the view of NASA that the only mitigation technique which
would resolve interference to space-based GPS receivers used for Radio
Occultation is to relocate high power terrestrial operations to a
different frequency band.''
Appendix 4--Illustration of Concerns with LightSquared

Chairman Hall. I'd like to welcome you to today's hearing
entitled ``Impacts of the LightSquared Network on Federal
Science Activities,'' and in front of you are the packets
containing the written testimony, biography, and truth in
testimony disclosures for today's witnesses. We have two, four,
six, seven.
I recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement.
The United States is the clear leader in precision,
navigation, and timing because of its consistent investment in
the global positioning system. This investment has been
protected and reaffirmed by successive Administrations'
support, which has led to the--one of the greatest
technological achievements I guess this Nation has ever
created. It is one that both government and industry can be
proud of, and it is the gold standard for billions of people
around the world.
While it is nearly impossible to quantify the exact impact
GPS has on society, it has certainly had an enormous impact on
economic productivity, furthered scientific understanding, and
modernized our national defense. Some recent reports estimate
GPS enables over three trillion in direct and indirect economic
activity and has created over three million jobs, a fact that
should not be overlooked with the President preparing to speak
before Congress in a few short hours on the state of our
economy.
In addition to the economic significance, the Global
Positioning System is also an important aspect of many federal
operations and scientific activities. Aerial and satellite
imagery, weather forecasting, climate observation, search and
rescue, air traffic management, rail transportation, traffic
management, vessel navigation, emergency response and mapping,
time distribution, seismic monitoring, land surveys, resource
management, agriculture, engineering, and scientific
observations all depend on GPS. Any potential disruption to GPS
and the science activities that it supports is of utmost
concern to this committee.
LightSquared has proposed a network to support the
President's challenge to identify 500 megahertz of new spectrum
for broadband service. While the President's goal is certainly
commendable, it should not be accomplished by destroying
existing systems and applications. As the President's own
National Space Policy states, the United States must,
``maintain its leadership in the service, provision, and use of
global navigation satellite systems,'' and ``invest in domestic
capabilities and support international activities to detect,
mitigate, and increase resiliency to harmful interference for
GPS.''
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the potential
impact of the LightSquared Network on federal science
activities. In doing so we hope to ensure that all the affected
agencies are aware of the potential issues, have communicated
those concerns effectively, are identifying potential
mitigation strategies, and are calculating the costs associated
with those mitigation strategies. In preparing for this hearing
we have seen varying degrees of preparation by agencies. Some
have done the expected due diligence, and some clearly have
not.
Although the FCC has stated that it will not allow
LightSquared to begin commercial service without first
resolving the interference issue, nothing actually prevents the
FCC from moving forward at this point. Since the testing that
was conducted this spring and summer, LightSquared has put
forth a modified plan. Unfortunately, no testing has been done
on this modified plan. I agree with the agencies before us
today that additional testing should be required before the FCC
allows LightSquared to begin commercial service.
Ensuring that GPS is protected is a vital national
interest. Its economic impact is clear, and its utility to
science is unquestionable, but what is also important is the
real impact on lives. Last month the FAA announced that
LightSquared's previous proposal would result in billions of
dollars of investment loss, a decade of delays to ongoing
projects, a cost impact of roughly 72 billion, and almost 800
additional fatalities, and that is just one Administration.
Compromising the GPS would also benefit foreign systems and
threaten U.S. leadership. As we have recently seen dependence
on Russia for access to International Space Station has already
compromised U.S. interests. Reliance on Russia's GLONASS
System, China's COMPASS System, of Europe's GALILEO System for
the precision, navigation, and timing would be just as costly.
We have to find a way to open up more spectrum for
broadband but not at the expense of GPS. This is, however, a
two-way street. GPS users and agencies also have to be mindful
that developing applications outside of their spectrum is
dangerous and ripe for conflict, even though previously there
were no problems.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hall follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Ralph M. Hall
Good afternoon. Welcome to today's hearing titled ``Impacts of the
LightSquared Network on Federal Science Activities.'' The United States
is the clear leader in precision, navigation, and timing because of its
consistent investment in the Global Positioning System. This investment
has been protected and reaffirmed by successive Administrations'
support, which has led to one of the greatest technological
achievements this nation has ever created. It is one that both
government and industry can be proud of and is the gold standard for
billions of people around the world. While it is nearly impossible to
quantify the exact impact GPS has had on society, it has certainly had
an enormous impact on economic productivity, furthered scientific
understanding, and modernized our national defense. Some recent reports
estimate GPS enables over $3 trillion in direct and indirect economic
activity and has created over three million jobs--a fact that should
not be overlooked with the President preparing to speak before Congress
in a few short hours on the state of our economy.
In addition to its economic significance, the Global Positioning
System is also an important aspect of many federal operations and
scientific activities. Aerial and satellite imagery, weather
forecasting, climate observation, search and rescue, air traffic
management, rail transportation, traffic management, vessel navigation,
emergency response and mapping, time distribution, seismic monitoring,
land surveys, resource management, agriculture, engineering and
scientific observations all depend upon GPS. Any potential disruption
to GPS, and the science activities that it supports, is of utmost
concern to this Committee.
LightSquared has proposed a network to support the President's
challenge to identify 500 megahertz of new spectrum for broadband
service. While the President's goal is certainly commendable, it should
not be accomplished by destroying existing systems and applications. As
the President's own National Space Policy states, the United States
must ``maintain its leadership in the service, provision, and use of
global navigation satellite systems (GNSS),'' and ``[i]nvest in
domestic capabilities and support international activities to detect,
mitigate, and increase resiliency to harmful interference to GPS.''
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the potential impact of
the LightSquared network on federal science activities. In doing so, we
hope to ensure that all of the affected agencies are aware of the
potential issues, have communicated those concerns effectively, are
identifying potential mitigation strategies, and are calculating the
costs associated with those mitigation strategies. In preparing for
this hearing, we have seen varying degrees of preparation by agencies.
Some have done the expected due diligence and some clearly have not.
Although the FCC has stated that it will not allow LightSquared to
begin commercial service without first resolving the interference
issue, nothing actually prevents the FCC from moving forward at this
point. Since the testing that was conducted this spring and summer,
LightSquared has put forth a modified plan. Unfortunately, no testing
has been done on this modified plan. I agree with the agencies before
us today that additional testing should be required before the FCC
allows LightSquared to begin commercial service.
Ensuring that GPS is protected is a vital national interest. Its
economic impact is clear, and its utility to science is unquestionable,
but what is also important is the real impact on lives. Last month the
FAA announced that LightSquared's previous proposal would result in
billions of dollars of investment lost, a decade of delays to ongoing
projects, a cost impact of roughly $72 billion, and almost 800
additional fatalities--and that is just one Administration. Compromises
to GPS would also benefit foreign systems and threaten U.S. leadership.
As we have recently seen, dependence on Russia for access to the
International Space Station has already compromised U.S. interests.
Reliance on Russia's GLONASS system, China's COMPASS system, or
Europe's GALILEO system for precision, navigation, and timing would be
just as costly.
We have to find a way to open up more spectrum for broadband, but
not at the expense of GPS. This is, however, a two-way street. GPS
users and agencies also have to be mindful that developing applications
outside of their spectrum is dangerous and ripe for conflict, even
though previously there were no problems.
With that, I yield to the Ranking Member from Texas, Ms. Johnson.

Chairman Hall. I now recognize Ms. Johnson for her opening
statement.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good
afternoon, and I would like to join you in welcoming our
witnesses for today's hearing.
There is no question that the Global Positioning System has
transformed our economy and our society in many ways. It has
been an amazing accomplishment, and some here may be surprised
to learn that this very successful program is a government
initiative. The Global Positioning System was established by
the Department of Defense to support their national security
mission needs.
But civilian agencies also rely on GPS to provide greater
services for the American public. There is no doubt that GPS
plays an essential role in public safety. This hearing will
allow Members to better appreciate how agencies use GPS as well
as what would be lost without a GPS. GPS satellite signals have
also spawned an entire area of innovation in private industry
with new hardware and applications that allow the average
citizen unprecedented tools for location and navigation. All of
this has been a free benefit to the Nation's economy that is a
product of sound management of the radio spectrum and direct
government investment.
The LightSquared proposal to build a nationwide broadband
network into frequencies that sit next to GPS has provoked
enormous controversy. I believe that if there is no way for
LightSquared to move forward without damaging GPS, then the FCC
should not approve the company's proposal.
However, I do not believe that FCC would make a decision
that compromises GPS services. The question the commission has
to settle and the question that this hearing will not allow us
to make much headway on is whether GPS can thrive side by side
with a ground-based broadband network.
I sincerely hope that they can coexist. Some of those
supporting the GPS industry claim such coexistence is
impossible. This suggests the physics of cell towers sending
out powerful transmissions will overwhelm the sensitive GPS
receivers.
However, others are feeling this is not a physics problem
but an engineering challenge. With filters for GPS units and
with reasonable beam shaping at cell towers, smart engineering
can solve these problems. I do not know whether we are dealing
with a physics problem or an engineering challenge, but I am
not convinced that any of the witnesses can today provide an
answer to that question with absolute certainty.
The agencies before us are testifying based on testing of
GPS equipment under the original LightSquared proposal, in
which the company would first build cell towers that broadcast
in the portion of the spectrum immediately adjacent to that of
GPS. That testing was not based on the new proposal from the
company to use the portion of the spectrum that is most remote
from GPS-assigned frequencies.
I fully believe that the FCC will make its decision based
on technical assessments and not the political pressure that
may come from private parties or even from committees of
Congress or the Executive. I hope to learn as much as I can
today about what additional testing may be needed to inform the
FCC's processes.
The core question for policymakers is this. Can we use the
L-band, or some portion of it, of the radio spectrum for an
earth-based broadband network without damaging GPS? I hope the
answer is yes, and everyone here should hope the answer is yes,
because we need more broadband just as we need GPS.
LightSquared is saying that they intend to invest $14
billion over the next eight years to build out the network,
employing 14,000 people in the process. In building more
information technology infrastructure, consumers would have
more choice in their telecommunications and data services with
lower costs and expanding access.
We should also see accelerating innovation of data-
intensive cellular applications that take advantage of the
greater capacities of this new network, creating more jobs,
more profits, and more growth in high-tech industries. And we
are desperately in need of jobs, profits, and growth right now.
And while I am skeptical that today we will get definitive
answers to the most important policy questions, I look forward
to listening to the testimony, and I thank all of our witnesses
for their participation.
Thank you, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Johnson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson
The Global Positioning Satellite system has been a complete
success. It is, for those who don't know, a government program. The GPS
system was established by the Department of Defense to help assist
their security mission needs, but civilian agencies also use the GPS
system to provide greater services to the American public. There is no
doubt that GPS plays an essential role in public safety.
But that is not all that has come from this public investment. GPS
satellite signals have spawned an entire area of innovation in private
industry with new hardware and applications that allow the average
citizen unprecedented tools for location and navigation. All ofthis has
been a free benefit to the economy from this government investment and
sound management of the radio spectrum.
The LightSquared proposal to build a nationwide broadband network
in the frequencies that sit next to GPS has provoked enormous
controversy. On the one hand, GPS is too important to lose and so if
there is no way for LightSquared to move forward without damaging GPS.
On the other hand, the promise of enhanced infrastructure and the jobs
that this might create is worthy of further study. This hearing will
allow Members to better appreciate how OUI agencies use GPS as well as
what would be lost should GPS suddenly go away. However, I do not
believe that the FCC would make a decision that compromises GPS
services. The question they have to settle, and the question that this
hearing will not allow us to make much headway on, is whether GPS can
thrive side-by*side with a ground-based broadband network.
Some of those lobbying for the GPS industry claim such coexistence
is impossible. They suggest the physics of cell towers sending out
powerful transmissions would overwhelm sensitive GPS receivers.
However, others argue that this is not a physics problem, but an
engineering challenge. With filters for GPS units and with reasonable
beam shaping at cell towers, smart engineering could solve these
problems. It is unclear whether we are dealing with a physics problem
or an engineering challenge, and I do not believe any of the witnesses
before us today can provide an answer to that question with absolute
certainty.
The agencies before us today are testitying based on testing of GPS
equipment under the original LightSquared proposal in which the company
would first build cell towers designed to use the portion of the
spectrum immediately adjacent to that of GPS. Their testing is not
based on the new proposal from the company to use their spectrum that
is most remote from GPS's assigned frequencies. The FCC will have to
make its decisions based on technical assessments and not the political
pressure that may come from private parties or even from Committees of
Congress. Today, I want to learn about what additional testing may be
needed to inform the FCC's processes.
The core question for policy-makers is this: can we use the L-band,
or some portion of it, of the radio spectrum for terrestrial broadband
applications without damaging GPS? I hope that the answer is yes, and
everyone here should hope the answer is yes, because we need more
broadband just as we need GPS. LightSquarcd is proposing to invest $14
billion over the next eight years to build out their network and
projects it will employ 14,000 people in the process. In building more
information technology infrastructure, we would see consumers have more
choice in their telecommunications and data services, lowering their
costs and expanding access. We should also see accelerating innovation
of data-intensive cellular applications that take advantage ofthe
greater capacities of this new network--creating more jobs, more
profits, more growth. And we desperately need jobs, profits and growth
right now.
While I am skeptical that we will get definitive answers to the
most important policy questions here today, I am happy to listen to the
testimony from all of our panel members.

Chairman Hall. Thank you, Ms. Johnson. If there are Members
who wish to submit additional opening statements, your
statements will be added to the record at this point.
At this time I would like to introduce our witnesses and to
thank our witnesses because I know they are valuable, their
time is valuable. It took time to prepare for this. It took
time for you to arrive here, it will take time for you to give
your testimony, take time for you to go home. And your time is
valuable, and we are going to try to be as helpful with you. As
long as you give us the answers we are looking for, we won't
even use up all of our time.
Mr. Anthony Russo is the Director of National Coordination
Office for Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, Mrs. Mary
Glackin is the Deputy Under Secretary at the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, Mr. Victor Sparrow is the
Director of Spectrum Policy at the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration. The Honorable Peter Appel is the
Administrator of the Research and Innovation Technology
Administration at the Department of Transportation, Dr. David
Applegate is the Associate Director for National--Natural
Hazards at the U.S. Geological Survey, Mr. Jeffrey J. Carlisle
is the Executive Vice President for Regulatory Affairs and
Public Policy at LightSquared LLC, and Dr. Scott Pace is the
Director of the Space Policy Institute at George Washington
University. And I want to welcome all of you.
As our witnesses probably know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes, after which the Members of the Committee will
have five minutes each to ask questions. We hope you can stay
as close to that five minutes as you can because--and don't let
these empty seats here indicate a lack of interest in what you
are saying because we are just back from a month when we were
all gone and nobody was getting heard up here, and we came
back, and everybody has a lot to do, and they have other
committees, but all this testimony is being taken down and will
be of record for everybody, not just the Members of this
Committee but for everybody to read.
So Mr. Russo, you may proceed if you would like, sir.

STATEMENT OF MR. ANTHONY RUSSO,

DIRECTOR, THE NATIONAL COORDINATION OFFICE FOR

SPACE-BASED POSITIONING, NAVIGATION, AND TIMING

Mr. Russo. Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson, and
Members of the Committee, I am deeply honored to be here for
you today.
Like the Internet, GPS is an essential element of the
global information infrastructure. The free, open, and
dependable nature of GPS has led to the development of
thousands of applications affecting every aspect of modern
life, and innovation has not stopped. New applications are
being developed daily.
GPS saves lives by preventing transportation accidents,
aiding search and rescue efforts, assisting law enforcement,
and speeding delivery of emergency services and disaster
relief. It is vital to weather forecasting, earthquake
monitoring, and environmental protection.
GPS's role as part of our civil infrastructure traces its
roots to a tragic incident in 1983. A Korean airliner took off
from Alaska and ended up straying way off course in Soviet
airspace. The airliner was shot down, and all 269 passengers
were killed, including a sitting Member of Congress. As part of
the response, President Reagan announced we would make GPS
signals available to the world, and that marked the beginning
of a multi-use policy approach to GPS that each successive
Administration has strengthened.
An Executive Committee consisting of the Department Deputy
Secretaries was established in 2004, to advise and coordinate
on GPS-related issues to include spectrum protection and
interference. To execute the staff functions of the Executive
Committee, a National Coordination Office or NCO was also
established. The NCO is staffed with representatives from every
department or agency with major equities in GPS. I am speaking
to you today in my capacity as director of that office.
Earlier this year, the FCC approved a conditional waiver
for LightSquared's high-powered network, and with the
permission of the Executive Committee, a tasked interagency
group of technical experts called the National Space-Based
Position Navigation and Timing Systems Engineering Forum or
NPEF for short, to evaluate the LightSquared proposal, assess
impacts, and look at the mitigation of any harmful effects.
And although they were not required to do so, LightSquared
actively supported these efforts. They provided their actual
hardware including a custom filter for their transmitter,
technical specifications, they answered numerous questions, and
they even sent personnel to government test sites to review the
test set-up. So I would like to take the opportunity to
publicly thank LightSquared for their cooperation, which
greatly improved the fidelity of the results.
The NPEF testing was done under numerous limitations,
especially an extremely compressed time frame, but despite
these limitations the NPEF reached a definitive answer.
LightSquared's proposed system would create harmful
interference throughout all three phases of its planned
deployment. Although not every individual receiver failed to
perform, there were unacceptable levels of harmful interference
in every class of receiver tested and at significant distances.
I had asked the NPEF to investigate not only things that we
might reasonably ask LightSquared to do, but also to look at
changes the GPS community could do that would mitigate harmful
interference and still allow LightSquared to execute their
business plan. The NPEF spent many hours considering the full
range of options but could not identify any feasible option
that would both mitigate harmful interference for all or even
most GPS users and still allow LightSquared to meet their
system requirements.
Now, to meet one of the conditions of their conditional
waiver, LightSquared created a Technical Working Group or TWG
with significant industry, government representation to conduct
interference testing. LightSquared chose to break their testing
into seven separate subgroups based on GPS application type.
All seven subgroups reported significant harmful interference
with respect to all three phases of LightSquared's planned
deployment. However, there was no consensus on feasible
mitigation options.
On June 29, LightSquared submitted their TWG report
acknowledging the harmful interference, and simultaneously they
submitted a report outlining a potential solution.
LightSquared's new recommendation paper suggests three distinct
changes, and this was a series in constructive proposal, and
the FCC is currently evaluating this recommendation, but the
NPEF testing did not include the configuration LightSquared is
now proposing. And it wasn't in the TWG test plans either.
Now, in the final days of their testing TWG did manage to
collect some of the data relevant to this configuration, but
the report itself is inconclusive as to whether data still
shows harmful interference to many GPS receivers. The limited
data collected is highly disputed among the members of TWG.
Therefore, the federal agencies are recommending further
testing once the FCC defines the final LightSquared end-state
configuration.
What we do know is enough data was collected that--by all
parties in terms of whether or not high-precision receivers
would be impacted. LightSquared's report indicates 31 of 33
receivers tested in this subgroup still failed, even in the
lower configuration, and this class of receivers involves many
of those used in advanced scientific research applications.
Most federal science systems were not directly tested by either
the NPEF or the TWG, so we do not know for sure if they would
be impacted. But the tests did indicate increased
susceptibility interference for the higher end, more
sophisticated systems, many of which are used in research and
science applications.
In summary, the extensive testing done by LightSquared, the
government, and the GPS industry conclusively demonstrate
harmful interference from LightSquared's intended deployment,
and they should not be allowed to commence commercial
operations until the identified problems are resolved. Further
study is needed on alternative concepts that were not
comprehensively tested, including the most recent LightSquared
proposal. The National Coordination Office will assist as
directed by the Executive Committee in any follow-on efforts.
I thank you for this opportunity to speak on this very
significant issue impacting federal science activities and over
a billion worldwide users. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Russo follows:

Prepared Statement of Mr. Anthony Russo,

Director, The National Coordination Office for

Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing

Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson, and Members of the
Committee, I am deeply honored for this opportunity to appear before
you today. Like the Internet, Global Positioning System (GPS) is an
essential element of the global information infrastructure. The free,
open, and dependable nature of GPS has led to the development of
thousands of applications affecting every aspect of modern life and new
applications are developed daily. GPS technology is now in everything
from cell phones and wristwatches to bulldozers and shipping
containers. When you swipe your card at an Automatic Teller Machine
(ATM) or your credit card at a gas pump, you are using GPS. GPS boosts
productivity across a wide swath of the economy, to include farming,
construction, mining, surveying, package delivery, and logistical
supply chain management. Major communications networks, banking
systems, financial markets, and power grids depend heavily on GPS for
precise time synchronization. Some wireless services cannot operate
without it.
GPS saves lives by preventing transportation accidents, aiding
search and rescue efforts, assisting law enforcement and speeding the
delivery of emergency services and disaster relief. GPS is vital to the
Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) that will enhance
flight safety while increasing airspace capacity. GPS also advances
scientific aims such as weather forecasting, earthquake monitoring, and
environmental protection.

The Role of the Space-Based Positioning, Navigation
and Timing Executive Committee

On September 1, 1983, a Korean civilian airliner took off from
Alaska and ended up straying way off course into Soviet airspace. The
airliner was shot down as it attempted to leave the airspace and all
269 passengers were killed. As part of the response to that tragedy,
President Reagan announced the United States would make its GPS signals
available to the world to avoid any navigation errors of that type.
That announcement marked the beginning of a multi-use policy approach
to GPS and each successive administration has strengthened that
concept. In 2004, President Bush issued a National Space-Based
Positioning, Navigation, and Timing (PNT) Policy establishing a Deputy
Secretary-level Executive Committee to advise and coordinate on
policies, programs, requirements, schedules, architectures and budgets
to sustain and modernize GPS, systems that augment or enhance GPS, and
any backup systems. The Policy includes an explicit instruction to
continue to operate and modernize GPS to meet growing scientific and
commercial demands. Last year, President Obama signed out his
comprehensive National Space Policy which left the existing PNT policy
in place, but added emphasis and additional guidance in four key areas
related to GPS. One of these new emphasis areas dealt specifically with
the issue of harmful interference. We are also responsible in this
policy to identify impacts to government space systems prior to any
reallocation of spectrum for commercial, federal, or shared use.
To execute the staff functions of the Executive Committee, and to
assist them in ensuring implementation of the President's policy
objectives, a National Coordination Office (NCO) was established. The
NCO is staffed with representatives from every department or agency
with major equities in GPS. I am speaking to you today in my capacity
as the Director of that office.

The National Space-Based Positioning, Navigation,
and Timing Systems Engineering Forum (NPEF)

The NPEF is an interagency working group that supports the
Executive Committee on major technical issues that cross agency
boundaries. Their reports help form the basis for recommendations made
to the Executive Committee. The NPEF is co-chaired by the Air Force's
Chief Engineer from the GPS Program Office and the FAA's Ground Segment
Lead for Global Navigation Satellite Systems and Space-Based
Augmentation Systems. They are assisted by technical representatives
and other staff from across the interagency.
On the January 26 this year, the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) approved a Conditional Waiver for LightSquared's high-power
broadband network the Executive Committee had warned might cause
significant interference to governmentwide GPS applications. With the
permission of the Executive Committee's Steering Group, the NPEF was
tasked to evaluate the LightSquared proposal, assess impacts, and look
at potential mitigation of any harmful effects. I've included the NPEF
Task Statement as part of this testimony.
Their test methodology involved modeling, simulation, analysis,
bench testing, radiated testing inside an anechoic chamber, and what we
call ``live sky'' testing where they set up a tower outdoors and
broadcast a signal as close as they could to what they expected the
actual configuration to be. Each of these methods has advantages and
limitations and using multiple methods enhances confidence in the
results. LightSquared actively supported these efforts. They provided
their actual hardware including a custom filter on their transmitters,
technical specifications and answered numerous questions from NPEF
engineers, and sent personnel to government test sites to review and
comment on the test set-up. I would like to take this opportunity to
publicly thank LightSquared for their cooperation. It greatly enhanced
the fidelity of the results.
I do want to identify some limitations of our testing effort. The
most significant is that there was only one LightSquared transmit
antenna. Since interference effects can be additive, this is a serious
limitation in a planned environment where the LightSquared base
stations are densely enough packed that a given user will likely see
effects from multiple towers simultaneously. This also greatly
complicates some of the potential mitigation options. A second limiting
factor was there were no LightSquared handsets available to test. The
handsets operate at a different frequency than their base stations and
are much less powerful. However, the NPEF anticipates they will be much
more numerous and since they are mobile they could be anywhere, and may
even be frequently co-located with GPS receivers. Several technical
experts on the team consider this to be a very significant problem, but
they were not able to explicitly address this issue. A third limiting
factor is the inability to fully represent the diversity of the GPS
user community. There are more GPS applications than we can count, and
at the NCO we learn of new applications at the rate of about three per
week. Each application is different. Some require extreme position
accuracy; others do not use position at all, but need very precise
timing. Some applications require less precision, but need extremely
high integrity--in other words they need high confidence the signal
they receive is accurate. Still others do not even read the signal's
message content; they only care about the phase relationship between
the military and civil GPS signals. It was therefore difficult to
construct tests that covered all of our diverse users in the time we
had to work with. And a final limiting factor was the extremely
compressed time frame.
But despite these limitations, the NPEF completed the job they were
asked to do. They were able to look at a wide range of representative
receivers against all three phases of LightSquared's proposed
deployment plan. In all, 24 different organizations participated in
testing more than 75 different receivers in over 50 separate test
events. The answer is definitive: LightSquared's proposed system would
create harmful interference throughout all three phases of its planned
deployment. I have attached an Executive Summary of the publicly
releasable results to this testimony. The tests showed no evidence of
out-of-band emissions. In other words, the NPEF was able to confirm
LightSquared's claim they correctly filter their transmission so it is
not leaking into the GPS band. However, the tests also confirm the
presence of other serious and harmful interference effects. Although
not every individual receiver failed to perform, there were
unacceptable levels of harmful interference in every class of receiver
tested and at significant distances.
In the NPEF task statement, the engineering team was asked to
consider possible mitigations to any problems they discovered. They
were asked to investigate not only things that we might reasonably ask
LightSquared to do, but also to look at changes the GPS community could
do that would mitigate harmful interference and still allow
LightSquared to execute their business plan. The NPEF spent many hours
considering the full range of options such as: reducing power on
LightSquared's transmission, increasing GPS's transmitted power,
building better GPS filters, or asking for exclusion zones around
certain sensitive installations that use GPS. Unfortunately the NPEF
could not identify any feasible option that would mitigate harmful
interference for all or even most GPS users, and still allow
LightSquared to meet their system requirements. The only suggested
option that might work would be moving LightSquared to a different part
of the spectrum, and that involves a host of other issues outside the
PNT community. I've included an Executive Summary of the results of the
NPEF testing, including a discussion of the potential mitigation
options, as part of this testimony.

LightSquared's Technical Working Group (TWG)

When the FCC granted the Conditional Waiver, one of the conditions
was for the company to fund testing efforts to resolve the interference
concerns the Executive Committee and GPS Industry had raised. The FCC
Order further directed the creation of a LightSquared-led working group
and highly encouraged participation from the U.S. Government and
representation from across the diverse GPS industry. Altogether the TWG
contained 39 full-time members and 61 part-time technical advisors,
split between GPS Industry, LightSquared, and the Government. Like the
NPEF, the TWG used an assortment of different techniques culminating in
two weeks of ``Live-Sky'' testing in Las Vegas. There was healthy
crossflow of expertise and data sharing between the NPEF and TWG.
LightSquared chose to break the effort into seven separate
subgroups based on GPS application type. The results were completely
consistent with what the NPEF found. All seven subgroups reported
significant harmful interference with respect to all three phases of
LightSquared's planned deployment. There was no consensus on feasible
mitigation options although most of the subgroups did advocate for
moving LightSquared's service to a different frequency band.

LightSquared's New Plan

On June 29, 2011 LightSquared submitted their TWG report
acknowledging the harmful interference their proposed system would
create. Simultaneously they submitted a report outlining a proposed
potential solution. This solution was completely separate from the TWG
and not evaluated by them. LightSquared's new ``Recommendation Paper''
suggests three distinct changes. (1) A re-phasing of their plan where
the first of their two transmissions is the one lower in their
frequency band and therefore further from GPS; (2) a reduction in
authorized power to the level they told us they originally planned to
operate at; and (3) a ``standstill'' on transmitting their second
channel (closer to the GPS band) for some undefined period of time.
The FCC is currently evaluating this recommendation as well as
considering all the comments received in the public comment period. The
Government testing did not consider the configuration LightSquared is
now proposing, although NPEF testing was done at the power level they
indicate. The TWG did not plan to test this configuration either, but
in the final days of their testing did collect some data. The TWG
report is inconclusive as to whether this lower channel transmission
does or does not cause harmful interference to most GPS receivers. The
limited data collected is highly disputed and all seven of
LightSquared's subgroups recommended further study of this planned
change to the phasing. The federal departments and agencies are
recommending retesting once the FCC defines the final configuration.

High-Precision Receivers

However all parties concur the class considered ``High-Precision''
would still be impacted even under the first phase of LightSquared's
new proposal. LightSquared's TWG report indicates 31 of 33 receivers
tested in this subgroup failed in an environment where LightSquared was
not transmitting in the upper half of their band. This class of
receivers involves many of those used in advanced scientific and
research applications. For example, the receivers used in EarthScope's
Plate Boundary Observatory can measure movements due to tidal forces
less than a one millimeter. Receivers like these would fit into the
``High-Precision'' category and will eventually be in every county in
the country. This National Science Foundation project is critical to
our understanding of the interior of the Earth and supports research on
earthquakes, tsunamis and global climate change.
Another example of a service which may be affected would be the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Time and
Frequency Measurement and Analysis Service (TMAS) and (FMAS).
LightSquared implementation, even under their new configuration, may
impact NIST's ability to provide high-precision calibration services to
national laboratories and private sector customers nationwide. Even
non-GPS related research may depend on accurate time and frequency
calibration received from NIST.
High-Precision GPS is also used by the Environmental Protection
Agency for numerous research applications and is an integral part of
their Field EnvironmentaL Decision Support system, or FIELDS. This
impacts areas such as hazard waste site clean-up, response to oil
spills, emergency preparedness, revitalization and development. Another
NSF-funded environmental research project involves spatial variability
in plant nitrogen and forage quality related to grassland fires. This
directly affects grazing habits of herbivores.
A final example would be potential impacts to efficient power
distribution. The future ``Smart Grid'' incorporates geographically
diverse Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs) to ensure alternating current
is phase synchronized across the network. There are numerous economic
and environmental benefits to this including reduced overall energy
consumption, increased efficiency in demand response/load management
programs, better utilization of equipment, reduction in carbon
emissions, and the ability to more easily substitute renewable forms of
energy. With the aid of precise GPS timing, the Department of Energy
will be able to decrease the likelihood and the severity of major
blackouts.
None of these systems I've mentioned above were directly tested by
either the NPEF or the TWG, so we do not know if they would be
impacted. But both sets of tests did indicate increased susceptibility
to interference for those higher-end, more sophisticated systems. Both
the NPEF and the TWG subgroups recommended further testing, especially
on the 10 MHz low configuration and on any proposed measures to
mitigate harmful effects.

Summary

The extensive and comprehensive testing done by LightSquared, the
NPEF, and the GPS Industry conclusively demonstrates harmful
interference from LightSquared's intended deployment of their high-
power terrestrial broadband system and should not be allowed to
commence commercial operations until the identified problems are
resolved.

The Administration believes that we must protect existing GPS
users from disruption of the services they depend on today and
ensure that innovative new GPS applications can be developed in
the future. At the same time, recognizing the President's
instruction to identify 500 MHz of new spectrum for innovative
new mobile broadband services, we will continue our efforts at
more efficient use of spectrum. Therefore, in the short run, we
will participate in the further testing required to establish
whether there are any mitigation strategies that can enable LSQ
operation in the lower 10MHz of the band. We also encourage
commercial entities with interests to work with Lightsquared
toward a possible resolution, though any proposed mitigation
must be subjected to full testing. The challenge of meeting the
President's goal also depends on long-term actions by Federal
agencies in the area of research and development, procurement
practices that encourage spectrally efficient applications, and
new policy development.

Further study is needed on alternative concepts, including the most
recent LightSquared proposal. The National Coordination Office will
assist as directed by the Space-Based PNT Executive Committee in any
follow-on efforts. I thank you for this opportunity to speak on an
issue with a very significant impact to federal science activities and
to over a billion world-wide users. I look forward to your questions.

Chairman Hall. Thank you very much.
Dr. Applegate, you may proceed.
I am sorry. I am told Ms. Glackin is next in line.

STATEMENT OF MS. MARY GLACKIN,

DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY, NATIONAL OCEANIC AND

ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION

Ms. Glackin. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Johnson, and Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak today about the importance of GPS to NOAA
and the operational impacts we could face as a result of GPS
interference from the LightSquared network.
GPS technology is a key enabler for nearly all of NOAA's
mission activities, and for this reason we are very interested
and involved in the activities surrounding LightSquared and
GPS. NOAA contributed equipment and experts to the two major
testing efforts just described. My testimony will address the
potential effects of the original and the modified LightSquared
Spectrum Plans based on our analysis of the data.
Based on our work to date, GPS interference under
LightSquared's original plan would cause serious degradation
for a wide range of NOAA systems, resulting in the loss of
critical services and potentially loss of life and property.
These include satellite, airborne, sea-based, and terrestrial
systems used for weather warnings, forecasting, climate
observation, search and rescue, among others.
First and foremost, our entire fleet of meteorological
satellites would be put at risk. Without GPS, the ground
systems that control the NOAA spacecraft would fail to keep
proper time, causing widespread errors, leading to inaccurate
warnings of tornadoes, hurricanes, and other severe weather
events and eventually our ability to command and control the
satellites would be compromised.
Likewise, without precise GPS times, NOAA's search and
rescue satellite ground stations would produce less accurate
and less timely distress alerts, leading to longer response
time, greater risk to human life, and increased costs.
We are concerned that LightSquared's original broadcast
would interfere with onboard GPS for newer satellites,
including our NPP satellite in low-earth orbit and even GOES-R
in GS geostationary orbit.
My written testimony also highlights other critical NOAA
systems put at risk at the LightSquared's original proposal,
including 23,000 environmental sensor platforms that depend on
GPS for accurate geo-referencing, time stamping, and
communication of data that enable timely storm and flood
warnings, use in weather balloons and hurricane dropsondes that
measure wind speeds.
LightSquared's proposed solution involves voluntary power
limits and postponement of one of its two planned channels, the
upper 10 megahertz next to GPS. Unfortunately, LightSquared's
own report to the FCC demonstrates that the new spectrum plan
involves--would still raise issues for high-precision GPS
receivers featuring a wideband design.
We have identified at least five major NOAA functions that
require wideband GPS equipment. These include the COSMIC System
of satellites to improve global and weather climate models,
monitoring sea level trends to protect natural and human
communities, the ground-based GPS meteorology project to
improve short-term forecasts, the issuance of the U.S. Total
Electron Count product to inform the public of space weather
conditions and space storms, and maintaining the National
Spatial Reference System to ensure the compatibility among U.S.
maps and surveys.
Three of these five activities depend on NOAA's nationwide
network of Continuously Operating Reference Stations, or CORS,
which collect and share precise data about GPS satellite
orbits. CORS provides a consistent positioning technology,
accurate to an inch, used by millions to anchor nautical
charts, build roads and railways, and respond to disasters.
CORS alone includes 1,800 wideband receivers owned by NOAA
and 190 partner stakeholder organizations, and without a
suitable mitigation for the lower channel LightSquared
interference, major portions of CORS could cease functioning,
forcing NOAA to revert to less accurate and much more costly
methods to define the National Spatial Reference System.
LightSquared has stated its belief that filtering can
mitigate interference for wideband GPS users. We are concerned
that a filter capable of blocking out the powerful LightSquared
signal at a lower channel may also block the GPS signal,
rendering our equipment useless. This is something that must be
tested and, in any event, would not be feasible to apply to
satellites that are already in space.
Mr. Chairman, we must protect existing GPS users from
disruption of services on which they depend. At the same time
we recognize the need to use spectrum more efficiently to
improve broadband access. We recommend further testing of
LightSquared's proposal to assess GPS interference in the lower
10 megahertz and to establish whether there is any feasible
mitigation strategies.
We appreciate LightSquared's offer to not transmit in the
upper 10 megahertz and strongly support efforts to identify
alternative means of achieving the purpose of the signal that
was planned there.
Thank you for your attention, and I look forward to any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Glackin follows:]

PRepared Statement of Ms. Mary M. Glackin,
Deputy Under Secretary for Operations,
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Johnson, and Members of the Committee,
thank you for the opportunity to speak today on the importance of the
Global Positioning System (GPS) to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) and the operational impacts we could face as a
result of GPS interference from the proposed LightSquared
communications network.
My name is Mary Glackin, and I am the Deputy Under Secretary for
Operations at NOAA.
From daily weather forecasts, severe storm warnings, and climate
monitoring to fisheries management, coastal restoration, and supporting
marine commerce, NOAA's products and services support economic vitality
and affect more than one-third of America's gross domestic product. GPS
technology is a key enabler for all of these activities, integrated
into our operational systems and functions across all of the line
offices at NOAA.
For this reason, NOAA has been very interested and involved in the
recent activities surrounding LightSquared Subsidiary LLC and its
conditional authorization to broadcast in the 1525-1559 MHz band next
to the GPS signal. NOAA contributed GPS equipment and experts to both
of the major interference testing efforts that took place this spring--
namely, the Technical Working Group led by LightSquared, and the
government's National Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing
Systems Engineering Forum.
Those testing efforts focused primarily on the original
LightSquared broadcasting plan involving two channels, referred to as
the upper 10 MHz and lower 10 MHz channels. But both groups also
performed initial testing of LightSquared's modified spectrum plan
involving only the lower 10 MHz channel. My testimony today will
address potential effects of both the original and modified
LightSquared spectrum plans, based on our analysis of the empirical
test data collected to date.

Potential NOAA Impacts of LightSquared's Original Spectrum Plan

In response to tasking from the National Space-Based Positioning,
Navigation, and Timing Executive Committee, we recently conducted an
extensive review of GPS usage across NOAA, including the National
Weather Service, the National Ocean Service, the Office of Oceanic and
Atmospheric Research, the National Marine Fisheries Service, and the
National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service.
Our review concluded that interference to GPS under LightSquared's
original spectrum plan would cause serious performance degradation or a
total loss of mission for a wide range of our operational systems,
resulting in the loss of critical services and potential loss of life
and property. These include major satellite, airborne, sea-based, and
terrestrial systems used for weather forecasting, climate observation,
search and rescue, vessel navigation, nautical charting, emergency
response, and geodesy.
Our entire fleet of meteorological satellites would be put at risk.
All of the ground stations that control the current GOES (Geostationary
Operational Environmental Satellite) and POES (Polar-orbiting
Operational Environmental Satellite) spacecraft depend on GPS for
accurate system timing. Without GPS, these ground systems would
eventually fail to keep proper time, causing widespread errors that
degrade the quality of satellite-based weather and climate
measurements. The result would be less accurate warnings of tornadoes,
hurricanes, and other severe weather directly affecting U.S. public
safety, property, and businesses. Eventually, if the timing errors
reach the order of a few microseconds, spacecraft could become unstable
and we could completely lose the ability to command and control them.
Likewise, NOAA's satellite-based search and rescue system, SARSAT,
uses multiple GPS receivers at its ground stations to determine and
maintain precise time. Since 1982, SARSAT has contributed to over
28,000 worldwide rescues--including last year's rescue of Abby
Sunderland, the 16-year-old who capsized in the Indian Ocean while
sailing around the world. SARSAT ground stations use GPS time maintain
the clocks on the satellite instruments that relay distress alerts.
Without precise GPS time, the accuracy and timeliness of distress alert
position calculations are significantly impacted. This leads to larger
search areas, increased rescue personnel and fuel costs, longer
response times, and ultimately, greater risk to rescuers and persons in
distress.
Our future satellites, including the NPOESS Preparatory Project
(NPP) and GOES-R, will use on-board GPS receivers for timing and orbit
determination. The testing to date has shown that LightSquared's
original broadcast could cause interference to GPS equipment in low
Earth orbit, where NPP will fly. Our own engineering analysis suggests
that it could even affect GOES-R at geostationary orbit, since GPS
reception is already weak at that long distance. NPP and GOES-R are
essential to continuing our weather and climate observations; without
reliable GPS, their data will become almost useless.
Aside from our satellites, NOAA has deployed over 23,000
environmental sensor platforms across the planet that depend critically
on GPS for accurate georeferencing and time stamping of data. All of
the sensor data must be tightly bound to the same geospatial and time
scales, or it cannot be combined and ingested into our weather and
climate models. The sensor platforms also require GPS time to
synchronize their radio transmitters, so they can share limited radio
spectrum as they relay data via the GOES and POES Data Collection
Systems. Prolonged, continuous GPS interference at sensor platforms
would cause their radios to start transmitting at the wrong times, and
eventually cease operation. This would cause data corruption and gaps,
degrading our modeling, forecasting, and disaster warning capabilities.
Redesigning the radio system and redeploying it to over 23,000 remote
locations would require new technology whose cost cannot be estimated
at this time.
Similarly, NOAA's network of NEXRAD weather radars and sea surface
radar altimeters require GPS-based time synchronization to enable the
sharing of radio frequencies among dozens of radars. The NEXRAD system
is critical to issuing timely severe storm and flood warnings, and
local weather forecasts. The oceanographic radar systems measure
conditions at the ocean surface and ocean currents to improve weather
and climate models, as well as models used to inform search and rescue
operations at sea. NOAA used these radars to predict the growth of the
Deepwater Horizon oil spill last year. Loss of GPS timing would require
either greater use of spectrum, which is very unlikely, or loss of
current NOAA capabilities.
NOAA's radiosondes and dropsondes--instruments we attach to weather
balloons and drop from aircraft into hurricanes--are entirely dependent
on GPS for accurate position and velocity measurements. These
measurements provide wind speed data used for aviation forecasts and as
input to global numerical weather prediction models. Widespread
interference to GPS would force us to re-engineer these critical
systems using alternative methods. These methods would be less accurate
and take many years to develop and implement. Meanwhile, we would be
left with major data gaps for numerical weather prediction models,
support to air traffic, and hurricane forecasts.
NOAA's fleet of 19 ships employs a variety of GPS and differential
GPS receivers for navigation and scientific use. These vessels support
oceanographic, atmospheric, fisheries and coral reef research, nautical
charting, environmental monitoring, and ocean exploration. In addition,
NOAA has numerous fleets of smaller vessels used for research,
education, damage assessment, law enforcement, environmental
observation, and buoy maintenance. If GPS service becomes unavailable
or unreliable along U.S. coasts and waterways, NOAA vessels will be
unable to perform many operations and missions.
I have described just a few of the myriad NOAA systems that depend
on GPS and that would be impacted by GPS interference under
LightSquared's original spectrum plan.

Potential NOAA Impacts from LightSquared's Modified Spectrum Plan

LightSquared's proposed solution to the problem involves voluntary
power limits and the postponement of one of its two planned broadcast
channels--the upper 10 MHz bordering the GPS signal.
Unfortunately, the existing data from the interference testing
groups, including LightSquared's own report to the FCC, demonstrates
that the new spectrum plan, involving the lower 10 MHz channel, still
raises issues for high-precision GPS receivers that feature a wideband
design. As I mentioned, NOAA participated in this testing.
Specifically, we provided five different wideband receivers that are
representative of the equipment in use at NOAA for high-precision
positioning. During the tests, four out of the five models failed when
subjected to only the lower 10 MHz LightSquared channel. Since many
critical NOAA operations require high-precision, wideband GPS
equipment, we support further testing of LightSquared's proposal and
continued investigations into mitigation options for wideband
applications.
We have identified at least five major NOAA systems or functions
that require wideband GPS equipment. These include:

(1) the six-satellite COSMIC system that observes the
Earth's atmosphere to improve global weather and climate models;

(2) the monitoring of sea level trends to protect natural
and human communities;

(3) the Ground-Based GPS Meteorology (GPS-Met) project,
which measures atmospheric moisture to improve short-term weather
forecasts;

(4) the issuance of the U.S. Total Electron Content (US-
TEC) product to inform surveyors and other customers about space
weather conditions affecting GPS accuracy; and

(5) the maintenance of the National Spatial Reference
System to ensure compatibility among U.S. maps, surveys, and other
geospatial products.

Three of these five activities depend on NOAA's management of a
nationwide network of Continuously Operating Reference Stations, or
CORS, which collect and share precise data about GPS satellite orbits.
CORS provides a consistent positioning technology, accurate to an inch,
that is used by millions of people throughout the United States, from
surveyors to farmers to the FAA. This network is critical to anchoring
nautical charts, building roads and railways, surveying airports, and
responding to natural disasters and other emergencies, such as
Hurricane Katrina and the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. For example, it
allows FEMA flood maps to be seamlessly overlaid with levee surveys
from the Army Corps of Engineers.
Unlike consumer GPS devices used for basic positioning, high-
precision GPS equipment costs thousands of dollars per unit, and the
economic value it provides to society is similarly high. In the case of
CORS alone, there are over 1,800 reference stations, many of which have
multiple GPS receivers. This multimillion dollar investment has been
made not only by NOAA, but over 190 stakeholder organizations,
including states, local communities, universities and other federal
agencies. They all have a shared interest in maintaining a common
standard for geospatial positioning in the United States, so the
construction and maintenance of roads, bridges, railways, inland
waterways, and other projects that cross jurisdictional boundaries all
use the same coordinate system.
If testing confirms that high-precision GPS receivers are
significantly degraded by LightSquared's lower channel, and a suitable
mitigation is not developed, major portions of the CORS network could
cease functioning. Depending on the geographic distribution of the
remaining sites, the entire network could fail to serve its intended
purpose, forcing NOAA to use less accurate, more labor-intensive, and
more costly methods such as line-of-sight triangulation to define the
National Spatial Reference System.
For example, the cost to update the International Great Lakes
Datum--a water level reference system of enormous economic importance
to the United States and Canada for maritime navigation and shipping--
could increase from under $30 million using GPS to $160 million using
older methods. In addition, the widespread socioeconomic benefits of
CORS use, estimated at $758 million annually, could be lost due to
interference at CORS sites. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Leveson, Irving. 2009. Socio-Economic Benefits Study: Scoping
the Value of CORS and GRAV-D. NOAA's National Geodetic Survey,
Washington, D.C.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similarly, we must find a way to preserve the high-precision GPS
receivers used to measure sea level rise, which are subject to the same
interference risk as the CORS equipment. Monitoring of ecological
observations within an accurate and consistent geospatial framework
requires high-precision GPS. Losing the availability or reliability of
this technology would have a profound effect on our ability to monitor
the impacts of sea level changes and inundation from storms and coastal
flooding on coastal communities and ecosystems. This would undermine
the ability of communities to identify their risk to sea level change
and episodic storm events.
Finally, we have concerns about the COSMIC satellite system that
uses the ``GPS radio occultation'' technique to probe the Earth's
atmosphere. We use COSMIC data operationally to significantly increase
the accuracy of hurricane forecasts and other weather models. COSMIC
flies in low Earth orbit and would have been impacted by LightSquared's
original broadcast plan. The next round of testing needs to assess
whether wideband receivers in low Earth orbit, including those on
COSMIC, are affected by LightSquared's new plan involving only the
lower channel with proposed maximum power levels. If they are affected,
the mitigation options will be limited, as the COSMIC satellites are
already in space and cannot be modified.For the wideband GPS receivers
that are on the ground, LightSquared has stated its belief that new
radio signal filtering techniques and/or exclusion zones can mitigate
the interference concern for GPS users. Our engineers are concerned
that a filter capable of blocking out the powerful LightSquared signal
at the lower channel may also prevent the receiver from detecting the
GPS signal, rendering it useless. This is something that must be
investigated thoroughly in the next round of testing, so that NOAA does
not lose important operational capabilities. If a filter-based solution
is identified, it must preserve the receiver's high-precision
functionality and it must not impose an unreasonable cost burden on
NOAA and its partners. Establishing exclusion zones to keep
LightSquared base stations away from major GPS users such as CORS sites
may be more feasible, although this creates its own set of problems.

Conclusion

Mr. Chairman, the Administration believes that we must protect
existing GPS users from disruption of the services they depend on today
and ensure that innovative new GPS applications can be developed in the
future. At the same time, recognizing the President's instruction to
identify 500 MHz of new spectrum for innovative new mobile broadband
services, we will continue our efforts at more efficient use of
spectrum. Therefore, in the short run, we recommend further testing in
order to assess the GPS interference concerns in the lower 10 MHz of
the band and to establish whether there are any feasible mitigation
strategies. We also encourage commercial entities with interests to
work with LightSquared toward a possible resolution, though any
proposed mitigation must be subjected to full testing. The
Administration appreciates LightSquared's offer to not transmit in the
upper 10 MHz of its band, right next to GPS, and strongly supports
efforts to identify alternative means of achieving the intended purpose
of the signal that was planned there. The challenge of meeting the
President's goal also depends on long-term actions by federal agencies
in the area of research and development, procurement practices that
encourage spectrally efficient applications, and new policy
development.
NOAA has communicated our concerns to the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), the agency
that is responsible for managing federal agencies' use of spectrum, and
with which the FCC has stated it will consult in determining whether
the interference concerns raised by this matter have been resolved.
NTIA, on behalf of impacted federal agencies, has previously
informed the FCC, on two occasions, that the LightSquared proposal
``raises significant interference concerns'' with respect to GPS and
GNSS receivers and has urged the FCC to ensure these concerns are
resolved before permitting LightSquared to become operational. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Letter from Lawrence E. Strickling, Assistant Secretary for
Communications and Information, U.S. Department of Commerce, to Julius
Genachowski, Chairman, Federal Communications Commission, (January 12,
2011). See also, Letter from Lawrence E. Strickling, Assistant
Secretary for Communications and Information, U.S. Department of
Commerce, to Julius Genachowski, Chairman, Federal Communications
Commission, (July 6, 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This concludes my prepared statement. I thank you for your
attention and look forward to your questions.
Chairman Hall. And thank you for staying within the five
minutes.
Mr. Sparrow, you may proceed, sir.

STATEMENT OF MR. VICTOR SPARROW,

DIRECTOR, SPECTRUM POLICY,

SPACE COMMUNICATIONS AND NAVIGATION,

SPACE OPERATIONS MISSION DIRECTORATE,

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Sparrow. Okay. Good morning Chairman Hall, Ranking
Member Johnson, and distinguished Members of the Committee.
Thank you for inviting NASA to testify on the potential impacts
of the proposed LightSquared Network on NASA's scientific and
exploration activities. My name is Victor Sparrow, and as you
have mentioned, I am the Director of Spectrum Policy and
Planning for NASA.
My testimony today will focus on some of NASA's GPS-
dependent applications and their vulnerability to interference
from the proposed network. I have gone into more detail in my
written testimony and would be pleased to provide more
information on any of these applications if needed.
NASA relies on GPS technology and capabilities to monitor
and improve our scientific understanding of the Earth,
including climate studies and solid earth hazards, such as
earthquakes and volcanic activity. This knowledge of our
dynamic environment enhances resource management and
protection, as well as environmental impact mitigation efforts.
NASA also uses GPS data for ground-truth calibration, often
supported by field measurements. Precise knowledge of their
location is critical to enable accurate calibration of
instruments aboard many of NASA's orbiting earth science
spacecraft.
NASA also collects data used in Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
and crewed aircraft. For example, NASA recently flew
sophisticated radar to study the oil disaster in the Gulf of
Mexico and the impact of the Mississippi River floods on levees
and farmlands. These UAVs and other aircraft conducting
airborne science flights rely heavily on GPS data for accurate
navigation and critical science measurements.
Spacecraft also use GPS for highly precise navigation. This
may involve obtaining signals from very low angles, including
those from just over the horizon. Based on testing and
analysis, NASA is concerned that powerful signals from a
ground-based terrestrial network may cause disruption of these
signals, degrading the precision of the spacecraft's
orientation.
The worldwide search and rescue community uses the proposed
band for downlink messages. There is a new system, the Distress
Alerting Satellite System, developed by NASA's Goddard Space
Flight Center, which is intended to integrate future GPS
satellites to replace the existing search and rescue system
that will be decommissioned in 2016.
As far as testing is concerned, NASA has participated in
several efforts to analyze the potential impacts from the
proposed network. NASA was part of the industry-led TWG and led
the work of the Space-Based subgroup. NASA also participated in
the High Precision Receiver sub-group.
NASA is also a member of the federal agency National Space-
Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing or PNT Systems
Engineering Forum or NPEF, conducting tests and analysis work
to interference to GPS receivers.
Finally, NASA was involved in the test and analysis efforts
conducted by RTCA, an advisory board to the FAA.
Results of the TWG and NPEF test and analysis efforts
indicate that significant and harmful interference would occur
to terrestrial and space-based GPS receivers from the proposed
network. NASA's test results firmly support the conclusion at
this point that deployment of the LightSquared network would
jeopardize NASA's low-earth orbit and terrestrial-based science
missions that are dependent and reliable on GPS reception.
Similarly, analysis conducted on aviation-based scenarios in
the RTCA efforts demonstrated that the deployment and operation
of the propose network would not be compatible with aviation
GPS operations. The significant disruption of GPS-based
aviation systems would adversely impact NASA's aviation
research missions.
The Technical Working Group considered several mitigation
options, none which of yet have been demonstrated to be
effective in mitigating potential interference to GPS.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, NASA has participated in
federal agency and industry-led test and analysis efforts
related to the deployment of the LightSquared Network and its
potential impact to GPS. At this time it is clear to NASA that
the FCC-imposed condition requiring resolution of GPS
interference issues prior to commencing commercial operations
has not been satisfied, including LightSquared's modified plan
of June 30. Impacts to NASA's GPS-dependent systems from
interference created by the network would be substantial. It is
important to reiterate that NASA fully supports the Nation's
efforts to increase broadband wireless access, but such efforts
should be compatible with our critical GPS assets. The critical
science and engineering applications that GPS makes possible,
benefiting Americans in many ways, should not be jeopardized.
I would like to thank the Committee for its continued
support of NASA and its programs, and I look forward to
answering your questions you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sparrow follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. Victor D. Sparrow,
Director, Spectrum Policy and Planning Division,
Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Good morning Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson, and Members of
the Committee. Thank you for inviting the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA) to testify today on this very important
issue concerning the potential impacts of the proposed LightSquared
network on NASA's activities. My name is Victor Sparrow, and I am
Director of the Spectrum Policy and Planning Division at NASA.
NASA recognizes the importance of maximizing the utility of the
radio spectrum, and fully supports the President's Wireless Innovation
Initiative and the Executive Memo setting a goal of 500 MHz for mobile
broadband to achieve this end. This effort is needed to enable the
continued growth of, and innovation in, wireless broadband capabilities
and services. It is important to ensure, though, that projects being
undertaken to pursue this initiative are compatible with the many
Global-Positioning-System-dependent (GPS-dependent) systems that are
also critical to the Nation. The capabilities, benefits, and innovation
of the GPS utility should not be degraded or disrupted in the pursuit
of increased wireless broadband access.
My testimony today will focus on some of NASA's GPS-dependent
applications, and their significant vulnerability to interference from
the network proposed by LightSquared and under consideration by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Impacted systems would include
ground-based, airborne, and space-based receivers used to support
activities such as: Earth Science research, weather forecasting,
disaster monitoring, ground-truth calibration of instruments on orbit,
precision navigation for aircraft and spacecraft, and search and rescue
efforts. Research into the development of future aeronautical
applications might be affected, as well. The Administration believes
that we must protect existing GPS users from disruption of the services
they depend on today and ensure that innovative new GPS applications
can be developed in the future. At the same time, recognizing the
President's instruction to identify 500 MHz of new spectrum for
innovative new mobile broadband services, we will continue our efforts
at more efficient use of spectrum. Therefore, in the short run, we
recommend further testing in order to assess the GPS interference
concerns in the lower 10 MHz of the band and to establish whether there
are any feasible mitigation strategies. We also encourage commercial
entities with interests to work with LightSquared toward a possible
resolution, though any proposed mitigation must be subjected to full
testing. The Administration appreciates LightSquared's offer to not
transmit in the upper 10 MHz of its band, right next to GPS, and
strongly supports efforts to identify alternative means of achieving
the intended purpose of the signal that was planned there. The
challenge of meeting the President's goal also depends on long-term
actions by Federal agencies in the area of research and development,
procurement practices that encourage spectrally-efficient applications,
and new policy development.

NASA Science-Related Uses of GPS Technology

In addition to depending upon GPS to provide robust navigation
services, NASA relies on GPS technology and capabilities to monitor and
improve our understanding of Earth science, including climate change
and solid Earth hazards, such as earthquakes and volcanic activity.
This knowledge of our dynamic environment enhances resource management
and protection, and environmental impact mitigation efforts. Some
examples of the use of GPS-dependent space-based applications to
improve our knowledge of the Earth include: determining the
atmosphere's water content; improving the accuracy of weather
forecasts; and enabling (as part of a multi-instrument suite) ocean
topography measurements to determine currents and long-term changes in
sea height. Ground-based GPS networks are also playing an increasingly
prominent role in monitoring ground movement in order to identify
potential conditions that may precede earthquakes and volcanic
activity.
NASA also uses GPS data for ground-truth calibration measurements,
often supported by field measurements. Precise knowledge of the
location of these measurements is critical to enabling accurate
calibration of instruments aboard orbiting spacecraft. This important
procedure is completely dependent on the availability of the in situ
GPS location data. Without ground-truth measurements, the resulting
observations from spacecraft instruments, and interpretations of the
data they collect, would be suspect. This application of the GPS system
impacts many Earth Science missions.
In addition to data collected from satellites or in situ
measurements on the ground, data are also collected using Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and crewed aircraft. For example, NASA's highly
successful UAV Synthetic Aperture Radar project recently flew a
sophisticated radar to study the Gulf of Mexico oil disaster and the
impact of the Mississippi River floods on levees and farmland. These
UAVs and other aircraft use GPS for navigation. Airborne science
flights carrying lidars or altimeters rely on GPS data for all the
science measurements they obtained.
Spacecraft also use GPS for highly precise navigation, using as
many GPS satellites' signals as their receivers are able to acquire at
one time. This may involve obtaining signals from very low angles,
including those from just over the receiving spacecraft's ``horizon.''
Based on testing and analysis of receivers used for a similar low look
angle scenario (``radio occultation'' measurements), NASA is concerned
that powerful signals from a ground-based terrestrial network may cause
disruption of those signals, degrading the precision of the
spacecraft's orientation.
NASA uses GPS for weather sensing applications with a technique
known as GPS radio occultation. This relies on the bending of GPS radio
signals by the atmosphere as they travel from the GPS satellites in
medium Earth orbit to a spacecraft in low Earth orbit (LEO).
Specifically, this technique is used to estimate the temperature and
water vapor content of the atmosphere by evaluating the minute changes
in the GPS signal. These measurements define a vertical profile within
the atmosphere. This technique, developed by NASA, is now being used
operationally by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) to improve its long-range weather forecasts.

NASA Support for GPS-Based Search and Rescue (SAR) Efforts

The worldwide Search and Rescue (SAR) community uses the 1544 MHz
band for downlink messages. The effects of the LightSquared network on
the global SAR capability have not yet been determined. It is critical
to test the compatibility of these systems before a final regulatory
decision is made which might affect future federal and international
infrastructure plans. NASA is supporting the integration of a next-
generation SAR capability onto the GPS satellites. The new system, the
Distress Alerting Satellite System (DASS), is intended to succeed the
existing COSPAS-SARSAT \1\ system as it is decommissioned around 2016.
DASS is expected to significantly enhance current SAR operations by
providing near-instantaneous detection and location of emergency
beacons (NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center currently hosts a prototype
ground station for such applications).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  COSPAS-SARSAT is the international satellite search-and-rescue
network. COSPAS is an acronym for the Russian words 11Cosmicheskaya
Sistyema Poiska Avariynich Sudov'' (``Space System for the Search of
Vessels in Distress''), and SARSAT for ``Search And Rescue Satellite
Aided Tracking.''

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NASA Aeronautical Research and GPS

NASA's aeronautics research supports the development of the FAA's
NextGen air traffic system. NASA's work in this area may or may not be
impacted, depending on the resolution of the GPS signals interference
issue. If the spectrum is not protected for aviation uses, certain GPS-
enabled capabilities would not be possible. These include advanced
Flight Management Systems which would allow for precision positioning
and navigation (e.g., area navigation and required navigation
performance). Substantial operational efficiencies would be lost (such
as improvements enabled by Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast,
or ADS-B technologies), and the benefits of NASA's aeronautics research
into NextGen applications that assume GPS-enabled precision would not
be realized.

Test and Analysis of LightSquared's Impacts

NASA has participated in several efforts to analyze the potential
impacts of the LightSquared proposal. The Agency was part of the
industry-led Technical Working Group (TWG), which analyzed and tested
GPS receiver performance in the presence of interfering signals
representing LightSquared terrestrial broadcasts. Specifically, NASA
led the work of the Space-Based Receiver (SBR) subgroup of the TWG, and
participated in the work of the High Precision Receiver (HPR) subgroup.
NASA is also a member of the National Space-based Positioning,
Navigation, and Timing (PNT) Systems Engineering Forum (NPEF), a
federal agency group that performed test and analysis work related to
interference to GPS receivers.
Finally, NASA was involved in the test and analysis effort
conducted by the RTCA (formerly the Radio Technical Commission for
Aeronautics), an advisory body to the Federal Aviation Administration.
The FAA chartered an RTCA committee to investigate the impact to
aviation and NextGen of the LightSquared implementation plan. This team
concluded that all three phases of the currently proposed LightSquared
deployment plan are incompatible with aviation GPS operations. RTCA
concluded that use of the upper 10 MHz band segment should not be
allowed from an aviation perspective and that use of the Lower 10 MHz
channel as a possible mitigation technique would require additional
study.
Results of the TWG and NPEF test and analysis efforts indicate
significant and harmful interference to terrestrial and space-based GPS
receivers from the LightSquared network, were it to be deployed as
originally intended. NASA's test results support the conclusion at this
point that if the LightSquared network were to be deployed as
originally intended, NASA's LEO and terrestrial-based science missions
that are dependent on reliable GPS reception would be jeopardized.
Similarly, analysis conducted on aviation-based scenarios in the RTCA
effort showed significant disruption of GPS-based aviation systems,
thereby impacting NASA aviation research missions.

Mitigation Options

Mitigation options for preventing the disruption of GPS by the
deployment and operation of the LightSquared network, including a
proposal to only use the lower 10 Megahertz (MHz) channel of the
planned two-channel deployment, were identified in the TWG and NPEF
Reports. However, none of these options have yet been demonstrated to
be effective in mitigating potential interference to GPS. Although
limited testing was conducted by the TWG on the susceptibility of some
GPS devices to the use of only the lower 10 MHz LightSquared channel,
limitations-- such as filters that have yet to be designed or are
theoretical or speculative in nature--prevented adequate testing of
this mitigation approach. NASA believes it would be premature to allow
the use of only the lower 10 MHz channel as a solution, until testing
has been completed and it is established that there is no negative
impact on GPS users.

Conclusion

Mr. Chairman, NASA has participated in the federal agency and
industry-led test and analysis efforts related to deployment of the
LightSquared network and its potential impacts to GPS. At the
conclusion of these efforts, it is clear to NASA that the FCC-imposed
condition requiring resolution of GPS interference issues prior to
commencing commercial operations has not been satisfied, including by
LightSquared's modified plan of June 30, 2011. Impacts to NASA's GPS-
dependent systems from interference created by the network would be
substantial, impacting airborne and spaceborne science, as well as
certain space operations. It is important to reiterate that NASA fully
supports the Nation's efforts to increase wireless access, but those
efforts should be implemented in such a way that our critical GPS
assets, and the many worthwhile, innovative science and engineering
applications they make possible, are not jeopardized.
I would like to thank this Committee for its continuing support of
NASA and its programs. I would be pleased to respond to any questions
you may have at this time.

Chairman Hall. Thank you, Mr. Sparrow.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Appel.

STATEMENT OF HON. PETER H. APPEL,

ADMINISTRATOR, RESEARCH AND

INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGY ADMINISTRATION,

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

Mr. Appel. Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson, and
distinguished Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today.
The Global Positioning System is vital to multimodal
transportation safety and efficiency now and in the future. The
Next Generation Air Transportation System or NextGen will use
GPS to shorten routes, save time and fuel, reduce traffic
delays, increase capacity, and permit controllers to monitor
and manage aircraft with greater safety margins. Positive Train
Control will increasingly depend on GPS to prevent train
collisions and derailments and accidents caused by railroad
switches left in an incorrect position.
The Intelligent Transportation System Program for surface
transportation relies on GPS for vehicle collision-warning and
crash-avoidance systems.
To provide the accuracy necessary for precision navigation,
GPS receivers are designed with a wide front end so precision
receivers also pick up signals from the adjacent Mobile
Satellite Service band, the MSS band.
Until the recent FCC action on LightSquared, this did not
create a potential conflict. The GPS and MSS bands were both
designed to be ``quiet,'' limited to weak satellite signals.
GPS receivers easily filtered out the MSS signals.
The Department of Transportation assessed the impact of
test results from LightSquared's original operating plan and
concluded that the planned use of GPS for NextGen, Positive
Train Control, and Intelligent Transportation System research
and applications would not be feasible under this scenario.
Based on the test results of using both the upper and lower
portion of the LightSquared band, aviation use of GPS would be
significantly compromised due to the aggregate effect of 40,000
LightSquared transmitters. This would impact GPS receivers
onboard over 60,000 aircraft, resulting in substantial retrofit
costs and delay. Safety benefits of using GPS for approach and
landing in all weather conditions and addressing controlled
flight into terrain and runway incursions would not be fully
realized.
As a mitigation technique, there would be heavy reliance on
aging legacy ground-based systems which do not meet the
performance requirements for NextGen. The aviation industry
also could have a demand for a non-U.S. satellite navigation
system, such as Russia's GLONASS system, which operates farther
away in frequency from LightSquared than does GPS.
For Positive Train Control, GPS is the least costly method
for transmitting location information. If GPS were deemed
unreliable, most railroads would have to switch to transponder-
based technology identifying alternative approaches, would
significantly delay PCT implementation and increase costs.
The Intelligent Transportation Systems Program and their
industry partners have invested many years and millions of
dollars in safety-based research that leverages GPS to make
significant improvements in surface transportation crash
avoidance. A degradation or loss of GPS will affect the
operation of connected vehicle safety applications that will
assist drivers in preventing crashes.
Recently, LightSquared proposed to initially broadcast only
on the lower 10 megahertz portion of the band in an attempt to
avoid many of the interference issues. It is important to
realize that any future use of the upper portion of the band
would introduce all of the impacts uncovered by the test
results previously discussed. Any future examinations of
LightSquared should be made under the paradigm that only the
lower 10 megahertz portion of the band will be utilized.
While this scenario may lessen the impacts on aviation and
other modes of transportation, it is important that the new
scenario be thoroughly analyzed and tested. High-precision GPS
receivers used for airfield and flight procedure surveys,
flight test tracking, space weather monitoring, and timing
applications might be impacted.
The DOT would like to work towards a win-win, if one
exists, that allows for increased broadband access without
disrupting existing and planned GPS-based services. The DOT is
also responsible for representing the Space-Based Positioning,
Navigation, and Timing or PNT interested partner civilian
federal agencies, as well as our own. Applications which may
require access to both GPS and MSS signals such as precision
agriculture and many scientific and surveying systems may be
most difficult to resolve.
We are concerned that if terrestrial broadband
transmissions are allowed anywhere in the MSS band, they may
disrupt existing high-precision GPS uses. The Department of
Transportation has communicated its concerns to the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration, NTIA, which
has expressed concerns to the FCC and has urged that they be
resolved before permitting LightSquared to operate.
Going forward, the Transportation Deputy Secretary, John
Porcari, has committed the Department to working with NTIA and
the other federal agencies to ensure that we will have a plan
in place such that the GPS systems in development now will not
be compromised by interference in the years to come.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Appel follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Peter H. Appel,
Administrator, Research and
Innovative Technology Administration,
U.S. Department of Transportation
Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson, and Members of the
Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss
such an important topic.
The Global Positioning System (GPS) is one of the greatest success
stories of government and private sector innovation. Today, the use of
GPS is ubiquitous. No one knows exactly how many commercial uses are
built around GPS. Worldwide sales of GPS navigation devices exceed $20
billion, annually, and an estimated $3 trillion worth of commerce
relies on GPS for tracking, timing and navigation.
The United States clearly is the leader in space-based positioning,
navigation, and timing (PNT) and we must continue to maintain and
improve GPS, its augmentations, and backup capabilities.
GPS is vital to multimodal applications of transportation safety
and efficiency. The Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen)
will transform America's air traffic control system from an aging
ground-based system of today to a satellite-based system of the future.
NextGen GPS technology will be used to shorten routes, save time and
fuel, reduce traffic delays, increase capacity, and permit controllers
to monitor and manage aircraft with greater safety margins. Positive
Train Control (PTC) will increasingly depend on GPS to prevent train-
to-train collisions, train derailments, and accidents caused by
railroad switches left in an incorrect position.
The Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) program will rely on
GPS as a key technology for vehicle collision-warning and crash-
avoidance systems. GPS-based location is also a crucial element of the
Next Generation-911 public safety response systems currently in
development.
Per U.S. National Space-based PNT policy, the Department of
Transportation also is responsible for representing the space-based PNT
interests of partner civilian federal agencies, as well as our own.
These applications include millions of GPS receivers used for precision
agriculture and scientific and surveying systems such as those that
NASA, NOAA, Department of the Interior, and others rely on.
To provide the accuracy necessary for precision navigation, GPS
receivers have been designed with a ``wide front end'' that pick up
signals greater than the band authorized for GPS. In order to pick up
this wide range of signals, precision receivers also pick up signals
from the adjacent band, reserved for Mobile Satellite Service (MSS).
Until recently, this did not create a conflict. The GPS and MSS
bands were both designed to be ``quiet,'' limited to weak satellite
signals, a tiny fraction of a watt when they reached the Earth. GPS
receivers easily filtered out the MSS signals.
In January 2011, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
approved the application of LightSquared to broadcast broadband signals
in the MSS band, contingent on LightSquared resolving potential
interference to GPS. The LightSquared-led Technical Working Group (TWG)
performed measurements and submitted its results and findings to the
FCC on June 30th.
Technical staff from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
participated in the TWG testing. In addition, the FAA commissioned
RTCA, Inc. to study the impact of LightSquared's proposed operations on
aviation. The Department of Transportation also participated in a joint
federal study--the National Space-Based PNT Engineering Forum (NPEF)--
to assess the impact on a broad range of common government and
commercial GPS receivers.
The tests, based on the original operating plan that LightSquared
had submitted to the FCC, focused on ``overload interference''--
interference with the GPS receivers that ``listened in'' to the
adjacent MSS band. The powerful broadband signal overwhelmed filters
and effectively blocked GPS signals in almost all of the devices
tested.
The Department of Transportation assessed the impact of these test
results from LightSquared's original operating plan and concluded that
the planned use of GPS for NextGen, Positive Train Control, and
Intelligent Transportation System research and applications would not
be feasible under this scenario.
Based on the test results of using both the upper and lower portion
of the LightSquared band-- the original LightSquared operating plan--
aviation use of GPS would be significantly compromised due to the
aggregate effect of 40,000 high-power LightSquared transmitters. This
would impact GPS receivers onboard over 60,000 aircraft, resulting in
substantial retrofit costs. Benefits of providing more direct routes
and improving capacity, as well as safety benefits of using GPS for
approach and landing in all weather conditions, and addressing
controlled flight into terrain and runway incursions, would not be
fully realized.
As a mitigation technique, there would be heavy reliance on aging
legacy ground-based systems which do not meet the performance
requirements for NextGen. The aviation industry also could have a
demand for a non-U.S. satellite navigation system, such as Russia's
GLONASS system, which operates farther away in frequency from
LightSquared than does GPS.
The FAA has initiated an Alternative Positioning, Navigation, and
Timing (APNT) research program to identify technologies that meet the
requirements of NextGen in the event that GPS is disrupted.
Other transportation applications that rely on GPS also would be
affected. For Positive Train Control, use of GPS is the least costly
method for transmitting location information. If GPS were deemed to be
unreliable, most railroads would have to switch to the transponder-
based technology such as that used for the Advanced Civil Speed
Enforcement System (ACSES) currently in place on the Northeast
Corridor.
A need to identify alternate and complementary sources for
positioning, navigation, and timing would result in significant
increases in PTC implementation time and costs.
The Intelligent Transportation Systems Joint Program Office and
their industry partners have invested many years and millions of
dollars in safety-based research that leverages GPS to make significant
improvements in surface transportation crash avoidance. A degradation
or loss of GPS will affect the operation of Vehicle-to-Vehicle and
Vehicle-to-Infrastructure applications that provide the location and
speed of other vehicles assisting drivers in preventing crashes,
thereby reducing the substantial number of fatalities and injuries that
occur each year.
On June 30th, LightSquared submitted a Recommendation Paper to the
FCC proposing to initially broadcast only on the lower 10 MHz portion
of the band in an attempt to avoid many of the interference issues.
LightSquared plans to ``standstill'' on use of the upper portion of the
band. It is important to realize that any future use of the upper
portion of the band would introduce all of the impacts uncovered by the
test results previously discussed. As a result, any future examinations
of LightSquared should be made under the paradigm that only the lower
10 MHz portion of the band would ever be utilized for the proposed
high-power terrestrial transmitters.
While this scenario may lessen the impacts on aviation and other
modes of transportation, it is important that the new scenario--at
which LightSquared only operates at the lower 10 MHz portion of its
spectrum--be thoroughly analyzed and tested to determine any impact to
GPS performance.
The FAA is concerned that high-precision GPS receivers used for
airfield and flight procedure surveys, flight test tracking, space
weather monitoring, and timing applications might be impacted. Also,
applications which require access to both GPS and MSS signals such as
precision agriculture may be the most difficult to resolve.
The Department of Transportation would like to work towards a
``win-win''--if one exists-- that allows for increased broadband
access, without disrupting existing and planned GPS-based services,
such as NextGen.
However, we are concerned that if terrestrial broadband
transmissions are allowed anywhere in the MSS-band, they will disrupt
existing GPS uses including precision agriculture and many scientific
and surveying systems such as those that NASA, NOAA, Department of the
Interior, and others rely on.
The Department of Transportation has communicated its concerns to
the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA),
the agency that is responsible for managing federal agencies' use of
spectrum, and with which the FCC has stated it will consult in
determining whether the interference concerns raised by this matter
have been resolved. NTIA has advised the FCC that the LightSquared
proposal ``raises significant interference concerns'' and has urged the
FCC to ensure these concerns are resolved before permitting
LightSquared to become operational. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Letter from Lawrence E. Strickling, Assistant Secretary for
Communications and Information, U.S. Department of Commerce, to Julius
Genachowski, Chairman, Federal Communications Commission, (January 12,
2011). See also, Letter from Lawrence E. Strickling, Assistant
Secretary for Communications and Information, U.S. Department of
Commerce, to Julius Genachowski, Chairman, Federal Communications
Commission, (July 6, 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Department of Transportation will look for solutions to the
challenges of our partner agencies, as well as our own, in interagency
discussions. Going forward, Deputy Secretary John Porcari has committed
the Department to work with NTIA and the other federal agencies to
ensure that we have a plan in place such that the GPS systems in
development now will not be compromised by interference in the years to
come.
The Administration believes that we must protect existing GPS users
from disruption of the services they depend on today and ensure that
innovative new GPS applications can be developed in the future. At the
same time, recognizing the President's instruction to identify 500 MHz
of new spectrum for innovative new mobile broadband services, we will
continue our efforts at more efficient use of spectrum.
Therefore, in the short run, we will participate in any further
testing or analysis required to establish whether there are any
mitigation strategies that can enable LightSquared operation in the
lower 10 MHz of the band. We also encourage commercial entities with
interests to work with Lightsquared toward a possible resolution,
though any proposed mitigation must be subjected to full testing. The
challenge of meeting the President's goal also depends on long-term
actions by federal agencies in the area of research and development,
procurement practices that encourage spectrally efficient applications,
and new policy development.
Thank you and I look forward to answering your questions.

Chairman Hall. I thank you very much, and our next--who is
next up? Dr. Applegate for five minutes. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Applegate. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF DR. DAVID APPLEGATE,

ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR, NATURAL HAZARDS,

U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY, U.S. DEPARTMENT

OF THE INTERIOR

Dr. Applegate. Well, Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson,
and Members of the Committee, I want to thank you for the
invitation to testify at this hearing. I am the Associate
Director for Natural Hazards at the U.S. Geological Survey, and
we are the science agency for the Department of the Interior.
The Department has significant concerns about the proposed
LightSquared system, which could have negative impacts on the
reception of Global Positioning System signals. The USGS and
our colleagues across Interior make extensive use of GPS
technology. Testing performed this year on LightSquared's
original deployment plan has failed to demonstrate the
satisfactory effectiveness of mitigation techniques. Proposed
alternatives, meanwhile, require further testing to be fairly
judged. The Department feels that the proposal should not be
approved at this time.
The USGS and our sister bureaus at Interior face a wide
range of potential impacts from GPS interference. Many Interior
bureaus have law enforcement and public safety missions, for
example, Interior Department police officers and fire crews use
GPS for navigation in both remote back country and urban
settings.
At the USGS GPS is an essential tool for many of our
mission responsibilities, including streamgaging, mapping and
surveying, and in my area of responsibility, natural hazards
monitoring and research.
Streamgages and water quality monitors operated by the USGS
and our partners provide data used to manage water resources,
to forecast floods and droughts, and for many other purposes.
GPS signals are used to calibrate these streamgages. In
addition, modern streamgages have radios that use the GPS
timing signal to make near real-time transmission of data
possible. There are about 9,000 of these radios in use, and
without them the quality of data from the streamgages would be
diminished. Losing those capabilities would reduce the accuracy
of National Weather Service flood forecasts and would likely
diminish the ability of the Army Corps of Engineers to minimize
flood damage.
With respect to our mapping mission, nearly all of the
mapping data collected today involves the use of GPS. All
modern airborne or satellite-based systems are dependent on GPS
for navigation, position, and geolocation of the data. LiDAR
technology can determine elevation to within centimeters but
requires equally precise GPS positioning data to validate it.
Nowhere is our stake in this issue more significant than in
our natural hazards mission. Under the Stafford Act, the USGS
issues warnings and forecasts for earthquakes, volcanoes, and
landslides, and we support other agencies, especially NOAA, for
a host of other threats. All of these responsibilities depend
on reliable, redundant monitoring infrastructures.
For rapid reporting of earthquakes and their impacts, the
USGS relies on our Advanced National Seismic System here in the
U.S. and the Global Seismographic Network worldwide, which we
maintain in cooperation with the National Science Foundation
and the IRIS Consortium. The 2,500 seismic sensors in these
networks use GPS for precise timing, and a small change in the
timing signal, even just a few stations, can degrade the
accuracy of our response products.
Our ability to monitor deformation of the earth's crust
requires the most precise, accurate, and reliable GPS signals.
With our university cooperators, along with the National
Science Foundation and the UNAVCO Consortium, we maintain and
use over 1,000 permanent continuously operated GPS stations to
monitor ground deformations along faults like the San Andreas.
Dense networks of these high-data rate, high-precision GPS
stations are particularly important for earthquake monitoring
in at-risk urban areas in Southern California, the San
Francisco Bay Area, and the Pacific Northwest.
Our network of volcano observatories relies on real-time
data from 220 continuously reporting GPS stations in order to
forecast and detect eruptions for volcanically active areas
across the Western U.S. These GPS instruments provide unique
information, which are not often available from other
monitoring methods and almost never with the near real time
availability provided by GPS. Losing our GPS monitoring
capabilities would result in a severely decreased ability to
provide early as possible warning of volcanic unrest. This
would be a significant public safety concern for communities
near volcanoes, such as those in the Pacific Northwest and
Alaska. It is also a concern for air traffic to the hazard of
volcanic ash.
GPS has become so pervasive that it risks being taken for
granted. Many of these applications are critical, even
fundamental, to the missions of the USGS and the Department of
the Interior. The Department is committed to the development of
solutions that ensure no loss of critical national security
capabilities, including GPS. We look forward to working with
our federal partners as well as Congress to address long-term
solutions regarding a balance between federal spectrum
requirements and the expanding demand for mobile broadband
services.
Thank you again for your attention to this important
matter, and I would be happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Applegate follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. David Applegate,
Associate Director for Natural Hazards,
U.S. Geological Survey, U.S. Department of the Interior
Chairman Hall, Congresswoman Johnson, thank you for inviting me to
this hearing. My name is Dave Applegate. I am the Associate Director
for Natural Hazards at the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). The USGS is
the science agency for the Department of the Interior (DOI).
As you already know, the Department has significant concerns about
the proposal for a satellite communications system being developed by
the firm LightSquared. The proposed system could have negative impacts
on the reception of Global Positioning System signals, or GPS. The USGS
and our colleagues across DOI make extensive use of GPS technology--
some of our work is entirely dependent upon it. Testing performed this
year on LightSquared's original deployment plan has failed to
demonstrate the satisfactory effectiveness of mitigation techniques.
Proposed alternatives, meanwhile, require further testing to be fairly
judged. The Department of the Interior feels that the proposal should
not be approved at this time and has expressed this position to the
National Telecommunications and Information Administration, which
represents the spectrum interests of the Federal agencies before the
Federal Communications Commission.
I am, of course, most familiar with the uses of high-precision GPS
technology in the fields related to my charge of natural hazards
research and monitoring. However, DOI, the USGS, and our sister bureaus
have identified a wide range of impacts of potential GPS interference
to capabilities used for mapping, navigation, and timing. Many Interior
bureaus have law enforcement and public safety missions, including a
significant role in wildfire response nationwide. Law enforcement
officers and fire crews use GPS for navigation in both remote
backcountry and urban areas. Any degradation of GPS signal could make
it more difficult for personnel to navigate. They would have to revert
to navigating by ``pencil-and-map.'' Miscommunication and delays also
would be a life-safety risk for personnel and the public. It is even
possible that investigations by Department law-enforcement agents could
be called into doubt due to the greater inaccuracy of manual
geolocation techniques.
For our part at the USGS, GPS technology is an essential tool for
many of our mission responsibilities. Some examples include
streamgaging, mapping and surveying, and in my area of expertise,
geologic hazards.
Streamgages and water quality monitors operated by the USGS and its
partners provide data used to manage water resources, forecast floods
and droughts, inform the design and operation of dams, levees, water--
and wastewater treatment plants, and irrigation systems, and the
regulation and monitoring of water pollution and its impacts. GPS
signals in mobile applications are used to accurately position flow-
measuring equipment and obtain data needed to calibrate streamgages. In
addition, modern streamgages have radios that use the GPS timing signal
to make near real-time transmission of data possible. There are about
9,000 of these radios in use and without them the quality of data from
the streamgages would be diminished. The impact of losing the
capabilities of these radios is varied and significant. For example, it
would reduce the accuracy of National Weather Service flood forecasts
and would likely diminish the ability of flood-fighting agencies such
as the Corps of Engineers to minimize flood damage. The confidence and
timeliness of water-management decisions made by states, the Bureau of
Reclamation, and the Army Corps of Engineers could also be impacted.
Since 2009, the USGS has invested $11.5 million in GPS-based satellite
radios and 91 acoustic doppler current profilers. Without the GPS-
driven streamgage satellite radios, the increase in costs will approach
$6.6 million per year based on the expense of periodically resetting
physical clocks at each streamgage.
As with our work to better understand water resources, the USGS
relies on strong partnerships to fulfill our mapping missions. The
science and craft of mapping have come a long way since this USGS
mission began in the late 19th Century. Today, nearly all of the data
collected involves the use of GPS. All modern airborne or satellite-
based systems are dependent on GPS for navigation, positioning and
geolocation of the data. Ortho-rectified imagery needs GPS to reliably
determine the location of each image. LiDAR technology, meanwhile, can
determine elevation to within centimeters, but requires equally precise
GPS positioning data to validate it. High-precision LiDAR data are also
useful in my field because the technology can reveal hidden faults, map
out ancient landslides, and determine the shape of volcanoes in
unprecedented detail. Since 2008, USGS has made between $18 million and
$20 million in lidar acquisition purchases per year. The 2010 total was
over $40 million, including a substantial investment of Recovery Act
funds.
Nowhere is our stake in this issue more significant than in our
mission responsibilities for natural hazards. Under the Stafford Act,
the USGS issues warnings and forecasts for a variety of geologic
hazards, and we support other agencies for a host of other threats. All
of these responsibilities depend on reliable, redundant monitoring
infrastructures, like networks of seismometers or streamgages.
For rapid reporting of earthquakes and their impacts, the USGS
relies on our Advanced National Seismic System (ANSS) here in the U.S.
and the Global Seismographic Network (GSN) worldwide, in cooperation
with the National Science Foundation and IRIS Consortium of
universities. The 2,500 seismic sensors in these networks use GPS for
precise timing, and a small change in the timing signal at even just a
few seismic stations can degrade the accuracy of earthquake's location,
and hence all downstream response products.
Our ability to monitor deformation of the Earth's crust requires
the most precise, accurate, and reliable GPS signals. We and our
university cooperators, along with the National Science Foundation and
UNAVCO consortium, maintain and use over 1,000 permanent continuously
operating GPS stations to track plate motions and monitor ground
deformation due to earthquakes along faults like the San Andreas and
hundreds of others nationwide. Dense networks of high data rate, high-
precision GPS stations are particularly important for earthquake
monitoring for at-risk urban areas in southern California, the San
Francisco Bay Area, and the Pacific Northwest. The estimated capital
cost of the USGS investment in these geodetic networks is $26 million,
including $6 million in Recovery Act funds used to upgrade existing
networks. For the NSF Earthscope project alone, GPS network capital
costs are about $100 million and current operation and maintenance
costs are $11 million yearly. UNAVCO expert analysis shows that this
NSF investment would be put in jeopardy if the LightSquared Network is
given approval to proceed.
Our network of volcano observatories relies on real-time data from
220 continuously reporting GPS stations in order to forecast and detect
eruptions for volcanically active areas around the western United
States. These GPS instruments provide unique information on the
location of magma and the size of an impending eruption, which seismic
or other types of data do not. The impact of interference of GPS
signals on the monitoring of U.S. volcanoes would be substantial. The
three-dimensional deformation data gathered from continuously recording
GPS stations are often not available from any other monitoring method,
and almost never with the near-real-time availability provided by the
GPS networks. We now rely on our GPS monitoring capabilities, and
losing these would result in a severely decreased ability to perform
our duties in providing earliest possible warning of volcanic unrest.
This would be a significant public safety concern for communities near
volcanoes, such as those in the Pacific Northwest and Alaska. It is
also a concern for air traffic in the northern Pacific Ocean due to the
hazard of volcanic ash, a hazard that was recently demonstrated by the
eruption of Icelandic volcanoes. Similar technology is used to monitor
16 potential landslide sites. The USGS capital investment in GPS
receivers currently used for volcano monitoring is $3.5 million of
which $1.5 million came from Recovery Act funds.
Recent testing has demonstrated that reception of the L1 signal,
the civilian-use band of frequencies, by high-precision receivers used
by DOI is significantly degraded when exposed to the proposed
LightSquared signals tested thus far (recently proposed alternatives
will require further testing to be sufficiently understood and fairly
judged). Given the wide use of such receivers and the uncertainty of
technical fixes, it is impossible to predict exactly how much it would
cost to replace these receivers. The Department estimates that it has
invested about $100 million in the technology and it could cost as much
as $500 million to replace it. Also, there could be a cost in lost
situational awareness and ongoing scientific research.
GPS is vitally important in acquiring virtually every type of
spatially referenced data in use today. It has become so pervasive that
it is taken for granted. Many of these applications are critical-even
fundamental-to the missions of the USGS and the Department of the
Interior. A short-term requirement for replacement or modification
would be chaotic and expensive; a gradual upgrade would require
adequate funding, careful planning, and several years.
The Department fully supports the national economic and security
goals of the President's 500 MHz initiative and is committed to the
implementation of more effective and efficient use of the finite radio
frequency spectrum and the development of solutions that ensure no loss
of critical National Security capabilities, to include GPS. The
Department will continue to work with its Administration partners and
NTIA, as well as with Congress, to address long-term solutions
regarding a balance between federal spectrum requirements and the
expanding demand for mobile broadband services.Thank you again for
inviting me today and for your attention to this important matter. I
would be happy to answer any questions you may have.

Chairman Hall. I thank you, sir, and Mr. Carlisle, you may
proceed, sir.

STATEMENT OF MR. JEFFREY J. CARLISLE,

EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, REGULATORY AFFAIRS

AND PUBLIC POLICY, LIGHTSQUARED

Mr. Carlisle. Chairman Hall, Ranking Member Johnson,
Members of the Committee, thank you very much for giving me the
opportunity to speak with you today about this issue.
We are going to make a major investment in U.S.
infrastructure, and let me be extremely clear about this. We
are not going to implement that investment in a way that will
degrade or destroy GPS. Nor do we believe that the FCC would
ever allow us to do so. This is not a zero sum game. Americans
do not have to choose between a robust GPS and a competitive
broadband wireless network. They can have both, because this is
an issue of responsible receiver design and coordination of the
network. It is a technical issue that can be solved just as it
is solved every time anybody deploys a wireless network in the
United States.
As was mentioned earlier, we are investing $14 billion over
the next eight years in deploying this network. This investment
also includes support of our satellite, which was launched last
November, which in and of itself was a $1 billion investment in
American technology leadership. Part of that investment was
$250 million in space technology that have never been invented
yet, and as a result we have the largest commercial dish ever
launched into space anywhere.
Now, why did we make this investment, and why are we
committing to invest more? Because the certainty of the FCC
regulatory regime allowing us to deployment a ground-based
network and this was not developed within the last few months
as it is sometimes portrayed. This was actually the result of a
four-year process that the FCC conducted from 2001, to 2005,
and I have detailed this process in my testimony, but I will
just emphasize a few points here.
This process resulted--there was the--there were the
original rules, there was out authorization under the rules
in--the original rules were written in 2003, we were authorized
in 2004, and the rules were reconsidered in 2005. That
reconsideration is relevant for a very specific point. In that
reconsideration in 2005, the FCC did two things. It removed any
limit on the number of base stations or cell towers we could
deploy in our network. It also established a power level of 1.6
kilowatts for those base stations. That is what we tested, that
is what we are using, and that is what we have committed to use
going forward.
Also as part of this process it included the GPS
manufacturers, and it included review at every one of these
steps; 2003, 2004, 2005, by NTIA's interdepartmental committee
that review--interagency committee that reviews all decisions
by the FCC that have a potential impact on federal spectrum.
The agencies here today can have--can and have made their
concerns known through that committee on any number of spectrum
issues, including this one.
So why was that last issue relevant? Well, during the
process from 2001 to 2005, the GPS industry said that the only
issue that we were supposed to be worried about was our signal
going into GPS, that it was powerful, it was going to taper off
into GPS and overwhelm the GPS signal. We reached an agreement
in 2002 to prevent that. Our signal is filtered so it doesn't
taper off into GPS.
The issue of receiver sensitivity where the receivers or
receiver overload where the receivers look into our band, so it
doesn't matter what kind of filtering we put in, they can still
be overloaded by our transmitters, that was never raised during
this four-year period. It was first raised by the GPS Industry
Council in September of last year after we had already
committed $4 billion of investment to this project on the basis
of the rules that had been written six years previously.
So where are we today? We are moving forward with the
proposal that has been discussed. We are moving to the other
end of the GPS spectrum at a cost of $100 million to the
company. We are reducing our power by 90 percent, not 50
percent. Ninety percent to the levels established in 2005, and
this week we also discussed limiting the power that will reach
the ground so that we will not interfere with the vast majority
of devices. We will also fund research into resilient precision
devices and coordinate the deployment of our network to avoid
interference with them.
We are committed to solving this issue, because if we get
it wrong, Americans won't have access to another competitive
broadband network. They will basically have two, and that is a
pretty big stake right now, particularly for jobs, education,
and scientific progress in the United States.
Thank you very much for you time, and I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Carlisle follows:]

PREPARED STATEMENT OF MR. JEFFREY J. CARLISLE,
EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT,
REGULATORY AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC POLICY, LIGHTSQUARED
My testimony today will explain the network that LightSquared is
building, extensive interference testing, and steps that LightSquared
plans to take to mitigate interference. LightSquared is investing
billions of dollars in American infrastructure, in order to bring
competitive wireless broadband service across the country. We will do
so in a way that protects the GPS-related work of the agencies under
this Committee's jurisdiction. Indeed, LightSquared is in very much the
same position as the agencies testifying before you today. We find
long-planned and long-authorized operations threatened because the
manufacturers of GPS devices have been building and selling receivers
that ignored rules the FCC established in 2003 and 2005 with their
knowledge, and without their opposition. Nevertheless, LightSquared is
committed to working with the Committee and the agencies to do our part
in addressing a problem we did not create, and we have already made
substantial and real proposals. The interference issue is a question of
technology choice, and can be addressed through proper design.

I. Lightsquared Is Building Critical Infrastructure for the 21st
Century

LightSquared is investing $14 billion over the next eight years to
build a nationwide wireless broadband network. This investment will
support over 15,000 jobs a year for each of the five years that it will
take to construct this network. When completed, our ground network will
provide over 260 million people with wireless broadband service at
expected speeds of 5 to 10 megabits per second. The ground network will
provide the scale needed to make our new high-power satellite system
viable over the long term, which will provide disaster-resistant
service to a new generation of user devices that are the same size,
weight, and cost as today's terrestrial mobile devices. LightSquared's
network promises to increase competition in the marketplace, give
consumers new choices, broaden access to broadband, increase public
safety and emergency response, and, ultimately, lower prices.
This network is the culmination of years of hard work and billions
of dollars of investment. LightSquared has been authorized to use
spectrum for mobile satellite services (MSS) since 1989, and launch its
first satellite in 1996. For the last 15 years, it has provided voice
and data services over its satellites to federal, state and local
governments, transportation and maritime industries, and others who
need reliable communications when a ground network is unavailable.
In 2003, the FCC first issued rules authorizing the use of
satellite spectrum for ground networks. The FCC issued an authorization
to LightSquared's predecessor in 2004, and finalized the spectrum rules
in 2005 on reconsideration. Since then LightSquared has worked hard to
bring its network to market. It coordinated spectrum and developed
technology to support an integrated satellite and ground network.
Now we are ready to move forward, and this investment is coming at
a particularly crucial time. The U.S. ranks 15th in the world when it
comes to broadband, according to a recent Cisco survey. Congestion in
urban markets is leading to an unacceptable level of dropped calls and
``no service'' displays. At the same time, many consumers in rural
America don't even have a wireless broadband option: 28 percent of
people who live in rural America still have no access to broadband.
This puts rural communities at a disadvantage when it comes to
attracting new businesses, creating jobs and gaining access to
education.
Wireless infrastructure in the U.S. is manifestly unready to meet
the challenges of the 21st century. The U.S. is seeing the beginning of
almost vertical growth in data usage. Data usage in the will jump from
under 2 million terabytes per year to almost 14 million terabytes in
2015. Spectrum is needed to carry that data, and spectrum is severely
limited.
The FCC has already identified a need for at least 500 MHz of
additional spectrum to be freed for broadband use over the next 10
years. We are bringing 40 MHz of spectrum to be used for broadband
services--a significant down payment on the FCC's 10-year goal. No
other company has such a significant slice of airwaves that is ready to
deliver network capacity to our spectrum-starved nation, and no other
company could conceivably offer this broad coverage in the same time
frame.
It is important to understand that LightSquared will do this in a
way that is completely different from other wireless companies in two
ways.
First, LightSquared will be the only wireless broadband network
with an integrated satellite. Our first satellite was launched in
November 2010, with the largest dish ever placed on a commercial
spacecraft--seven stories tall. This represented a $1 billion
investment in U.S. space technology. Our satellite allows a smartphone,
tablet, data stick, or other device to link to the satellite when the
ground network is not available, either because the device is out of
range, or when ground networks have been destroyed by natural
disasters. LightSquared already has a history of providing satellite
communications in the places they are needed most: in Mississippi after
Hurricane Katrina; in Kentucky after widespread and destructive ice
storms; in Joplin, Missouri after its tornado; and in Maryland,
Delaware, and Virginia after Hurricane Irene. The size and cost of
satellite-enabled devices, assuming we can take advantage of the scale
offered by the ground network, will be the same as that of regular
cellular devices. This is why the deployment of the ground network is
so critical. A sustainable, reliable satellite function promises
substantial long-term benefit to government, public safety, and
individual consumers.
Second, LightSquared will be the first wholesale-only network. We
will sell capacity to wireless companies, retailers and other companies
that want to provide broadband services, and they can then provide the
integrated network to their consumers. Thus, when we build our network,
we're not just enabling LightSquared as a competitor, we're enabling
dozens of competitors in the marketplace.
In sum, then, what LightSquared is doing is making a massive
private investment in critical U.S. infrastructure, making better and
more efficient use of spectrum, and enabling wireless competition, all
to the benefit of American consumers, public safety, and the nation as
a whole.

II. GPS Interference Has Been Studied Comprehensively

Part of LightSquared's spectrum is directly adjacent to the
spectrum used by GPS. This is not a new development. When
LightSquared's predecessor first proposed using satellite spectrum for
a ground network over 10 years ago, the GPS community, represented by
the US GPS Industry Council (USGIC), asked us to voluntarily limit our
energy that could bleed over into the GPS band. If we did nothing,
comparatively powerful base stations used in cell sites would drown out
faint GPS signals. We agreed to limits on emissions out of our band
into GPS that were 1,000 times stricter than what the FCC required, and
designed our network around this agreement. Moreover, the power levels
we are using today in our base stations are the same as what the FCC
authorized in 2005, and we have committed to stay at those levels. I
have attached a chronology, with citations to the public record, as
Attachment 1 to my testimony.
The current concerns about interference do not stem from a concern
about emissions into the GOPS band. Instead, in September 2010, the
USGIC raised a new and different issue arising out of the fact that
certain GPS receivers are designed to not only capture GPS signals, but
also capture signals from our band and could be desensitized, or
overloaded. Accordingly, no matter how strictly we limited our out of
band emissions, we could still cause overload of some GPS receivers. I
have provided illustrations showing this effect as Attachment 2 to my
testimony.
Much of the advocacy by the GPS manufacturers over the last nine
months has tried to portray this issue as having arisen only this year
because LightSquared somehow changed the ``nature'' of its network.
This narrative has been stated and restated with a purpose: to distract
lawmakers from the fact that GPS manufacturers failed to raise this
issue at the FCC when it was developing its rules and could have
addressed this issue in the design of their receivers years ago. In
2005, they knew that the FCC rules allowed LightSquared to deploy tens
of thousands of base stations in our band, all broadcasting at a power
of 1.5 kw. Thus, if LightSquared's predecessor had had the resources to
build its network at that time, it could have built exactly the same
network as is planned today. Indeed, in 2003, the USGIC stated to the
FCC that the effect of their rules was to allow us to use tens of
thousands of base stations. (See Attachment 1 for citation.)
The GPS community's convenient story that we caused the problem
because we asked for a modification to the types of end user devices
that could be brought to our network is easily demonstrated to be
false. End user devices have nothing to do with the overload effect the
GPS community identified--it is entirely a function of the number and
power of our base stations, which as I stated above was established in
2005. Moreover, as I stated above, the GPS community raised this issue
in September 2010, two months before we asked for any modification for
end user devices. Finally, the USGIC did acknowledge, eight years ago,
that we would operate tens of thousands of base stations in our band.
The possible scale and scope of our use of the network was well known
by, or at least obvious to, any of the large companies that manufacture
GPS receivers, all with presences in Washington, and yet they did
nothing. This, despite the fact that the Department of Defense's
standards for use of the GPS constellation specify that manufacturers
should use a receiver that filters out signals from adjacent bands if
they expect to have full performance.
Notably, the original rules in 2003, our authorization in 2004, and
the reconsideration of those rules in 2005 were all subject to full
review by the NTIA's Interdepartment Radio Advisory Committee process,
which includes input from all impacted federal agencies. Thus, when the
FCC issued decisions allowing us to deploy tens of thousands of base
stations, all transmitting at the powers we will use today, federal
agencies had extensive and repeated opportunities for comment and
input. Of course, as users of GPS devices, it is extremely difficult,
if not impossible, for federal agencies to study this issue fully
without the support and involvement of the GPS receiver manufacturers.
The manufacturers' failure to identify the overload issue until a year
ago may well explain why Federal Government users did not raise this
issue earlier.
In the end, the GPS manufacturers either failed to understand the
vulnerability of their own receivers or took the calculated risk that
LightSquared would not be able to complete its network. Either way,
they did nothing to prepare their receivers or their users for the
changed spectrum environment.
Despite the history of this issue, the fact remains that many
receivers were placed into the stream of commerce that were not going
to be compatible with the uses established by the FCC in 2003 and 2005.
If LightSquared was going to be able to move forward with its network
within any reasonable period of time, the responsible thing to do would
be to test to determine the scope of the issue and possible mitigation.
This is exactly what the FCC did when, in January of this year, it
ordered us to work with the GPS community and federal agencies on joint
testing.
What followed is perhaps the most extensive study of interference
ever conducted. The Technical Working Group (TWG), co-chaired by
LightSquared and the USGIC, comprised 37 individuals with strong
technical expertise representing a full range of GPS receiver
categories, installed user groups, and other interested parties. The
TWG included representatives of all the major GPS manufacturers, the
four major wireless companies, two public safety organizations, the
Department of Defense, FAA, NASA, Boeing, Rockwell, and Lockheed
Martin. The TWG also relied on advisors representing a full range of
stakeholders including manufacturers, user groups and individual
experts in the GPS field. Over a three-and-a-half month period, the TWG
tested over 130 devices across seven GPS receiver categories--aviation,
cellular, general location and navigation, high-precision, networks,
space-based receivers, and timing receivers. The Final TWG Report was
filed June 30.
Separately, the Department of Defense, RTCA (the aviation safety
standards organization) and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory conducted
their own analysis and tests of dozens of GPS receivers. LightSquared
provided equipment and engineering expertise for each of these tests.
Several reports or summaries have already been made public including
reports from RTCA and the NPEF Report of government receivers derived
from the DoD tests. Accordingly, over the past nine months, there has
been more than adequate opportunity in numerous venues to fully test
receiver vulnerability.

III. Lightsquared and GPS Can Coexist

Key to understanding mitigation options is understanding that the
vast majority of GPS receivers look only at LightSquared's spectrum
that is immediately adjacent to GPS. LightSquared's original plan,
before USGIC advised of the overload issue in September 2010, was to
use this spectrum first, and then bring additional spectrum online
later, when it needed further spectrum to serve capacity needs. This
additional spectrum is on the other end of LightSquared's band, as far
away as possible from the border with GPS. Indeed, the frequencies
LightSquared planned to use far away from GPS are a full 23 MHz removed
from the bottom of the GPS frequency.
Unsurprisingly, then, testing shows that LightSquared's planned
deployment would cause interference with a broad range of different
types of GPS receivers, because the planned deployment would have
started close to GPS. They also show, however, that use of the spectrum
far away from GPS does not cause interference for the vast majority of
GPS receivers. Among the recommendations of the NPEF report was a
recommendation to conduct further testing of the 10 MHz furthest away
from GPS, as the testing conducted by the Federal Government agencies
on receivers so far has shown minimal or no interference. Similarly,
the RTCA report stated that the 5 MHz furthest away from GPS does not
cause a problem for aviation receivers under worst- case analyses, and
that further analysis is needed to confirm that the next 5 MHz is
similarly clear. Notably, the RTCA also noted that aviation receivers
tested performed significantly better than the minimum performance
standards. LightSquared is optimistic that this further analysis will
not change the report's conclusion.
LightSquared has developed its position in response to the actual
testing data, and has made the following proposal to resolve GPS
interference issues:

First, LightSquared will operate at lower power than
permitted by its existing FCC authorization, staying at the power level
authorized in 2005.

Second, LightSquared will agree to a standstill in the
terrestrial use of its upper 10 MHz of its frequencies immediately
adjacent to the GPS band.

Third, LightSquared will commence terrestrial commercial
operations only on those portions of its spectrum that pose no risk to
the vast majority of GPS users and will coordinate and share the cost
of underwriting a workable solution for the relatively small number of
legacy precision measurement devices that may be at risk.

Fourth, just this week, LightSquared has made a proposal
to the FCC to limit the power reaching the ground to levels that would,
based on actual testing data, definitely eliminate interference issues
for the vast majority of receivers. More detail on this proposal was
provided to the FCC earlier this week, and is attached as Attachment 3
hereto.

Initially, it should be noted that, though they are employed for a
variety of important uses, legacy precision GPS receivers represent a
small fraction of the overall installed base of GPS receivers. As
compared to the 400 to 500 million cellular, personal navigation and
aviation receivers that will be covered by our move to spectrum far
away from GPS, precision receivers amount to approximately 500,000,
used primarily in agriculture, surveying and construction. Precision
receivers are also used in some of the scientific work undertaken by
the agencies before the Committee. Some, but not all, precision
receivers may still be impacted by operations on the other side of our
band from GPS if they are specifically designed to look all the way
across the band. These receivers use satellite signals from our band to
augment the precision of their receivers. Notably, however, testing
showed that not all precision receivers are so impacted. Ten out of 38
tested receivers were resilient to our operations in the spectrum
farthest from GPS. The interference issue, then, is not a physics
issue. It is a technology design issue and can be addressed through
proper design.
Contrary to the claims of some of the GPS manufacturers, there are
technical and operational solutions that will allow us to deploy our
network while retaining the benefits provided by using these devices.
LightSquared can coordinate its rollout so agricultural receivers and
many other receivers in remote locations will not be near LightSquared
base stations for several years. LightSquared will underwrite the
development of filtering technology for new receivers that can then be
used consistently with the placement of our network. LightSquared will
also work with Inmarsat to find a place in our band where precision
manufacturers can be placed over the long term, isolated from
terrestrial operations and where they can have a much higher certainty
for their ongoing operations than they do today.

IV. Conclusion

LightSquared has never dismissed or made light of the sincere
concerns expressed by the GPS community over the interference issues
raised by the design of GPS receivers. Nor has LightSquared ever said
that, because it is a receiver issue, it is the job of the
manufacturers to solve alone. LightSquared has an obligation to be a
good neighbor, however or whenever this issue arose. By taking the
steps I've outlined in my testimony, LightSquared will address this
issue for over 99% of the receivers currently used. These steps are not
inexpensive to us, and they are not easy, but they can and must be
done. We are stepping up to this commitment so that Americans can get
the benefit of our significant investment in critical infrastructure,
and continue to have all the benefits of a robust GPS system.

LIGHTSQUARED AND GPS--THE FACTS

For the last decade, LightSquared has planned to deploy a
terrestrial network, and worked with the GPS community to make sure its
network would not interfere with GPS.

Lightsquared's Service Has Been Expected for Almost 10 Years

In 2001, LightSquared proposed using satellite spectrum
for a fully-capable ground network. In 2002, after discussions with the
GPS industry representatives, LightSquared agreed (http://
fjallfoss.fcc.gov/ecfs/document/view?id=6513283601) to curtail any
portion of its signal that crossed into GPS frequencies. This agreement
imposed restrictions that were 1,000 times stricter than what the FCC
rules eventually required. http://edocket.access.gpo.gov/
cfr
-
2010/octqtr/pdf/47cfr25.253.pdf.

In 2003, the FCC adopted initial rules allowing
LightSquared's ground network to operate near GPS. http://
hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs
-
public/attachmatch/FCC-03-15A1.pdf.
These rules were adopted after a full review by DoD, FAA and all other
interested government agencies. As the FCC said recently, ``extensive
terrestrial operations have been anticipated in [LightSquared's
spectrum band] for at least 8 years.'' FCC MSS Flexibility Order, Sec.
27 (Apr. 6, 2011). http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs
-
public/
attachmatch/FCC-11-57A1.pdf.

The GPS Industry Understood the Scope of Lightsquared's Network

When the rules were first written in 2003, the FCC had an
explicit limit in the technical characteristics as to the number of
base stations LightSquared could build--1,750 per 200 KHz channel,
which, when applied to the company's network, would equal a little over
10,000 base stations. ATC Report and Order, FCC 03-15, at Sec. Sec.
144-47 (February 10, 2003). http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/
edocs
-
public/attachmatch/FCC-03-15A1.pdf.

In 2003, the U.S. GPS Industry Council (``USGIC'') stated
that the restrictions of the 2002 agreement were necessary to protect
GPS against ``[t]he increased user density from potentially millions of
MSS mobile terminals operating in ATC mode . . . [and] potentially tens
of thousands of ATC wireless base stations.'' Reply Comments of USGIC,
IB Docket No. 01-185, at 2 (Sept. 4, 2003) (emphasis added). http://
fjallfoss.fcc.gov/ecfs/document/view?id=6515082621.

In 2004, the USGIC supported the LightSquared application
for authority to operate a ground network under the 2003 rules, stating
that the 2002 agreement was ``intended to protect GPS receivers and at
the same time allow [LightSquared] to maximize the utility of its ATC
[ground network] service to its users.'' Letter from USGIC to FCC (Mar.
24, 2004). http://licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/
download.do?attachment
-
key=366878.

In 2005, the FCC removed all limits on the number of base
stations LightSquared could build and increased their permissible power
to 1.6 kw, the level at which LightSquared now plans to operate. ATC
Order on Reconsideration, FCC 05-30, at Sec. Sec.  48-50, 53 (February
25, 2005). http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs
-
public/
attachmatch/FCC-05-30A1.pdf Again, this decision was reviewed by all
interested government agencies and was not challenged by USGIC.

Beginning in 2006 and continuing to 2010, LightSquared
disclosed its intent to build a wireless network using tens of
thousands of base stations in its annual filings with the SEC http://
www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/756502/000119312506067030/d10k.htm and
http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/756502/000119312510041110/
d10k.htm.

The GPS Industry Knew About Lightsquared's
Planned Power Levels and Did Not Object

In 2009, LightSquared asked the FCC to increase the power
levels of its base stations by approximately 10 times to 15 kw, to
match the power levels at which other wireless networks are permitted
to operate. http://licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/
download.do?attachment
-
key=-164606.

USGIC did not object to even those higher power levels.
It objected only to the possibility of interference into the GPS band
from low-power indoor femtocells, an objection it withdrew (http://
licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/download.do?attachment
-
key=738501)
in August 2009 after reaching agreement with LightSquared. http://
licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/download.do?attachment
-
key=731265.

In March 2010, the FCC approved LightSquared's increased
power levels. http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs
-
public/
attachmatch/DA-10-534A1.pdf. As with all previous FCC proceedings, the
order was issued after a public proceeding and was fully coordinated
with all interested Federal Government agencies. Neither GPSIC, nor any
other party, filed for reconsideration or review of this order.

Also in March 2010, the FCC required LightSquared to
build a ground network reaching 260 million people by the end of 2015.
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs
-
public/attachmatch/DA-10-
535A1.pdf. Neither GPSIC, nor any other party, filed for
reconsideration or review of this requirement.

Lightsquared Is Doing Everything It Can to Work With GPS
to Address Issues Raised Only a Few Months Ago

In September 2010, USGIC raised for the first time
(http://fjallfoss.fcc.gov/ecfs/document/view?id=7020912452)--in a
general mobile satellite proceeding--the possibility that some GPS
receivers may be subject to interference because they can be
overpowered by signals transmitted by LightSquared inside the spectrum
the FCC licensed to LightSquared.

In November 2010, LightSquared applied (http://
licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/download.do?attachment
-
key=852869)
to allow devices onto its ground network that do not also communicate
with its satellite. This application did not change the power, number,
deployment or any other technical characteristic of LightSquared's base
stations. USGIC raised the same objection it raised in September.http:/
/licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/download.do?attachment
-
key=854795.

Although the interference issue was irrelevant to this
application, LightSquared, in January 2011, proposed a rigorous program
of testing to determine the extent of the susceptibility of GPS
receivers to LightSquared's transmissions, which the FCC made a
condition of granting LightSquared's application on Jan. 26, 2011.
http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs
-
public/attachmatch/DA-11-
133A1.pdf.

The FCC validated the GPS testing process in April 2011
by unanimous Commission vote, noting USGIC's September 2010 comments
and the cooperative testing program, and stating that ``responsibility
for protecting services rests not only on new entrants but also on
incumbent users themselves, who must use receivers that reasonably
discriminate against reception of signals outside their allocated
spectrum.'' FCC MSS Flexibility Order, Sec.  27 (Apr. 6, 2011). http://
hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs
-
public/attachmatch/FCC-11-57A1.pdf.

Chairman Hall. Thank you, sir, and at this time we
recognize Dr. Pace.

STATEMENT OF DR. SCOTT PACE,

DIRECTOR, SPACE POLICY INSTITUTE,

GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY

Dr. Pace. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Wonderful opportunity
today, and I appreciate the Committee's interest in this.
Other witnesses have ably described the importance of GPS
signals to their agencies and scientific users, and as is
fairly clear, scientific users tend to be the most demanding,
seeking the most precision and accuracy possible. The highest
precision GPS receivers are designed to receive not only the
full range of radio-navigation satellite signals, including
GPS, but also the mobile satellite service signals in the
adjacent bands that you have heard about that carry wide area
differential correction from commercial providers, and in many
cases the reception of those signals is part of a contractual
requirement.
It is important to understand that GPS is not a
communication service. It is a navigation service. It requires
precision-timed measurements, not just the reception of ones
and zeros, and that precision time is what results in precision
position. The evolution of these high-precision capabilities
has been made possible because of carefully considered past
spectrum management decisions to use this particular spectrum
neighborhood for satellite services, not terrestrial ones.
In addition to the federal science agencies you have heard
from, the university-scientific community is also concerned
with this issue. In January of this year the CEO of the
University Space Research Association, comprising 105 Ph.D.
granting universities, wrote that USRA member universities are
engaged in research in all aspects of GPS use and testing. All
of these have the potential to be adversely affected by the
LightSquared proposal unless rigorous measures are implemented
to mitigate interference of the reception of GPS signals.
The Technical Working Group final report, showed GPS
interference. The TWG rightly used multiple approaches to
characterize the interference. There were paper calculations,
along with testing in controlled environments such as anechoic
chambers, and finally, realistic operational scenarios were
defined for specific categories of users as well as live sky
field tests were conducted on government-controlled ranges.
Virtually all tests, the precision receivers, those used by
scientists and deployed in networks around the world, were
harmfully impacted. The GPS community concluded that 31 of 33
high-precision receivers tested were significantly affected. We
can talk about the other two.
There is no viable or verifiable technological solution
that has been identified to date that would allow a ground-
based broadband communication network to operate in close
proximity to GPS signals. This is why the band has for decades
been intentionally allocated for space services. Even if some
new as yet unforeseen technology did appear, the industrial,
commercial, and public sector users of GPS equipment routinely
take up to 15 years to complete a normal replacement cycle;
software cycles can be fast, but hardware takes longer.
GPS is arguably the most efficient use of spectrum the
world has ever seen. Almost a billion people are currently
benefiting from today's signal, and this use represents a
massive installed base and source of advantage for the United
States of which international scientific cooperation is but one
part.
If LightSquared were deployed in a way that caused harmful
interference with GPS, a major beneficiary as you have heard,
would likely be the Russian GLONASS System as its operating
frequencies are farther away from LightSquared base-station
frequencies. I should add that GALILEO and COMPASS probably
would be equally harmed because they share frequencies similar
to GPS.
Now, there are competing national policy objectives that
need to be reconciled. On June 28 the Administration released
two major policy statements. The first was aimed at expanding
spectrum for wireless broadband use; a memorandum from the
President called for collaboration between the FCC and the
National Telecommunications and Information Administration to
make available a total of 500 megahertz of federal and non-
federal spectrum over the next 10 years.
However, the memorandum cautioned that agencies were to
quote, ``take into account the need to ensure no loss of
critical, existing, and planned federal, state, local, and
tribal government capabilities.''
On the very same day the White House also released a
National Space Policy that specifically referred to GPS as a
form of space-based position, navigation, and timing, and in
this policy the President said, ``The United States must
maintain its leadership in the service, provision, and use of
global navigation satellite systems.'' More specifically, this
required, ``the protection of radio navigation spectrum from
disruption and interference.''
In my judgment the safest and most fact-based course of
action on the data we have to date is to conclude that the
terms of the LightSquared conditional waiver have not been met
and to withdraw the LightSquared license to deploy a
terrestrial network in the 1525 to 1559 megahertz band. It is
the only approach fully consistent with the terms of both the
National Space Policy and the broadband memorandum, and I would
argue the FCC's own regulations.
The last 20 years have seen continuous innovation in the
ability to use GPS for measurements of the Earth, the
atmosphere, and the biosphere via precise positioning,
navigation, and timing. If the LightSquared terrestrial network
is allowed to operate as proposed, it would create new,
additional, and as of yet unforeseen costs for federal science
agencies as well as state and local governments who rely on
high-precision GPS-derived data. It would mark a permanent
decline in the capabilities that GPS has afforded scientific
application in the United States. Such operations would be
contrary to the technical facts established by independent
testing. They would improperly place burdens on the victim
service, in this case GPS. They would undermine the
international credibility of the United States as built for GPS
and would be contrary to the National Space Policy and the
terms of the President's own broadband initiative.
Thank you for your attention, and I would be happy to
answer any questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Pace follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. Scott Pace,
Director, Space Policy Institute,
George Washington University
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to this Committee, for
providing an opportunity to discuss this important topic. The subject
of today's hearing is a complex one that involves not just federal
science activities, but national security, public safety, foreign
policy, and the health of economic sectors from agriculture to
information technology.
Specifically, the Committee has asked that witnesses address the
impact of the proposed LightSquared mobile terrestrial commercial
communications network on federal science agencies and to discuss the
recent report of the FCC-mandated technical working group that was
tasked to examine radiofrequency interference with GPS as well as
possible mitigation strategies. The technical evidence gathered to date
clearly shows that the LightSquared network poses an unacceptable
interference threat to all GPS users and especially high-precision
scientific users of GPS.
I have been involved with GPS issues for over 20 years, beginning
with work at the U.S. Department of Commerce around the time of the
first Gulf War. While at the RAND Corporation, I supported the Office
of Science and Technology Policy during the creation of the first
Presidential Decision Directive on GPS in 1996. I have also been
involved in domestic and international conflicts over radio frequency
spectrum used by GPS for almost as long, including negotiations at the
International Telecommunications Union and proceedings before the
Federal Communications Commission. I am currently the Director of the
Space Policy Institute at George Washington University and am speaking
today purely in a personal capacity and my comments do not necessarily
represent the views of any agency, organization or company.

The LightSquared Network Represents a Major Change in Spectrum Use

The most commonly used GPS signal, L1, is located in the spectrum
band 1559-1610 MHz. This band is specifically ``zoned'' internationally
for radionavigation satellite services (RNSS) like GPS, the Russian
GLONASS system, and the European Galileo system. On either side of the
band are bands for mobile satellite services (MSS) at 1525-1559 MHz,
below GPS, and at 1610-1660.5 MHz, above GPS. The key point is that the
entire ``neighborhood'' is oriented to satellite services and such
services require ``quiet'' spectrum as the powers of signals
transmitted from space are many orders of magnitude weaker than those
transmitted by typical terrestrial stations. There are major power
differences between satellite services as well. The power of a MSS
signal is much greater than that of signal coming from a GPS satellite.
Thus MSS and GPS signals operate in adjacent bands where their
functions are compatible with each other but they do not operate in the
same band since MSS signals would easily drown out the GPS
signal.Figure 1 shows how proposed uses of the 1525-1559 MHz band next
to GPS have evolved over the past 10 years. (Attachment 1 provides a
more detailed history of regulatory highlights.)

MSS services, such as those offered by Inmarsat, have historically
operated purely through satellites. This enables service over very wide
regions or even the entire globe. However, there will be coverage gaps
for areas either outside the satellite service area, or more commonly,
when dense urban environments block the weak satellite signals. This
led to interest in creating an ancillary terrestrial component (ATC) to
the MSS service in which ground-based towers would ``fill in'' the
coverage gaps and thus enable better service to a wider range of
customers. The GPS community was concerned the deployment of
terrestrial base stations would create interference to the adjacent
RNSS band. The U.S. GPS Industry Council negotiated with the proposed
MSS ATC operator, then known as MSV, and reached a technical agreement
on ``out-of-band'' emission limits to restrict any harmful spillover
into the RNSS band. This agreement was also predicated on the
requirement that the ATC would remain tied to satellites and that the
need to avoid self-interference between the satellites and terrestrial
components of the same company meant the MSS band would remain
relatively quiet. This helped ensure compatibility with GPS users next
door.
The U.S.-licensed operator of MSS ATC in the L-band went through
several ownership changes, including the most recent transfer of
license to what became LightSquared in March 2010. The essential
operational situation remained unchanged until November 2010 when
LightSquared requested relaxation of the ``gating requirement'' which
tied the ground-based ATC system to the satellite service. This would
allow the terrestrial network to carry broadband services and the
satellites would now be effectively ``ancillary'' to the ground network
as they are not capable of providing broadband level service. In
effect, satellite spectrum would be ``rezoned'' to allow deployment of
high-powered, terrestrial base stations in urban areas and across the
country. This is the situation that the GPS community sought to avoid a
decade ago. Unfortunately, the FCC granted a conditional waiver to
LightSquared on January 26, 2011. The waiver was conditioned on the
creation of an industry-led technical working group to examine the
potential for interference to GPS and possible means of mitigation.

Scientific and High-Precision GPS Users Depend on Large Bandwidths

Other witnesses have ably described the importance of GPS signals
to their agencies and scientific users. These users tend to be very
demanding, seeking the most precision and accuracy possible. This in
turn requires taking in the most information possible not only from GPS
signals but other Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) such as
Galileo and using accuracy augmentation signals that are carried on MSS
systems. Figure 2 shows the 2 MHz wide (pink) GPS signal used by common
smart phones. The wider blue region shows the full RNSS band used by
more capable receivers, including those designed to receive signals
from foreign GNSS systems as well as GPS. The green bars show the
proposed upper (close to GPS) and lower (farther from GPS) channels for
LightSquared's 4G long-term evolution (LTE) service.

Figure 3 shows the bandwidth of the highest precision GPS
receivers. They are designed to receive not only the full range of RNSS
signals, including GPS, but also MSS signals in the adjacent band that
carry wide-area differential GPS corrections from commercial providers
such as Starfire. Developed by John Deere and precision farming groups,
a Starfire-capable receiver can produce centimeter-level position
measurements. Powerful transmissions from LightSquared base stations
would unavoidably jam the reception of weaker MSS signals used by the
high precision GPS receivers. Thus when talking about receiver
bandwidths, it is not enough to receive just the GPS signal itself, but
all the services used for precision positioning, navigation, and
timing. The evolution of high precision capabilities has been possible
because of carefully considered past spectrum management decisions to
use this particular neighborhood for satellite services, not
terrestrial ones.

In addition to the federal science agencies, the university
scientific community is concerned with the LightSquared network. I
serve on the board of the Universities Space Research Association, a
non-profit organization of 105 Ph.D.-granting universities conducting
space and aeronautics-related research. In January of this year, prior
to the FCC granting the requested waiver of the satellite requirement,
the CEO of USRA wrote:

`` . . . USRA member universities are very engaged in research
on all aspects of GPS use and testing. This includes
development of the impending Federal Aviation Administration's
transition to a satellite based navigation system, known as
NextGen . . . Satellite data used by universities involving GPS
tracking and geodetic networks across the United States could
also be impacted. These applications range from global
environmental monitoring, weather prediction, and earthquake
monitoring to advanced concepts such as training for space
systems engineers. All of these have the potential to be
adversely affected by the LightSquared proposal unless rigorous
measures are implemented to mitigate interference to the
reception of GPS signals.''

International Concerns

While LightSquared is currently a domestic issue, it has attracted
international notice and concern. The Japan GPS Council (JGPSC) is the
non-profit association composed of the major firms and organizations of
the civil GPS applications and users in Japan. On May 27, they provided
a letter to the FCC docket stating:

GPS receivers are properly designed to operate in the
``satellite'' neighborhood that exists in the domestic and
international tables of frequency allocations in the 1525-
1660.5 MHz range. There are no unaccounted-for high-power
terrestrial signals anywhere in the world that pose the threat
of harmful interference to GPS and other RNSS users. At least
there were none until LightSquared's new owners
opportunistically decided to try to convert what has always
been an ATC-enhanced satellite band into a new home for high-
power terrestrial mobile broadband signals. The physics is
clear; LightSquared cannot provide 4G LTE service in the
satellite neighborhood without causing harmful interference.

(The) U.S. and Japan have worked in close cooperation at the
domestic level as well as in international fora to protect and
preserve spectrum for GPS in order to safeguard national
security applications as well as maintaining flexibility and
opportunity for continued commercial innovation and critical
public infrastructure . . .

Any threat to the integrity or availability of GPS in U.S.
markets would undermine and devalue the substantial investment
that Japanese firms have made to serve users and customers in
the U.S. Japanese firms provide products and equipment for
high-precision applications to U.S. customers, . . .

Any policy which would allow degradation of GPS service in the
U.S. would also raise question as to the integrity of the
stated U.S. commitment to maintain GPS as a stable and reliable
global standard for positioning, navigation and timing.

The European Commission expressed similar concerns in a July 19th
letter to the FCC docket. This letter cited technical concerns raised
by the European Space Agency and concerns about impacts to Galileo,
which is to be interoperable with GPS:

The band immediately below 1559 MHz, allocated by the Radio
Regulations to the mobile-satellite service (MSS), has been
used for satellite-based transmissions for many years and has
proved to be broadly compatible with RNSS systems above 1559
MHz. The LightSquared proposal for a terrestrial network
deployment in MSS spectrum would completely change the nature
of radio transmissions in the band.

Analysis carried out in Europe, including by our own technical
partner the European Space Agency, has shown that transmissions
from LightSquared base stations do indeed have considerable
potential to cause harmful interference to Galileo receivers
operating in the United States. Interference effects have been
determined to occur in the range 100m to almost 1,000km,
depending on the type of receiver being used. This obviously
presents a grave threat to the viability of providing a Galileo
service covering U.S. territory--a service which many studies
have shown will not only benefit Galileo users, but those of
GPS too as the two systems will be interoperable through a
common signal design providing significantly improved coverage
and accuracy in urban environments.

Europe and Japan are major international partners in every area of
scientific cooperation. Harmful interference to GPS and other GNSS
systems in the United States would undermine that cooperation. It would
also undermine the long-standing international commitment the United
States has made to protection of RNSS spectrum, not just GPS, from
harmful interference. This, in turn, calls into question the ability of
the United States to be a leader at a time when other systems from
Europe, Japan, Russia, China, and India are being deployed. Ironically,
if LightSquared were deployed in a way that caused harmful interference
to GPS, a major beneficiary would likely be the Russian GLONASS system.
Its operating frequencies are located farther away from the
LightSquared base station frequencies. Damaging GPS and driving users
to a Russian space system are not desirable outcomes for the United
States.

The Technical Working Group Final Report Shows GPS Interference

The TWG Final Report documents issues associated with the
interference threat to GPS receivers and GPS-dependent applications
resulting from LightSquared's proposal to deploy a high-power
terrestrial broadband system in the 1525-1559 MHz and 1626.5-1660.5 MHz
bands on either side of the 1559-1610 MHz band used by GPS, GLONASS,
and other satellite navigation systems. These bands were licensed to
LightSquared for mobile-satellite service and ancillary terrestrial
component use, prior to the Bureau's January 2011 decision to
conditionally waive the satellite ``gating'' requirement.
The final report is over 1,000 pages long, and detailed summaries
are available from the participating companies and government agency
observers. LightSquared also participated in the testing and
contributed to the final report. A key strength of the TWG report is
that it used multiple approaches to characterizing interference. Paper
calculations of potential interference were made, along with testing in
controlled environments (e.g., anechoic chambers), and finally
realistic operational scenarios were defined for specific categories of
users and ``live sky'' field tests were conducted on government-
controlled ranges. This reflects a best practice for interference
studies when national security or public safety applications are at
risk--no one approach is to be trusted but all are done to see if
consistent results are achieved.
Consistent results were achieved, supporting the expectations of
early analytical estimates. Specifically, the planned LightSquared
deployment would create harmful or significant interference for all
categories of GPS receivers. There were three categories of
interference that were examined. The first was ``out of band
emissions'' from LightSquared into the GPS band. The observed emissions
were in compliance with MSS ATC limits set in 2005 and were not a
source of harmful interference. The second was ``receiver overload'' or
11receiver desensitization'' due to the powerful terrestrial
transmissions exceeding the GPS receiver's normal tolerances with the
MSS bands. The third was an effect known as ``intermodulation'' in
which separate LightSquared signals interact to produce a composite
signal in a different part of the spectrum. In this case,
intermodulation products were observed on and near the center frequency
of the primary GPS signal known as L1.
Figure 4 shows a snapshot from testing conducted in New Mexico
earlier this year. The two large peaks are the expected LightSquared
terrestrial signals and the smaller peak to the right is the observed
intermodulation effect that lies at the same location as the GPS L1
signal.

The operational impact of interference effects for scientific
applications can be inferred from impacts to high precision receivers,
networks of high precision receivers, and space applications. Virtually
all tested precision receivers, those used by scientists and deployed
in networks around the world, were harmfully impacted. In the TWG
report, the GPS community concluded that 31 of 33 high precision
receivers tested were significantly affected in the testing. This is an
unavoidable and natural consequence of taking in as much of the GPS
signal as possible using a wideband receiver. It is a natural
consequence of accessing multiple radionavigation satellite systems
that share the same RNSS band as GPS. Giving up access to the best GPS
signals available or access to other RNSS satellite systems is not a
solution for scientific users.
In addition to direct effects on the receipt of GPS signals, the
LightSquared signals create co-channel interference to MSS signals in
the 1525-1559 MHz band where they operate. This blocks the receipt of
those signals by GPS receivers that use them to create ``differential
corrections'' to augment the accuracy of the basic GPS receiver. The
FCC has licensed commercial firms such as Starfire and OmniSTAR to
provide augmentation services that scientific, agricultural, and other
users rely on today across the country.
Due to the large distances involved, GPS receivers used for
navigation on spacecraft may not suffer harmful interference from the
LightSquared network. However, GPS receivers looking at the Earth would
be affected. Such receivers are used to understand the ionosphere and
atmosphere by looking at the behavior of the GPS signal as it passes
through them. This enables great improvements to weather forecasts,
tracking hurricanes and typhoons, and establishing precise climate
benchmarks to allow actual measurements of climate change.
In addition to scientific research, State and local governments use
high precision GPS for mapping, surveying and infrastructure
maintenance. High precision data is used in Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) for asset management, emergency preparedness, disaster
response and E911 mapping, public sector water, wastewater and electric
utilities, public works, environmental management, dam and structure
monitoring, environmental health, insurance rating districts, flood
zones, tax appraisals, the provision of geodetic control networks, and
a host of other functions.

The Government's NPEF Report Is Consistent With TWG Report Results

The National PNT Engineering Forum (NPEF) report contains the
results of testing by federal agencies, including the science agencies,
and had technical results consistent with those of the TWG effort. As
with the TWG, multiple approaches were taken to ensure theoretical and
experimental results agreed with each other. A summary of the TWG
report is available from the National Coordination Office and in other
testimony. I would like to therefore highlight the two recommendations
made by the NPEF:

Recommendation 1: LightSquared should not commence
commercial services per its planned deployment for terrestrial
operations in the 1525-1559 MHz Mobile-Satellite Service (MSS) Band due
to harmful interference to GPS operations.

Recommendation 2: The U.S. Government should conduct more
thorough studies on the operational, economic and safety impacts of
operating the LightSquared Network, to include additional ATC signal
configurations not currently in LightSquared planned spectrum phases,
effects on timing receivers, as well as transmissions from LightSquared
handsets. As part of these studies the compatibility of ATC
architectures in the MSS L-Band with GPS applications should be
reassessed.

The two recommendations underscore the infeasibility of operating
the LightSquared network as proposed without harmful interference to
GPS. The recommendations also note areas where testing was incomplete,
raising deeper questions about the feasibility of operating even
previously approved MSS ATC networks in the band, never mind a
broadband terrestrial network. The MSS ATC networks approved earlier
had never been deployed and realistic equipment was not available to
verify the regulatory limits truly prevented harm to GPS. Given the
discovery of intermodulation products, a reexamination of the
feasibility of ``traditional'' ATC would be prudent.

LightSquared's Proposed Solution Is Not Sufficient

LightSquared has proposed to change the order in which they would
deploy the same frequencies in the band adjacent to GPS. There are two
channels of spectrum in the band adjacent to GPS, which they originally
planned to deploy in a certain order. They now propose to suspend, for
what is implied to be a short time, use of the upper 10 MHz channel and
begin with the lower 10 MHz channel. This would potentially result in
impacting high precision scientific users first and other users, such
as aviation, later.
The company has also proposed reducing the power of the terrestrial
base stations by 50% from allowable levels. Unfortunately, that does
not help, as cell site transmitter providers do not even supply
equipment at the very high 15.8-kilowatt level the FCC proposes to
allow. All testing was done with equipment that was available, that is,
at roughly 10% of the maximum allowable level.
Even if it was considered acceptable to sacrifice high precision
GPS users, the ``lower 10 MHz'' approach could be solution only if it
was a complete solution. Unfortunately, it is not. LightSquared has
been consistently clear that a commercially viable network would
require more spectrum, preferably close to where they would already be
operating.
Deployment in the lower block alone has not been concluded to be
compatible with GPS and would likely require around 15 years prior to
commencement for new technology to be developed and existing user
equipment to be replaced. However, without a permanent restriction on
use of additional spectrum for terrestrial operations in other parts of
the band, this approach merely shifts the burden of mitigation to the
existing GPS users.
Section 25.255 of the FCC's rules makes the obligation of resolving
harmful interference to other services that is caused by MSS ATC
operations the sole responsibility of the ATC operator. \1\ Nominally,
at least, even under the LightSquared order, LightSquared is still an
ATC operator subject to Section 25.255. It cannot require authorized
users of another service to take measures--especially measures deemed
infeasible or inappropriate by a substantial majority of the TWG--to
mitigate the harmful interference. This obligation is LightSquared's
alone.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  47 C.F.R. Sec.  25.255.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is no viable or verifiable technological solution that has
been identified to date that would allow a ground-based broadband
communications network to operate in close proximity to GPS signals.
This is in part why the band has, for decades, been internationally
allocated for space services. Even if some new, as yet unforeseen,
technology did appear, the industrial, commercial and public sector
users of GPS equipment routinely take up to 15 years to complete a
normal replacement cycle. Equipment installed on aircraft, vessels,
agricultural, construction and mining machinery, commercial vehicles or
high-cost professional instruments used today are not thrown away after
a few years of use--their lifetimes are measured in decades.
There is one possible solution available today that I am aware of.
LightSquared could operate the satellite part of its network, serving
rural and public safety users outside of cellular coverage areas, in
the L-band adjacent to GPS while developing its new high-powered
terrestrial portion of its network in a different band, where it would
be compatible with adjacent uses. Possible locations include the S-Band
(above 2 GHz) or the 700 MHz bands already allocated to terrestrial 4G
wireless services. The MSS satellite part of the LightSquared network
is compatible with neighboring GPS uses and thus can coexist with all
GPS services, applications and existing user equipment. The terrestrial
component of the LightSquared network has not yet been built; therefore
it is at least technically feasible to move to a different band from
the outset, thus avoiding large scale disruption to GPS users across
the United States.

Competing National Policy Objectives Need To Be Reconciled

On June 28, 2010, the Administration released two major policy
statements. The first was aimed at expanding spectrum for wireless
broadband use. \2\ The Memorandum from the President called for
collaboration between the FCC and the National Telecommunications and
Information Administration to ``make available a total of 500 MHz of
Federal and nonfederal spectrum over the next 10 years, suitable for
both mobile and fixed wireless broadband use.'' However, the Memorandum
cautioned that agencies were to ``take into account the need to ensure
no loss of critical existing and planned Federal, State, local, and
tribal government capabilities . . . .'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  The White House, ``Unleashing the Wireless Broadband
Revolution,'' Office of the Press Secretary, June 28, 2010.
\3\  op cit.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On the same day, the White House also released a new National Space
Policy that specifically referred to GPS as a form of space-based
positioning, navigation, and timing. \4\ In the policy, the President
said, ``The United States must maintain its leadership in the service,
provision, and use of global navigation satellite systems.'' More
specifically, this required the ``Protection of radionavigation
spectrum from disruption and interference.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\  The White House, ``National Space Policy,'' Office of the
Press Secretary, June 28, 2010.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Considering the objectives of both policies, there seem to be four
options for consideration by the FCC, Administration and Congress:

1. Accept the most recent LightSquared proposal to begin
deployment in the lower 10 MHz of the 1525-1559 MHz band. Additional
testing to define mitigation measures should be required as a condition
of approval.

2. Rescind the LightSquared waiver and bar commercial
operations even in the lower 10 MHz pending completion of further
testing and demonstration of specific mitigation measures by
LightSquared to preclude harmful interference to GPS.

3. Assist LightSquared in finding alternative spectrum
for its terrestrial network outside the L-band. The FCC would have to
explore legal and regulatory challenges in aiding such as move that may
or may not be economically feasible for the company.

4. Conclude that the terms of the LightSquared
conditional waiver have not been met and withdraw LightSquared license
to deploy a terrestrial network in the 1525-1559 MHz band.

In my judgment, the safest and most fact-based course of action is
number 4. It is the only approach fully consistent with the terms of
both the National Space Policy and the Broadband Memorandum as well as
the FCC's own regulations.

Conclusion

It is sometimes argued that accommodations by legacy systems need
to be made to enable new uses of spectrum and that doing so enables
more efficient use of a scarce, natural resource. When it comes to
spectrum efficiency, GPS is arguably the most efficient use of spectrum
the world has ever seen; almost a billion people are currently
benefitting from the 20 MHz GPS signal that is available today. In fact
the entire global population could use GPS without any additional
spectrum being used. This use represents a massive installed base and
source of advantage for the United States, of which international
scientific cooperation is but one part. Most importantly, it represents
a high degree of trust and confidence in the United States and its
stewardship of GPS.
If allowed to operate in either its original or modified form, the
LightSquared terrestrial network would create unacceptable harmful
interference to GPS users and high precision scientific users in
particular. Such operations would be contrary to the technical facts
established by independent testing; they would improperly place burdens
on the victim service, in this case GPS, undermine the international
credibility the United States has built for GPS, and would be contrary
the National Space Policy and the terms of the President's own
broadband initiative.
The last 20 years have seen continuous improvement in the ability
to use GPS for measurements of the Earth, the atmosphere, and the
biosphere via precise positioning, navigation, and timing. If the
LightSquared terrestrial network is allowed to operate as proposed, it
will mark a permanent decline in the beneficial capabilities GPS has
afforded scientific users in the United States. It would create new,
additional, and unforeseen, costs for federal science agencies as well
as State and local governments who rely on high precision GPS-derived
data.
Thank you for your attention. I would be happy to answer any
questions you might have.

ATTACHMENT 1--HISTORICAL NOTES ON MSS ATC AT L-BAND

August 17, 2001: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) on MSS ATC
Released

Based on applications of ICO and Motient MSS systems

Included consideration of out-of-band emission limits to
protect GPS

July 25, 2002, Agreement Between MSV and U.S. GPS Industry Council

Parties reach agreement on a--100 dBW/MHz limit for MSS
ATC base stations in order to protect GPS/RNSS in the 1559-1610 MHz
band.

Predicated on the assumption that ATC use remained tied
to satellites and that the service would be relatively low-density
fill-in.

February 10, 2003: First Report and Order and NPRM on MSS ATC
Released

FCC makes clear that MSS ATC is to augment satellite
service:

Para. 1: ``We do not intend, nor will we permit, the
terrestrial component to become a stand-alone service.''

Footnote 5: ``While it is impossible to anticipate or imagine
every possible way in which it might be possible to `game' our
rules by providing ATC without also simultaneously providing
MSS and while we do not expect our licensees to make such
attempts, we do not intend to allow such `gaming.' For example,
even if an MSS licensee were to enter an agreement to lease
some or all of the access to its authorized MSS spectrum to a
terrestrial licensee such spectrum could only be used if its
usage met the requirements to ensure it remained ancillary to
MSS and were used in conjunction with MSS operations, i.e.,
that it met all of our gating requirements. The purpose of our
grant of ATC authority is to provide satellite licensees
flexibility in providing satellite services that will benefit
consumers, not to allow licensees to profit by selling access
to their spectrum for a terrestrial-only service.''

Adopts ``Gating Criteria'' (FCC Part 25.149(b)(4)) to
limit terrestrial deployment to that which is ancillary to the
satellite component of the network. Effectively prohibits ATC-only or
stand-alone terrestrial services.

Declined to adopt limits on emissions into the RNSS band
(1559-1610 MHz) more stringent than GMPCS rules (-70 dBW/MHz) for BS
and METs and mentioned possible rulemaking on GPS protection in a
future proceeding.

Number of base stations limited to 1725.

EIRP limited to 14.1 dBW (AE6 25 watts) towards the
horizon and maximum EIRP of 23.9 dBW (AE6245 watts) per sector (derived
from limit on per-carrier EIRP of 19.1 dBW and the number of carriers
per sector limited to three).

November 8, 2004: MSV Order and Authorization Released

MSV commits to meeting a--100 dBW/MHz limit in 1559-1610
MHz RNSS band, which FCC imposes as a condition of the authorization
(noting these limits are more stringent than FCC rules require).

Limit of 1725 base stations increased to 2415.

Gating criteria in 25.149(b)(4) retained.retaining the
prohibition against stand-alone terrestrial services.

Overhead gain suppression relaxed to permit base-station
antenna gain of up to 27 dB below the maximum directional gain in
vertical angles from 30.5 to 55.5 and up to 30 dB below the maximum
directional gain in vertical angles from 55.5 to 145.5, as requested.''

Aggregate EIRP increased (subject to some restrictions)
to 26.9 dBW toward the physical horizon and 31.9 dBW in other
directions.

February 25, 2005: Memorandum Opinion and Order (MO&O) Released

Limit on number of base stations eliminated in favor of
delta T/T limit of 6% to protect Inmarsat MSS in the L-band.

Aggregate EIRP increased by rule (beyond just waiver
granted to MSV) to 31.9 dBW (AE61550 watts) generally and 26.9 dBW
(AE6490 watts) per base station sector toward the horizon, representing
an 8 dB increase over the previous power limits that apply when three
carriers are used within an antenna sector.

Gating criteria in 25.149(b)(4) retained.retaining the
prohibition against stand-alone terrestrial services.

No L-band MSS ATC network or equipment deployed.

Note: Order includes extensive testing and analysis of Inmarsat
terminals and interference from MSV ATC network.

December 21, 2007: Inmarsat-MSV Spectrum Sharing Agreement

According to Satellite Today (January 2008): The
agreement was defined in two phases. Phase one, from December 2007 to
September 2011, gives the companies an 18- to 30-month period to
transition to the modified band plan, including ``modification of
certain of Inmarsat's network and end user devices and a shift in
frequencies between the MSV parties and Inmarsat,'' according to the
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission report. MSV will be allocated
28 MHz of L-band spectrum and will pay Inmarsat $250 million in cash
and $87.5 million in equity for additional spectrum. During phase two,
from January 2010 to January 2013, Inmarsat will be able to modify the
amount of spectrum it uses over North America and make that bandwidth
available to MSV for rental use. MSV will pay $115 million for this
additional spectrum.

No L-band MSS ATC network or equipment yet deployed.

March 26, 2010: FCC Issues Order on Harbinger Acquisition of
SkyTerra

Relevant Milestones:

March 27, 2009: Harbinger begins acquisition of SkyTerra with
filing to FCC for transfer and control of SkyTerra to Harbinger
Capital Partners, Ltd.

November 24, 2009: FCC issues Protective Order allowing
submissions by Harbinger and SkyTerra to be handled as
proprietary and confidential material upon request.

February 26, 2010: Harbinger submits information on its
business model, including the planned build-out of an extensive
terrestrial network, and requests it be treated as proprietary
and confidential information as allowed by the Protective
Order. The new business model (including the proposed building
of an extensive terrestrial network) is not coordinated with
the IRAC and Federal agencies.

March 26, 2010: FCC issues a Memorandum Opinion and Order and
Declaratory Ruling finalizing the acquisition of SkyTerra (to
be renamed LightSquared) by Harbinger.

March 26, 2010: Harbinger files a letter with the FCC on the
same day the Harbinger Order is released, making available
information on its business plans (including the building of an
extensive terrestrial network) that was filed under a request
for confidential treatment on February 26, 2010.

April 1, 2010: Verizon files Petition for Partial
Reconsideration of the Harbinger Order, alleging various
process fouls and irregularities in the proceeding (believed to
be still pending)

.April 2, 2010: AT&T files Petition for Reconsideration of the
Harbinger Order, alleging various process fouls and
irregularities in the proceeding (believed to be still
pending).

April 15, 2010: Harbinger withdraws its request that the
February 26, 2010, information on its business plans be treated
as confidential material.

March 26, 2010: FCC Releases Order and Authorization to modify
SkyTerra ATC license

Aggregate EIRP increased to 42 dBW (AE615.85 kilowatts)
per sector.

No change to gating requirement and tying of ATC to
satellites.

Power density limits relaxed near airports and waterways
subject to Inmarsat making its terminals less susceptible to receiver
overload interference (see paragraphs 35, 36).

Increased protection for GPS from femtocells added to
SkyTerra authorization: PSD of emissions in the 1559-1605 MHz band
limited to -114.7 dBW/MHz and that PC data cards transmitting to such
femtocells should limit the PSD of emissions in the 1559-1605 MHz band
to -111.7 dBW/MHz.

No L-band MSS ATC network or equipment yet deployed.

November 2010: FCC Initiates LightSquared Waiver Proceeding

November 18, 2010: LightSquared Files Report to FCC on
its MSS ATC Plans and notes that if the plans are not in conformance
with the ``gating criteria'' in FCC's rules, request that the
requirement be waived.

November 19, 2010: FCC initiates proceeding on LSQ waiver
request by placing the application on Public Notice and inviting public
comment. By a separate Order on November 26, FCC extended comment
deadline to December 2, 2010, with reply comments due December 9, 2010.

No L-band MSS ATC network or equipment yet deployed.

January 26, 2011: FCC Grants LightSquared Waiver of Gating Criteria

Federal agencies object to granting the gating waiver
prior to completion of technical studies establishing whether GPS would
be protected. The Department of Defense separately expresses its
opposition to the FCC Chairman.

While noting agency objections and the creation of a
``new interference environment'' NTIA does not formally block the FCC
waiver proposal.

On January 26, 2011, FCC granted a waiver to LightSquared
of FCC rule 25.149(b)(4), permitting stand-alone terrestrial use for
the first time.

Establishes Technical Working Group (TWG) to examine
potential interference to GPS.

Report from the TWG due to FCC on June 15, 2011. The FCC
later granted a two-week extension to June 30, 2011 at the request of
LightSquared.

No L-band MSS ATC network or equipment deployed. First
base station equipment provided for testing in April 2011.

June 30, 2011: FCC places TWG Report on docket for Public Comment

Period for comments closes July 30, 2011. Period for
reply comments closes August 15, 2011.

Chairman Hall. All right. Thank you, and thank you for your
testimony. I would remind the Members of this Committee that
the rules require and allow questioning for five minutes.
And the Chair at this point will open the round of
questions. I relegate myself to five minutes. Hope each of you
can stay within that deal.
And I will start out by asking Mr. Appel, are you familiar,
Mr. Appel, with the LightSquared impact to aviation that is
based on LightSquared? Yes. I think written by and prepared by
J.C. Johns. Is he the director?
Mr. Appel. He is one of the FAA officials overseeing a lot
of this effort. Yes.
Chairman Hall. All right, and for the first five, one, two,
three, four--Mr. Russo, Ms. Glackin, Mr. Sparrow, Mr. Appel,
you are all the representatives of the people, are you not? All
appointed, not elected, appointed, and serving, and I believe,
Mr. Appel, you were just confirmed by the Senate, were you not?
Recently.
Mr. Appel. 2009, actually.
Chairman Hall. Well, good luck to you.
Mr. Appel. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. And I guess I will ask all of you, Mr.
Appel, are you familiar with the FAA's analysis of the impact
on LightSquared's network, and that is what this study is.
Mr. Appel. Yeah. There have been a number of internal
analyses of the FAA, and I am generally familiar with them.
Yes.
Chairman Hall. And is this assessment based on studies of
LightSquared, LightSquared's Technical Working Group, their
radio technical commission for aeronautics, and other national
PNT engineering form reports?
Mr. Appel. My understanding is that the work that the FAA
did was in conjunction with the Technical Working Group and
those other groups. Yes.
Chairman Hall. And I think in my opening statement I
mentioned some of the real problems. Did that--let us talk
about the impact of LightSquared's network. Did that assessment
indicate an increase in potential aviation fatalities?
Mr. Appel. My understanding was that there was an internal
FAA analysis looking at the initial LightSquared proposals that
did some early estimates based on the original scenario. I
think that a lot of that work has been superceded by looking at
the current scenario.
Chairman Hall. And I think the estimate was around 800
reduced fatalities over 10 years, and to be more--to be exact,
that is something I think we should be, there is a 64 air
carrier and one was mentioned by the one that had a Congressman
aboard. I think I remember the day that Congressman left here
to go on an international meeting. It was a lot of secrecy
about it. I have even been told that some people thought the
airplane was shot down because he was on it, which is a bad
loss of life there, and they were supposedly over into the
wrong airways when they got shot down.
But that was the 64. That is part of the air carrier and
then the general aviation part, there is 730 reduced fatalities
over 10 years according to this potential averted fatalities
report and for a total 794, not 800, but 794, and also in the
report they indicated the cost of money. That based on input
from RTCA as well as National Space-Based Position, Navigation,
and Timing Systems Engineering Forum, proposed LightSquared
development would result in an estimated aviation community
cost. Community cost of at least $72 billion stemming from two
billion loss of existing GPS efficiency benefits, five billion
loss of existing GPS safety benefits, 59 billion due to delayed
NextGen benefits, and six billion in aircraft retrofit costs.
Additionally, LightSquared deployment resulted in an
additional 30 million tons of CO
2
, and FAA would be
forced to re-plan 17 billion in NextGen investments with
associated additional development costs. Those are within the
findings of the FAA, Federal Aviation Administrator's research
and report.
Are you satisfied with that, the accuracy of it, and have
you examined it on your own?
Mr. Appel. My--I have looked at it. My colleague, the head
of the FAA, the Administrator, Randy Babbitt, when asked about
this issue, has made clear that he is not going to let anything
happen that is going to jeopardize safety of aviation. We have
gotten progressively better and better every year in our
aviation safety in this country, and the FAA takes every
measure possible to ensure that no matter what the potential
threat to safety, we address it before it happens.
Chairman Hall. All right. I just have a little bit more
time left. I think you have answered my question, and I would
ask Ms. Glackin, and you are the only one I will ask this
because I don't have the time and because you are associated
with the weather, and we are all aware of some weather around
here, this Nation at this time, more than ever before. I don't
ever remember this many earthquakes or forest fires.
If NOAA received full funding for its satellite programs
but the LightSquared proposal was approved, how would the
Nation's weather forecasting capabilities be affected?
Ms. Glackin. NOAA has----
Chairman Hall. If you can give me a good quick answer.
Ms. Glackin. Yeah. I was going to say even with that full
funding NOAA has concerns about the impacts of LightSquared
because depending on how it is implemented it touches so many
parts of our warning mission, from our radars on the ground to
the satellites that are operating in space.
So I couldn't give you any confidence today that we would
be able to successfully deliver on that mission. It would be
impacted to some degree, and we would need to do much more
testing to understand that.
Chairman Hall. And in closing, Mr. Russo, Mr. Sparrow, Mr.
Appel, Dr. Applegate, would your answers have been similar to
her answer as it affects the division you represent for the
people of the United States?
Mr. Russo. Yes, sir.
Chairman Hall. Each of you have a yes or no on that?
Mr. Sparrow. Yes, sir.
Mr. Appel. Yes, sir.
Dr. Applegate. Yes.
Chairman Hall. All right. I have used up all my time.
At this time I recognize Ms. Johnson, the Ranking Member,
for five minutes or whatever time you have to use. Ms. Johnson.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much.
Chairman Hall. I went over about almost a minute.
Ms. Johnson. A little over a minute.
Chairman Hall. You can go for six minutes if you want to.
Ms. Johnson. I understand that minimal testing was done by
the Technical Working Group to examine whether LightSquared's
proposed plan to re-phase its bandwidth use and reduce power
will mitigate the network's impact on most GPS applications.
Agency statements today are consistent in their call for
additional testing.
What do agencies need to know about the new LightSquared
proposal to assess its impact on their programs? How long this
process take, and I would like to hear from all witnesses, but
let's start with Mr. Russo and Mr. Carlisle.
Mr. Russo. Yes. The first part of the question in terms of
what we would need to know, the first thing we need to know is
what the final end-state configuration is. In LightSquared's
recommendation paper of 29-June they had three recommendations.
One was to broadcast initially in the lower 10 megahertz of
their band, two was the reduction in power to basically the
same power level that we were testing at, and the third one is
the one that is problematic for us, which is that at some point
in the future they would be broadcasting in the upper half, and
that point is undefined. They called it a standstill period,
and we don't know at what point that would occur. That is the
key missing piece to being able to construct a new test to say
whether we will or will not have substantial interference.
And in terms of how long it would take, that will depend
somewhat on that answer.
Mr. Carlisle. To be clear, it is not true that there was no
testing at the lower 10 by the Technical Working Group. In
fact, every subgroup tested the lower 10, and it wasn't either
in the final days. Some of the subgroups had from the very
beginning of their work a plan to test the lower 10 against
their devices.
So in effect, there has been testing of 130 devices across
seven different categories on the lower 10, and some of those
categories are fine. Precision is not as we have heard here
today. We take a measurement of 10 out of the 38 precision
devices that were ultimately tested actually will operate fine
in the presence of the power levels that will reach the ground
in our network.
But very quickly I would say if there is a specific plan
for additional federal testing, we have yet to hear it from any
agency at this point. The only claim we have seen in terms of
additional testing needed is from the Department of Defense to
test certain classified receivers that were not tested on the
lower 10 as part of the Department of Defense's testing.
But we are completely open to speaking with the government
agencies about facilitating further discussion on this and also
about whether the upper 10 that Mr. Russo just mentioned is
ever going to be--it can be used down the road.
Ms. Johnson. Do you want to comment on that?
Ms. Glackin. I would just comment quickly, point out that
Mr. Russo's original testimony really highlighted some of the
shortfalls in the testing that was done, and in particular that
only one transmit antenna was part of the testing
configuration, and we know that there is--there can be
interference effects, you know, are additive there and also the
fact that the time period was so compressed. There is a lot of
complexity to work through.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you. Mr. Russo, in your opinion is it
technically feasible to design a filter that simultaneously
allows GPS users to listen to signals in LightSquared's
allocated band, and block LightSquared's signals?
Mr. Russo. I am sorry, ma'am. I don't know the answer to
that. We are dealing with a very large power difference. At
half a mile the LightSquared signal is five billion times more
powerful than the GPS signal by the time it gets down from
space. That is a big number to be able to reconcile.
Dr. Parkinson from Stanford University expressed it this
way, that the GPS signal is like a teaspoon of water. The
LightSquared signal is Niagara Falls. That is about a five
billion difference. I am a very optimistic person. I think that
given time, given the right technical people talking to each
other there may be a way to do this, but I certainly don't know
that, and I certainly would want to see that tested before I
would be able to say that would work.
Ms. Johnson. Can you estimate its cost?
Mr. Russo. No. I am sorry. I can't.
Ms. Johnson. Mr. Carlisle, would you like to comment on
that?
Mr. Carlisle. Yes, I would. Actually, its effect which is
the comparison of our base station power against the power
level of GPS signals was known in 2005. So my question
generally would be why did the GPS manufacturers not test that
and determine there was an effect? Why was the overload effect
never mentioned during the four years of testing, and why
wasn't that made a condition of our--any sort of condition
about our investing and deploying the network? It was only
brought up in the last year.
Now, we have done everything we can in order to address
this issue, and we have made sincere, real commitments in order
to address it, but at the end of the day this is a six-year-old
issue on which nothing was done in order to address receiver
overload.
Ms. Johnson. One last quick question. Dr. Pace, would you
comment on that?
Dr. Pace. Well, I would first of all say I agree that
trying to overcome a billion dollar, I mean, excuse me, a
billion times power difference is technically very difficult,
and because of that technical uncertainty it is difficult to
say how much money would be required.
With regard to how long this issue was known, I think one
additional fact is that the FCC time and time again from the
original discussions in 2002, up until January of 2010, were
very adamant that they would forbid any sort of stand-alone
terrestrial wireless service. In fact, they made a number of
points in the proceedings about how they would not allow
evasions of the satellite requirement, what was called the
gating requirement, the need to link to a satellite.
This linkage is very important because it meant that the
ground-based systems, the ancillary treshold component, could
not interfere with the satellite, and therefore, the mobile
satellite service band would remain a quiet band. So I would
say that the GPS industry for the period that Mr. Carlisle
mentions was relying on the assurances of the FCC that the band
would remain a satellite band, and the issue of numbers of
ground stations and powers and so forth is truly an ancillary
issue to the core question of would this band remain a
satellite band. If it is a satellite band, then you have no
problem. If it is not a satellite band, you have a problem that
you see here today.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you. My time has expired.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. The gentleman from Wisconsin, the
Vice Chairman of this Committee, Mr. Sensenbrenner, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you very much.
Mr. Carlisle, all of your contracters on this panel don't
seen to have a high regard for your position, and I have got a
few questions. Maybe I can blow a little bit of the fog away.
Say you don't get permission from the FCC to use the high-
end band, meaning the upper 10, for LightSquared. Would you
still invest the $14 billion in this project?
Mr. Carlisle. We would invest the maximum amount of money
necessary in order to build out on the spectrum we had. So if
we can't use the--if we can build out on the lower 10, we will
invest as much as we need to get a robust network.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. How much would that be?
Mr. Carlisle. I can't tell you that sitting here right now.
I would need a network engineer and a business model to go
through that, but right now the plan is 14 billion.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Now, what would happen if there was a
reduction in power? You know, we have heard about the teaspoon
of water versus Niagara Falls. Would you still be able to make
a go of it if you got a tablespoon of water?
Mr. Carlisle. Well, that is--in order to provide a wireless
broadband network, you need cell towers or base stations that
are operating consistent with the power levels that you need
for that in order to make it economically viable. Otherwise you
just have so many cell towers it becomes economically
infeasible to provide service.
So at the power levels we have committed to right now, that
is a network that is the size of between 30,000 and 40,000 base
stations.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Okay. Now, you made a deal with Sprint,
and they have got a lot of cell towers around the country.
Mr. Carlisle. Uh-huh.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Because you would have access to those,
would you still spend the 14 billion?
Mr. Carlisle. Our plan is yes. We are spending nine billion
with Sprint alone in order to deploy the network, and the 14
billion is the total of capital and operating expenses over
eight years.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Now, how much of that is Sprint's money,
and how much of that is LightSquared's money?
Mr. Carlisle. Nine, the $9 billion is what we are spending
to get the network deployed.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Is this LightSquared's money?
Mr. Carlisle. I believe so. Yeah. I am not sure what the--
we are spending--we are giving--spent $9 billion to----
Mr. Sensenbrenner. You know, I noticed the name of what is
now LightSquared has been changed as a result of reorganization
several times in the last decade, which is----
Mr. Carlisle. Right.
Mr. Sensenbrenner[continuing]. Not particularly comforting
to me, you know, unless something end up midstream on this. The
other line of questioning I would like to have in the time that
I have remaining is what kind of testing has there been on
precision GPSs, which are the most expensive ones and, you
know, the ones that I would say that we need particularly in a
transportation sector to make passengers safe.
We have heard that retrofitting as a result of potential
interference would cost billions of dollars, largely in an
airline industry that really isn't all the financially healthy.
What kind of testing have you done on this stuff?
Mr. Carlisle. Well, if you are talking about--the Technical
Working Group tested both aviation receivers, which are used in
aircraft, and also the standards that are applicable to the WAS
network that is going to be used for Next Generation, and
separately-tested precision receivers, which are largely used
in agriculture, construction, survey, and for scientific
research as we have heard today.
Those precision receivers were tested fully on the bottom
10. In terms of the level of the scale that we are talking
about here, if we are talking about cellular phones, personal
navigation devices, aviation receivers, and timing receivers,
it is about 400 million devices around the country. If we are
talking about precision as it was tested at the Technical
Working Group, it is less than a million, probably about--
between 500,000 and 750,000 receivers.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Okay.
Mr. Carlisle. So in terms of the investment needed to
replace those receivers, this is not, you are not talking about
replacing 400 million receivers. You are talking about
replacing a much smaller number.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. One of the complaints I have heard is
that LightSquared has been changing the parameters of what it
proposes to do before the testing is completed. The Committee
has information that you have a newer proposal. Has that been
filed with the FCC yet?
Mr. Carlisle. We have a proposal in addition to our last
proposal. It was filed at the FCC on Wednesday, and it is
attached to my testimony.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Okay. Now, are you going to stick by
that proposal until the testing is done, or if something bad
comes out, is there going to be another proposal that would be
filed, in which case the testing would have to go to square
one?
Mr. Carlisle. Well, let me respond to that in this way. We
are sort of--we are acting in a situation where the GPS
manufacturers have--and the federal agencies have most of the
information about what GPS devices they use and how they
operate. So our original proposal was in the absence of having
that information. As the information started to become
available, started to become obvious that there was going to be
a problem on the upper 10, we came up with a proposal that
would mitigate the issue by moving to the lower 10 at a cost of
$100 million to the company.
That is what you do when you see engineering problems.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. I don't think that answers my question
of whether we are going to have to go back to square one again
with a new proposal if the testing shows that there is another
problem that comes up.
Mr. Carlisle. Well, the proposal we have discussed this
week is in addition to our other proposal, so it is incremental
on top of it. If there are additional issues discussed, that
come to light with regard to federal receivers or other
receivers, we will take that into account and see what we can
do to fix it. But at this point you do raise a very good issue
in that we have made all the proposals to solve this issue, and
we are spending all the money to do it. The GPS manufacturers
have not.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, GPS was there first, and a lot of
people use GPS, and, you know, I don't want to have to face my
constituents at a town meeting if their GPS ends up not being
what it is supposed to be and what it has been as a result of
spectrum interference.
You know, Mr. Carlisle, I wish I could have gotten more
direct answers to questions that were pretty direct, but maybe
you can supply them with written testimony later on.
Mr. Carlisle. I would be happy to if there is anything I
didn't answer. Sorry about that.
Chairman Hall. All right. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney, recognized for five minutes.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to say
to Mr. Carlisle, you knew this was going to be a tough
afternoon, so I appreciate your coming out here and testifying.
The frustrating thing is that every one of us would like to
see you move forward because of the economic boom that
broadband brings, but we are all very concerned about the
impact on a very well-established and growing set of industries
and businesses.
One of the things I heard you say was that the problem in
your opinion can be solved by responsible receiver design, and
by that I take it you mean GPS receivers. And so that implies a
significant investment by the GPS people, and I am not even
sure that that technology exists. A lot of folks here don't
seem to think that it does, but I agree with Mr. Russo. I think
that there are technical solutions in the future that if enough
investment is made will become available.
So I am not going to be writing off anything at this point,
but I would like to have a little bit more comfort that the
technical solutions on the receiver side actually work.
Now, you have charted out a plot on page seven of your
Power Point that shows a 40 db reduction in signal
transmission. How many orders of magnitude is 40 db, Dr. Pace?
Do you have an idea? Because we are talking about a nine order
of magnitude difference in signals. Is 40 db equal to nine
orders of magnitude?
Dr. Pace. I would have to go back and get my computer.
Mr. McNerney. Yes. Does----
Dr. Pace. I may look at Tony to save me, but it is on the
order of multiple orders of magnitude. I mean, 1 db is a major
change, 10 I think is an order of magnitude. So I would guess
about four orders of magnitude unless someone wants to correct
me.
Mr. McNerney. Well, and Ms. Glackin is also concerned about
the attenuated part also causing distortion of the GPS signal.
We have a seven nanosecond delay. Is seven nanoseconds
acceptable in precision GPS?
Dr. Pace. I would have to say no, because, again, this is
something that is very interesting in the different
applications, and Mr. Carlisle is quite correct to point out
the differences in the different categories of receivers. A
seven nanosecond delay created by a filter may not be an issue
for say a smart phone, but a seven nanosecond delay can be on
the order of several meters of error that can be introduced,
which is a big deal if you are a precision farmer working at
two to 10 centimeters.
So it depends on what is the baseline level of performance
you are going to be looking for. A filter that may work for
certain categories of users may not be applicable to others,
and as Mr. Carlisle mentioned, the precision users are probably
the most stressing of the folks you have to deal with.
Mr. McNerney. Well, I mean, it seems to me that there are
technical solutions in the future, and I want to go there, but
what is happening is that you are sort of saying and Mr.
Carlisle, you are saying that the rules have changed along the
way from what was originally required, but the problem is that
if you are talking about public safety, that is a losing
argument. We need to get to a point where the public safety
people are comfortable, or this isn't going to go forward. I
mean, that is the bottom line, so I see a great deal of
cooperation on your part and earnest effort to get there, but I
am not convinced that we are there yet, and anything you can do
to convince me or the Members of this panel would be useful.
Mr. Carlisle. If I could respond on two things. First of
all, on public safety the primary use of GPS by public safety
is two ways. On timing receivers and in simulcast networks, the
public safety entity is used and in vehicles and for mission-
specific use of personal navigation devices.
Under our current set of proposals no public safety devices
will have--no personal navigation devices will have a problem
with the deployment of our network as long as we are operating
on the lower 10 megahertz. On the timing devices that should
also be the case, but if some of these timing devices happen to
be in close proximity to one of our transmitters, there are
replacement antennas available that are completely filtered
against our signal that are available on the market today for
$100 each. So this is an issue that can be handled.
In terms of precision receivers, this is directly out of
the report. It is slide 12 in the Power Point attachment to my
testimony. This line is the power level that we will be
broadcasting at that will reach the ground. These dots are all
precision receivers that were tested. Now, most of those fall
below the line and would show harmful interference. These ten
above the line would operate fine in the presence of our
signal.
This is a design choice. It is not an immutable physics
problem. We know it because we can see the performance of the
receivers.
Mr. McNerney. Okay. Well, one of the issues that has been
brought up is a lack of testing in the lower 10 band, so I just
don't think we are quite there yet, and I want to see what you
are proposing to go forward because it just--we need jobs, and
this is going to create them, but in my opinion we are not
quite there yet, and I would like to see that happen.
So with that I will yield back.
Chairman Hall. I thank the gentleman.
Next the gentleman from Maryland, Dr. Bartlett, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Bartlett. Thank you very much.
It seems to me that the actions of the FCC seven years ago
might have anticipated that we would be here today talking
about this problem because as I understand it, the FCC granted
LightSquared, then known as MSV, conditional approval to build
its integrated ATC ground-based wireless network using its
satellite spectrum near the GPS signal. Wouldn't it have been
expected that the enormous disparity between the GPS satellite
signal and these ground signals would have produced some bleed
that we would have this problem?
I am a little concerned as to why that spectrum so close to
GPS was granted. I am also confused by the FCC's rulings here.
In 2003, when they adopted the initial rules allowing
commercial satellite service providers who operate a ground-
based integrated with their satellite service, they made this
statement. The purpose of our grant of ATC authority is to
provide satellite licensees flexibility in providing satellite
services that will benefit consumers, not to allow licensees to
profit by selling access to their spectrum for terrestrial-only
service.
And then I note that on January 26 of this year the FCC
granted LightSquared a conditional waiver of its ATC authority
integrated service rule meaning its customers could offer
terrestrial-only services.
Now, did our staff make an error in this briefing paper, or
is this a direct contradiction?
Mr. Carlisle. Are you asking me or----
Mr. Bartlett. Whoever can answer. Because it appears to me
a direct contradiction. My concern is that I think that we, the
government, are somewhat complacent in this problem that I
wonder why we were ever--gave a spectrum so close to the GPS
signal that when you have a billion time disparity, wasn't it
anticipated that there was going to be a bleed over? Who would
have thought there wouldn't have been a bleed over that would
compromise the GPS? For at least the low-end technical
receivers.
Mr. Carlisle. Well, Congressman, the FCC process is only as
good as the input it gets, and at the time from 2001 to 2005,
the only issue that was discussed was the possibility of our
signal bleeding over into GPS.
Mr. Bartlett. Well, was it a given that being a billion
times, if you went to a ground based and pumped it up, wasn't
it just anticipated that a billion times more powerful signal
was going to bleed over?
Mr. Carlisle. And that is why we entered into an agreement
in 2002, with the GPS Industry Council to filter our
transmission so it would not bleed over. The issue that was
not----
Mr. Bartlett. It is bleeding over because many of the
devices you tested were compromised by it, and now you are
using only the lower end of it, which still bleeds over is my
understanding.
Mr. Carlisle. Well, as Dr. Pace's testimony points out, the
testing actually showed that if you look at what our signal is
doing, it is not tapering off into GPS and causing a problem.
We have filtered it. The problem is caused by receivers that
are looking not only at the GPS signal but also looking at our
signals.
So even if we have a filter so we don't bleed over into
GPS, they are still seeing our signal. It is a receiver-side
issue that was never raised between 2001 and 2005.
Mr. Bartlett. But if the frequencies were further apart,
this wouldn't be a problem. Right?
Mr. Carlisle. Not--no, it would not be a problem and----
Mr. Bartlett. Okay.
Mr. Carlisle[continuing]. That is why we have offered to
move to the lower part of our spectrum.
Mr. Bartlett. Was there no signal more distinct from GPS
that could have been given to LightSquared? I am confused as to
why they ended up with a spectrum so close to the GPS.
Mr. Carlisle. Well, we had been licensed to use that
spectrum since 1989, when the FCC added the possibility of
having a ground network. The only issue related to GPS
interference that was raised was the issue that we accounted
for in our filtering. This receiver overload issue was not
raised to the FCC until September of 2010. Entities that had
the information, the performance of their receivers and how
much spectrum they actually look at, the GPS manufacturers did
not raise it until then.
Mr. Bartlett. But even with the filtering and even with
only using the lower half of the band, don't we still have a
very significant number of GPS receivers that are compromised?
Mr. Carlisle. The testing shows that that would be
precision receivers primarily, which amount to perhaps 750,000
in the country compared to 400 million other types of----
Mr. Bartlett. They both are big numbers.
Mr. Carlisle. But not--in terms of precision receivers, not
an impractical number to handle over time.
Mr. Bartlett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hall. I yield you another minute. Dr. Pace has
been holding his hand up there for about five minutes, I think
wants to help answer this question.
Dr. Pace. Thank you. The thing I would have to add is that
when the discussions took place between the GPS Industry
Council and the predecessor organization, MSV, I was at NASA at
the time, and so I knew that these two groups were going off to
have these conversations with each other and the out-of-band,
the emission limits, bleed-over issue was certainly one of the
issues that was discussed in great detail before the groups
came back to the FCC and came back to the government agencies
to talk about what their solution was.
I think an integral part of that solution was the fact that
this was still supposed to be an ancillary terrestrial
component, an add-on extension, a fill-in service to a
satellite service. So the satellite gating requirement and the
preservation of the band as a satellite band was crucial. It
was not a matter of looking at one solution in isolation, that
is the out-of-band emissions into the GPS band. It was a total
look at what that band was like, what the neighborhood was
like, and it rested on the assurances of the Commission that
they intended and wanted to preserve that band for mobile
satellite services.
So I recall the very deep technical discussion, there was a
total package that was looked at, there are a number of
technical characteristics that were preserved. If one was to go
and change those characteristics and say convert this satellite
band to a mobile service, a terrestrial band, the normal
process one would go through is a notice of proposed
rulemaking. This is what happened up at other bands, what is
called the S band up around two gigahertz. You have probably
heard of Charlie Ergen and DISH Network and some of these other
guys have proposals there.
So the FCC engaged in proper notice and proposed rulemaking
when they made other major changes. In this particular case
they granted a waiver without really in my view sufficient
technical data in place to support that waiver, then testing
occurred after the fact to see if it could be made to work.
They made a major change in the allocation of the band from
satellite to a terrestrial service without the notice of
proposed rulemaking that they engaged in in other areas.
So I think your phrase that the government is a little
compliant in this is actually quite true, that there were
indications and encouragements made for a very worthy cause of
more broadband but where sufficient homework was not done, and
that has led to the situation we are facing today.
Chairman Hall. Thank you very much.
Next--do you yield back now, professor?
Mr. Bartlett. One final comment, Mr. Chairman. I wonder is
there not a technology that could migrate this system for the
ground-based component that would make it not competitive or
threatening to GPS?
Do we have receivers that are designed to receive both the
terrestrial signal and the space signal, or are they two kinds
of--strength is enormously different; I would judge that you
got two different----
Mr. Carlisle. There are, well, for our band, yes, we are
going to--the concept that this is going to be a terrestrial-
only network is wrong. We will continue to have an integrated
network. We invested in a satellite. We will continue to use
it. We will have dual-mode devices that will enable these
devices to talk to the satellite and loop through it.
Mr. Bartlett. But they are dual mode----
Mr. Carlisle. Yes.
Mr. Bartlett. [continuing]. Because they have a part of it
which receives the terrestrial signal and another part which
receives the space.
Mr. Carlisle. Absolutely.
Mr. Bartlett. We aren't concerned about the satellite I
understand. It is only the terrestrial part of it that is a
concern. Why cannot we simply migrate that signal so that it is
not competitive?
Mr. Carlisle. To the ground----
Mr. Bartlett. Yes.
Mr. Carlisle. Network somewhere else.
Mr. Bartlett. Completely move the band width.
Mr. Carlisle. Well, that has been proposed by some of the
GPS manufacturers. We have invested $4 billion in the spectrum
so far and but what those proposals amount to is go somewhere
else and spend another $4 billion to develop your technology in
another band. So that is one problem.
The other problem is that where is it? Every piece of
spectrum that is suitable for a ground network is already taken
by someone else.
Chairman Hall. I would be upset if I hadn't caused that
last question, but I always get more of out Dr. Bartlett's
questions than I do out of the answers. Thank you. You are a
good Member.
And we have another good Member that has been very patient.
The gentlelady from Maryland, Ms. Edwards, my friend, is
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you also to
the Ranking Member and to our witnesses today.
You know, I am just coming at this from your basic
consumer. I think none of us can, you know, question the fact
that GPS is so pervasive in our lives that obviously we don't
even know it anymore because it is everywhere and everything,
and that is a good thing, and I think it is one of those
examples where the government has made a significant
investment, and it is good government work, and you know, at a
time when we seem to be, you know, cutting back and challenging
every single aspect of government, I think the American public
can be thankful for the investment that the Federal Government
and taxpayers made in the development of GPS.
I think the confusion here is that we have competing
national policy directives. On the one hand we have the, all of
the good work of our scientific and technological agencies that
are dependent on GPS for important and critical services, and
on the other hand we have a policy directive from the
Administration, which I think is, you know, right in terms of
expanding the ability of broadband to be accessed in multiple
communities, and that was my signal that I am going to keep
going until my time is up.
And so--and I share that, I share the value of doing that.
I mean, in urban and suburban areas, even like ones represented
in my Congressional district, that are plenty of people who for
a variety of reasons because of the level of competition and
the lack of access, there are plenty of communities
underserved, both suburban and urban, who need greater access
and need that at competitive rates that people can afford. In
rural areas, obviously, that challenge exists, too, and so it
is a great goal to have to expand broadband access.
And so what I would like to know is given the level of
investment that the Federal Government has put in and the
competing policy directives, why it is that our agencies don't
have some responsibility and the Federal Government doesn't
have some responsibility to figure out a solution that allows
LightSquared to move forward at the same time that we protect
our vital GPS services. And it does seem to me that our federal
agencies can't just sort of sit and wait and say, well,
LightSquared, you figure that out without some responsibility
of our own agencies.
I mean, NextGen, for example, is just in development. Why
is it that we are not investing in the technology that is going
to allow for the existence of these two services, even if it
means that at least part of the band width isn't used in order
to guard GPS but then allows LightSquared to develop the part
of the band with--that can be used.
And so my question for the agencies is what investment are
you all making to try to meet the dual directives, policy
directives of the Administration that I outlined previously?
Any one of you can take that question.
Mr. Russo. I will start off, see if I can get part of this.
We recognize the dual directives. The one piece I want to point
out is that the President's broadband directive also contains
the caveat that it not be done at the expense of critical
federal, state, and local capabilities. So he recognized that
when they gave the initiative out, that, you know, do this but
do this without stepping on other things.
In terms of investment, we do need to make ourselves more
efficient, and as Dr. Pace said, GPS is really the most
efficient spectrum use we have ever seen, where we have a
billion users in 20 megahertz. But we concur that we need to
work towards making it even more efficient in the future. Our
demands for spectrum are going to continue to grow, especially
in terms of our broadband needs.
So we do have a responsibility to try to work with all of
our partners to make that more efficient, and the FCC is the
lead for that.
In terms of this specific issue, we have taken out of hide
all of the technical experts that we have available to try to
work this problem. We don't have--this NPEF I talked about is
not a standing organization. When I sent the tasker out, people
had to be pulled from their regular jobs in order to come
together to do this testing.
So the departments and agencies don't want to do this
perpetually. They want to be able to do this on a focused
answer. We can't do this 365 days a year. You haven't
authorized us the money to be able to keep these people as a
standing test for anything that somebody might come up with.
So that is part of the answer. We are willing to work on
future testing and future alternatives to try to make this
work. We are seeking a win-win solution, and that is guidance
we will receive from the White House, and we are all working
towards that. Could we do more? Maybe. We are also resource
constrained.
Ms. Edwards. Could I hear for a moment from the Department
of Transportation because, you know, NextGen is just in
development. You are not finished, you are not done, you are
not, you know, where you need to be yet. Why is it that you
can't work on some technological solution that allows the
compatible existence of these two technologies?
Mr. Appel. Certainly. The Department of Transportation
believes that we would want nothing more than to have expanded
broadband capabilities. Expanded broadband capabilities has
tremendous benefits for transportation in improving efficiency,
in improving environmental sustainability, and just getting
better routings, not just from the navigation GPS but from
better broadband applications across the spectrum.
So in the case of this win-win that Mr. Russo is talking
about, yes, we are--the FAA has put people, we are working very
closely with the Technical Working Group, not just to find
problems, but to find solutions, to find that win-win.
In the case of NextGen in particular, yeah, we want to make
NextGen work as well as it can based on what we have with which
to work. A lot of the receivers, for example, on which NextGen
will be based are already either there or in development. There
are future aspects of NextGen, there will be several billion
dollars in additional investment from each of the public and
private sector, and that can be affected by the state of the
world today, but there is also a lot that is already in place
that we have to work from.
So we just--so bottom line we would want to as best as we
can help find the win-win solution. We would also have to
accept that there are certain give-ins that we have to deal
with.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I failed in staying
in my five minutes.
Chairman Hall. You did pretty good. I thank the gentlelady,
and I thank the gentleman for his answers.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Rohrabacher, is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I have been
trying to take in the information. I was actually--when I left,
I was watching you from my office, which is what we often do.
Let me ask, first of all, let me suggest that--is it
Carlisle? Is that how you pronounce your name? You are doing a
terrific job for your company. Let me just note that you have
got all of these guys against you, and there you are, and you
are holding your own, and I often find myself in that position,
so I certainly appreciate it.
Chairman Hall. The gentleman's time is almost over.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let me--so I am trying to glean exactly
how we get to the core of the issues here, but because I admire
the job you are doing doesn't mean I agree with the positions
that you have taken.
The--we are talking about a company now, LightSquared, that
received a waiver originally from what other companies would
have been expected to, and how much did LightSquared pay for
the right to own this band?
Mr. Carlisle. We received the spectrum in 1989, when
spectrum was still allocated on a competitive process. Auctions
didn't start until the late 1990s.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So how much did you pay?
Mr. Carlisle. We paid nothing at the time.
Mr. Rohrabacher. You paid nothing at the time for that
right, and you had a waiver for other restrictions, and so
while I would have to admit that my sympathies might be a
little bit greater if I would have learned that your company
had actually paid a great deal of money out of their pocket for
the right to this to begin with, so we are recognizing that
this was a publicly-owned asset that was transferred ownership
to your company for nothing.
Mr. Carlisle. Sir, can I respond to that?
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes. Please.
Mr. Carlisle. Okay. Originally when we received the
allocation, it was before auctions were in place. That is how
spectrum was allocated, and in fact, that is how the original
cellular networks were built by the companies that own them.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes.
Mr. Carlisle. Cingular, all the rest of them, they got
spectrum for nothing as well----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yeah.
Mr. Carlisle [continuing]. Before auctions were instituted.
We subsequently invested several billion dollars to put up
satellites to use it----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right.
Mr. Carlisle [continuing]. And provide public safety
services and significant public benefit to the United States.
When our company was acquired for $3 billion last year, that
was an investment in the spectrum, and further investment----
Mr. Rohrabacher. When you were granted this and the waiver
was specifically--had something to do with whether or not--as
long as you were not interfering with others' use of the band
near your band width, was that correct? I mean, that was part
of the agreement that you had when you received this right to
this band width. You did not receive----
Mr. Carlisle. Are you talking about the waiver in January?
Mr. Rohrabacher. The waiver and the original grant. You
were--wasn't there pre-condition that this would not be
interfering with other activities in nearby band widths?
Mr. Carlisle. Well, anybody who receives spectrum has the
obligation not to interfere with adjacent bands.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right.
Mr. Carlisle. We are operating within the limits----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay.
Mr. Carlisle [continuing].On our network.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And wasn't it pretty well understood as
then the satellite that if you did choose to go the satellite
route in the development of your right to use this band, that
it might, indeed, complicate things to the point that you were
interfering or there was a potential interference, because now
you are using satellite rather than ground-based systems.
Mr. Carlisle. Well, there was no issue with the development
of our satellite network, which we have operated for 15 years.
That is--that does not cause interference with GPS. The
potential interference comes from the ground-based network.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. I am trying to--that is what I am
trying to learn here. We are not--none of us are engineers. So
right now what we have heard from these witnesses is that there
is potential interference at least in a very small, maybe 98
percent has been corrected, but there is a small area where
there might be some kind of interference, and you have, of
course, confirmed that.
Now, you don't--your company's position isn't that you
should move forward even though there is this potential
interference. You seem to be saying if the people who are being
interfered with will buy certain types of technology, that
interference can be overcome or might, it might be overcome.
Mr. Carlisle. Well, and we have committed to fund the
research of the--take the cost of that off the GPS
manufacturers and fund it ourselves. So we have actually put
earnest money up in order to solve this problem.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And but that is in terms of the scientific
research. Have--are we satisfied that the science exists, not
that we will pay for it until it comes out, that the science
exists to take care of the problem, meaning that last entity or
part of the band that will possibly interfere with GPS? Is the
consensus that technology exists, or is this a--something that
is--you are suggesting that it might exist if we made this
investment in research and development?
Mr. Carlisle. We know it exists today because these
receivers, these precision receivers are just fine. It is a
technology design choice.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I have one last question, Mr. Chairman.
Are you in agreement with that, that you were--he said we are
satisfied that the technology does exist by this test?
Mr. Russo. Sir, there is not a consensus on that. Some of
the receivers passed, but they may have a different
application. Not all precision receivers do the same thing. The
GPS community is so diverse and the way this TWG report is
presented, it is--there is an anonymous receivers. In order to
get everybody's cooperation, the manufacturers that submitted
devices didn't want their device to be named. So I don't know
whether the ones that are above the line, what specific
function they do. So it may be that they don't need to be as
precise as other ones, and therefore, can have more filtering.
So the answer from inside the government is that our
technical experts are split as to whether it is even feasible
that we could put a filter in that was both strong enough to
knock out the LightSquared signal and still allow us to do our
mission. That is the hard part is the second part of that, not
the first part.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the
extra time.
Chairman Hall. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mr.
Neugebauer, who is one of the members who asked for this
hearing, and recognize him for five minutes or whatever time he
has to use.
Mr. Neugebauer. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think this
has been a good hearing, and one of the problems of being one
of the last people in the question queue is I think a lot of
the questions and statements that I wanted to make have been
asked, but I do appreciate you holding this hearing. I think it
is an important issue. Certainly, you know, the broadband issue
is for--spreading that around to the rest of the country is
important, but it is also important that we protect our GPS as
well.
And so I ask unanimous consent, Mr. Chairman, that a letter
that we wrote the FCC Chairman, which you so kindly joined in
on June the 7th, as well as the response I received, that they
be made a part of this record.
Chairman Hall. Without objection.
[The information can be found in Appendix 2.]
Mr. Neugebauer. I also ask unanimous consent that the
testimony of the Save our GPS Coalition be made a part of the
record for today's hearing as well. They were not able to
provide a witness for today but ask that their testimony be
included in the record.
Chairman Hall. Is there objection? The Chair hears none.
[The information can be found in Appendix 2.]
Mr. Neugebauer. And I thank the Chairman and I thank the
Chairman for having this hearing.
Chairman Hall. And you yield back. I would say this. The
members of the Committee may have additional questions. We may
have to ask you to respond to those in writing, if we might,
and the record will remain open for two weeks for additional
comments from members.
I ask for unanimous consent to enter a number of documents
into the record that were previously shared with the minority,
including the list of over 400 individuals who submitted
comments to the Committee. And I have heard a lot of testimony
about funds. I have heard very little testimony about the 800
fatalities. We maybe need another hearing for that sometime in
the near future.
But hearing no objection, it is so ordered.
[The information can be found in Appendix 2.]
Chairman Hall. The Chairman calls this hearing adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:04 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Mr. Anthony Russo, Director, The National Coordination
Office
for Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1.  How common are the wideband and high precision GPS receivers that
are at risk of interference from LightSquared's modified business plan
that starts commercial operations with just the ``lower'' portion of
its spectrum?

A1.  In response to an August 9th request by Mr Strickling (NTIA
Administrator), federal agencies identified a current inventory of over
one million wideband and high precision GPS receivers. This inventory
does not include State, local, tribal, or commercial high precision
receivers. While the number of non-federal receivers is unknown, it
would be in the hundreds of thousands. According to a September 29th
market study conducted by ABI Research, the high precision market is
expected to double between now and 2016. Areas that are expected to
experience strong growth include agriculture, construction, aviation,
GIS mapping, and military high precisionb applications.
There is no universally accepted definition of what constitutes a
``wideband'' or ``high precision'' receiver, so the number of affected
receivers might vary based on different interpretations.

Q1a.  How much do they cost?

A1a.  High precision receivers vary greatly in terms of their mission
requirements and applications. Therefore, there is also a wide
variation in cost. On the lower end of the high precision market,
receivers cost between $4,000 and $20,000. On the higher end, receivers
can be as high as $40,000 to $50,000, occasionally even higher.

Q1b.  What is the normal upgrade or re-equipage cycle for these GPS
receivers at federal departments and agencies?

A1b.  The federal agencies were not able to provide an estimate of
their normal upgrade time, but federal users do typically keep their
equipment much longer than their commercial counterparts. Certain high
precision applications, for example aviation infrastructure, would
require longer--as much as 10-15 years. Fifteen years was also the
upper end identified by GPS Industry in the FCC-directed Technical
Working Group final report. It should be noted that LightSquared
disputed this estimate and believes it could be accomplished in
significantly less time.

Q2.  LightSquared has agreed to a ``standstill'' on the use ofthe
``upper'' portion of their spectrum, the portion closest to the GPS
signal. LightSquared has stated they would like to work with the GPS
community to develop mitigation strategies in order to initiate
commercial operations of the upper spectrum within two to three years.

Q2a.  Are federal agencies prepared to upgrade or re-equip all their
GPS equipment in that time frame?

A2a.  No federal agency has indicated they are prepared to upgrade or
re-equip in this time frame.

Q2b.  What would be the cost to implement this strategy at federal
departments and agencies?

A2b.  No feasible mitigation has been proposed for tbe ``upper''
portion of the spectrum. Even the LightSquared-compatible receiver
recently announced by JAVAD GNSS does not mitigate upper channel
induced interference. No credible estimate of implementation cost can
be provided until the set of effective mitigation solutions is
identified and fully tested. Certainly re-equipage of GPS equipment
across the Federal Government would cost tens of billions of dollars if
it is necessary.

Q2c.  Is two to three years a reasonable time frame to expect federal
agencies to upgrade or re-equip?

A2c.  No, there is no way federal agencies would be able to accomplish
such widespread equipment changes in this time frame. We have one
previous data point on how long is ``reasonable'' when faced with the
issue of upgrading or re-equipping. In 2008, a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) between the Departments of Defense and
Transportation was set to expire, which had allowed the used of ``semi-
codeless'' techniques. These techniques took advantage of the encrypted
military signal to augment the accuracy of civil applications. Because
this decision impacted several hundred thousand civilian high precision
receivers, the Federal Government spent considerable time analyzing the
impacts and engaging industry to quantify the installed base affected,
estimate its economic value, and determine an acceptable time frame for
deferring the planned GPS military signal modications to allow an
extension of semi-codeless accesss for civilian GPS access. It took
longer to conduct interagency coordination of the task statement than
the entire amount of time devoted to LightSquared testing.
Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) authorized deferral of
changes to the military GPS signal until December 31, 2020, so that
civilian users of semi-codeless GPS augmentations techniques could have
more time to upgrade or change to alternatives. OSD established and
announced this revised policy via Federal Register notification. That
is more than 12 years after an effective migitation was identified.

Q3.  LightSquared's modified business plan starts commercial operations
with just the ``lower'' portion of its spectrum and will be limited to
urban areas. Does this satisfy your concerns about short-term
interference issues to wideband and high precision GPS receivers? If
not, why not?

A3.  No, the modifications to LightSquared's plans have not satisfied
the concerns about interference to GPS receivers. During the first
round of GPS interference testing, the limited tests performed using
only the lower LightSquared channel demonstrated significant
interference to wideband, high precision GPS receivers. According to
the FCC-directed Technical Working Group Report's Executive Summary, 31
of 33 high precision receivers experience harmful interference even
with transmissions restricted to the ``lower'' portion of the
LightSquared spectrum allocation. In addition, many of these
receivers--supporting a diverse set of important applications--are used
in urban environments and will be affected by the first day of
LightSquared operations.
On behalf of multiple federal agencies, we recommended to NTIA
additional testing be performed to better understand the interference
effects of the lower channel on high precision receivers, and to
determine whether receiver mitigation techniques proposed by
LightSquared are effective. Both NTIA and FCC have concurred with this
recommendation, and we expect NTIA to request this testing as soon as
LightSquared can provide the propsed receiver mitigation hardware.

Q4.  Given that LightSquared has clearly shown that it intends to
ultimately utilize both the upper and the lower portion of its
spectrum, even with its new business proposal to start with just the
lower portion, how is the new proposal really any different to your
agency than their original proposal?

A4.  Their new proposal is significant and constructive. It reduces the
impact to most GPS receivers in the near term and provides several
years to find mitigations (if they exist) for the second phase of their
implementation. However, LightSquared's filings and their congressional
testimony to several committees indicate they still intend to operate
in both the lower and upper portion of their identified spectrum.
Therefore, the end-state remains unchanged and the extensive testing by
LightSquared, GPS industry, and the government all indicate unresolved
interference problems that cannot be addressed in the expected time
frame. Contrary to media accounts, neither LightSquared nor the FCC
have taken upper channel operations ``off the table.''

Q5.  I understand there are now other companies exploring a similar
terrestrial broadband business plan but in an entirely different part
of the spectrum that would not interfere with the GPS signal. If we can
accommodate the President's goals for the Broadband Initiative using
spectrum that doesn't interfere with GPS, why should we risk the
taxpayer investment in GPS?

A5.  We strongly support protecting the taxpayer investment in GPS
including the modernization of GPS to ensure innovative new
applications in the future. At the same time, we continue to support
the President's goals to identify 500 MHz of spectrum to make available
for innvative mobile broadband services. We welcome all new entrants to
the broadband marketplace provided they demonstrate they can provide
new broadband services without jeopardizing existing and planned space-
based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing (PNT) capabilities.

Q6.  Will the filters proposed by JAVAD GNSS and LightSquared mitigate
the interference problem to wideband and high precision GPS receivers?
If not, why not?

A6.  Maybe. JAVAD GNSS claims its filters mitigate the interference
problem for the first phase (``lower 10 MHz'') of LightSquared's
planned deployment. Although currently this applies to only the small
number of precision receivers built by JAVAD GNSS, the company also
claims it can adapt their proprietary solution to devices built by
other manufacturers. Other manufacturers are also working independently
on designing solutions for their own systems. It should be noted this
solution does not mitigate upper channel overload interference or the
intermodulation products that will occur when LightSquared implements
their upper channel, which is still in their plans as filed with the
FCC. This JAVAD GNSS solution, by itself, also does not mitigate the
co-channel interference to GPS augmentation systems like StarFire and
OmniStar that receive signals from satellite service providers, such as
LightSquared and Inmarsat, in the Mobile Satellite Service (MSS) band.
However, if JAVAD GNSS is able to demonstrate they have successfully
done as they have claimed, it represents a very significant step to
resolving the problems for many users.

Q6a.  If so, what testing has been done to demonstrate their
effectiveness? If filters are developed and tested, how long would it
take to retrofit existing units? How much would this cost?

A6a.  We are not aware of any independent testing done to demonstrate
the effectiveness of this solution. Extensive, independent tests must
be conducted once hardware is made available. The testing must not only
ensure the filtering out of the LightSquared transmission, but also
verify required performance characteristics can still be met with the
modified devices. At this time, it is unclear how long it would take to
retrofit existing units, and LightSquared has stated it may not be
possible to retrofit some types of units. We do not know how much
retrofitting would cost for those units where it is feasible to do so.

Q7.  Are there currently any mitigation strategies that make sense for
wideband or high precision GPS receivers?

A7.  The three key strategies for mitigation LightSquared interference
to GPS are: (1) frequency separation, (2) physical separation, and (3)
reduction in the LightSquared transmitted power. LightSquared has
already offered to move (temporarily) from the GPS boundary as far as
possible within the band allocated to MSS. They have also proposed a
subtantial reduction in their authorized tramsmit power. LightSquared
has expressed some flexibility in working with the federal agencies on
the location of their towers to protect certain fixed installations
(for example, military training facilities) that must use wideband GPS
receivers. Physical separation is a major factor since the resulting
interference power reduces with the square of the separation distance.
In addition to mitigation measures that LightSquared can do on the
transmit side, there are also potential strategies for mitigation on
the receiver side. The most logical mitigation strategy for the lower
portion of the MSS spectrum is to reduce the bandwidth and steepen the
``cutoff'' slope of the radio frequency (RF) filters used by GPS
receivers; however, this will likely result in some accuracy and
performance degradation to the receivers. Precision GPS receivers
traditionally have used very wideband filters to capture as much GPS
signal energy as possible in order to achieve the best possible
accuracy. Another reason for the wideband filters is to allow reception
of differential correction signals from communications satellites in
the MSS band, which improve navigation accuracy. Precision agriculture
and some military applications depend on these correction signals.
Relocation of these correction signals to the top of the MSS band and
not transmitting terrestrial signals in the upper part of the MSS band
are both necessary in order to contemplate a way to mitigate
terrestrial signals in the lower part of the band. Whether mitigation
filters can be successful without impairing present or future accuracy
has not been confirmed.
There is no known mitigation strategy for mitigation of the
interference resulting from use of the upper portion of the MSS band.

Q8.  Mr. Carlisle states in his testimony that ``the GPS manufacturers
failed to raise issue at the FCC when it was developing its rules and
could have addressed this issue in the design of their receivers years
ago.''

Q8a.  Does identifying who is to blame for the current interference
issues minimize the interference to U.S. government receivers today?

A8a.  No.

Q8b.  Does the fact that GPS companies did not mention these issues in
the past minimize interference to U.S. government rceeivers today?

A8b.  No.

Q8c.  To your knowledge, did the U.S. Government raise concerns (at any
time) about potential interference to high precision receivers that
``look'' into spectrum licensed to LightSquared?

A8c.  GPS interference concerns with respect to Ancillary Terrestrial
Component (ATC) operation in the MSS band were raised immediately by
the federal agencies through the NTIA when LightSquared's predecessor
first submitted their application in 2001. At the time, the primary
interference concern was out-of-band-emissions (OOBE). LightSquared
successfully developed a custom filter for their base stations that
mitigates OOBE interference. The concerns about ``overload'' or
desensitization interference effects that severely affect wideband GPS
receivers--many used for high precision applications--were not raised
within the Federal Government until relatively recently. The government
raised a concern about this particular type of interference effect in
December 2010. Prior to that time, GPS had some protection from
overload interference effects because of the satellite ``gating''
requirements for dual mode (terrestrial/satellite) handsets the FCC
included in the original 2003 Order and in all subsequent Orders
between 2003 and 2010.
Based on federal agency comments, NTIA wrote a letter to FCC
(January 12, 2011) which raised significant interference concerns and
conveyed the agencies' desire to have a waiver decision deferred
pending testing. On that date the Deputy Secretary of Defense also
wrote to the FCC Defense Commissioner citing national security concerns
and also strongly recommending deferral. To address these concerns, the
FCC made the January 26, 2011, ATC waiver approval--which waived the
gating requirements for the first time--conditional on resolving the
overload interference to GPS.

Q9.  I understand that you have proposed additional testing of the
LightSquared proposal over the next six months. What type of GPS
receivers would be tested? Are there specific areas that are of more
concern than the others?

A9.  The Government's evaluation conducted by the National Space-Based
Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Systems Engineering Forum (NPEF)
from February to May of this year had some significant limitations. I
described these limitations in detail in my testimony to this
Committee. The NPEF final report recommends an additional evaluation
period of at least six months to enable completion of a thorough
assessment of LightSquared's network. Some of the specific reasons
identified for this additional testing: (1) Testing of LightSquared's
new signal configuration (``10 MHz Low'') which had not been identified
at the time of the NPEF testing; (2) Effects of multiple ATC towers
instead of one tower (interference effects aggregate); (3) Testing of
timing receivers which the NPEF could not evaluate due to schedule
constraints; (4) Systems-level testing vice just looking at GPS
receivers; (5) Testing of propsed mitigation strategies; and (6)
Testing of LightSquared handsets which were not available to the
government during the NPEF testing. This additional test period has not
been directed or authorized at this time.
Separate from the additional testing recommended above, the NTIA
requested (on September 9, 2011) that the NPEF revalidate two of the
seven areas tested by the FCC-directed Technical Working Group. These
areas focus on cellular devices and General Location/Navigation systems
such as personal navigation devices used by consumers in their cars.
This effort is underway and we expect to complete testing of these two
areas by November 30, 2011.

Q10.  What is the National Coordination Office's official
recommendation to the FCC for granting a final license to LightSquared?
Please explain your concerns.

A10.  The National Coordination Office (NCO) is an administrative
office serving the National Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and
Timing Executive Committee. It is not a decision-making or policy-
making body. Therefore all NCO recommendations are provided through the
Executive Committeee and not directly to FCC. Ultimately, NTIA filed
the measurement recommendations on behalf of the Administration.
The Executive Committee's recommendations are:

LightSquared should not commence commercial services per
its planned deployment for terrestrial operations in the 1525--1559 MHz
Mobile-Satellite Service (MSS) Band due to harmful interference to GPS
operations.

The U.S. Government should conduct more thorough studies
on the operation, economic, and safety impacts of operating the
LightSquared Network, to include compatibility of ATC architectures in
the MSS L Band with GPS-dependent applications, signal configurations
not currently in LightSquared planned spectrum phases, effects on
timing receivers, and transmissions from LightSquared handsets.

The Executive Committee (EXCOM) remains concerned the interference
issues are still not resolved, despite several constructive mitigation
proposals from LightSquared. The EXCOM would like to see thorough
testing of all proposed mitigation strategies. In addition, the EXCOM
has expressed concern about the need for a defined ``end-state.''
LightSquared's authorization, their recommendations filed with the FCC,
and their testimony to three Congressional Committees all refer to
using both the lower and upper channels. The upper channel transmission
has beeen discribed as being put in ``standstill,'' but that term lacks
clarity and makes it difficult to fully estimate the ultimate cost and
timeline for interference mitigation.

Q11.  How much would additional testing on high precision receivers
cost?

A11.  There has not been any cost estimate done on how much additional
testing of high precision receivers would cost. We have taken an
initial inventory of how many high precision devices are in use by
federal agencies, but no testing has been initiated to date.

Q11a.  Do agencies already have funding available to conduct this
testing?

A11a.  No agency has funding to conduct this testing. Multiple agencies
have raised the lack of funding as a concern if we are asked to
complete this testing in a timely fashion.

Q11b.  Has LightSquared offered to fund additional testing on their new
proposal?

A11b.  Yes, LightSquared has offered, in general terms, to partially
fund this testing and has offered in-kind services such as use of their
contracted test facilities and LightSquared hardware. It is not clear
if federal agencies can accept the funding LightSquared is offering.
The NCO continues to address this issue through discussion with
government legal counsel, but has not yet identified a mechanism where
we can accept this offer.

Q12.  Have you been involved in any efforts to quantify the potential
costs to the Federal Government of mitigating interference from the
LightSquared proposal?

A12.  Yes. At the request of the National Executive Committtee for
Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing (EXCOM), I tasked each
member agency to quantify costs of mitigating GPS interference and to
provide their estimate to NTIA. The relevant text from my June 8th task
letter is:

``To the extent possible, qualify, quantify, and describe
risks to your agency's GPS-based mission capability, including `lost
benefits' if GPS performance were degraded (or lost) due to
LightSquared's signals including the costs to modify (or replace) GPS
receiver infrastructure and the time frame required to replace that
infrastructure.''

Q12a.  Do you currently have any ``order of magnitude'' estimates of
the total potential costs?

A12a.  Some of the agencies that provided estimates to NTIA also
provided the NCO a courtesy copy. Not all agencies were able to provide
the requested estimates because of the uncertainties of the final end-
state signal configuration and of the effectiveness of mitigation
techniques. Some were able to answer only in general terms, while
others did make an ``order of magnitude'' estimate. NTIA has asked me
not to provide copies of these estimates to Congress because they are
still considered pre-decisional and part of the deliberative process of
the Executive Branch.

Q13.  State and local governments are also heavy users of GPS
equipment. Is any effort being made to estimate the potential costs to
state and local governments of mitigating interference from the
LightSquared proposal?

A13.  I am not aware of any effort to provide an overall estimate of
the impact to State and local governments. The FCC has regulatory
responsibility over non-federal users. State and local governments are
very significant users of GPS and especially high precision GPS. There
are over 100 high precision networks, supporting tens of thousands of
receivers, in use by 37 different States and more are being built. Some
of the areas supported are: heavy construction, municipal surveying,
high precision agriculture, roadwork, machine control, disaster
response, emergency first responders, asset management, intelligent
transportation, structural integrity monitoring, wastewater treatment
service, water distribution systems, and many others.
NITA represents federal agency interests in this matter. However,
in their response to NTIA, several federal agencies (i.e., Department
of Transportation) also have represented the concerns of non-federal
entities they regulate. I am unaware of the manner and extent to which
NTIA will factor in these concerns in its recommendation to the FCC.
The FCC is responsible for issues concerning State and local government
use of spectrum, but I am not aware of any attempt to estimate the cost
impacts of interference mitigation on those entities. State and local
governments were allowed to file comments to the FCC Public Notice, and
many did. However, these include only anecdotal estimates for narrow
application. A few examples:

The North Carolina Department of Agriculture cited:
``Basic land navigation, forest fire response, suppression, and
reporting affecting some 1,400 communities at risk, fire suppression
aviation assets such as firespotting aircraft and water-dropping
helicopters and airplanes, and forest measurement services for 300,000
private forestland owners. In addition, damaging America's GPS would
nullify over $1,000,000 of taxpayer investment in GPS-based tools for
the NC Forest Service alone.''

The Wisconsin Department of Transportation has invested
approximately $20M in a Height Modernization Program that relies on
high precision GPS reference stations. They have over 900 registered
users of the GPS Continuously Operating Reference Station (CORS), a
system our preliminary results indicate would be impacted by operation
at ``10 MHz Low.''

Houston County, a small rural county in Minnesota, told
the FCC it invested $90,000 in high precision GPS equipment and would
have to revert to more labor-intensive methods requiring additional
personnel and longer delivery times.

The City of Bellevue in Washington State says survey
projects that can be done with high precision GPS receivers in less
than a year would require 10 years to complete with other methods. They
estimate high precision GPS has saved them ``many millions of
dollars.''

Questions Submitted by Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson

Q1.  There seems to be a difference of opinion among LightSquared
proponents and detractors on when federal agencies initially voiced
concerns about the LightSquared network. In your view, when was the
issue of potential interference first surfaced by federal agencies,
what triggered agencies' concerns, and what was your office's
involvement? Were these concerns relayed to the FCC? What was the FCC's
response?

A1.  Federal agencies immediately raised concerns about potential
interference to GPS when LightSquared's predecessor company applied for
a license in 2001 for an Ancillary Terrestrial Component (ATC) to its
Mobile Satellite Service (MSS). These concerns primarily dealt with
Out-of-Band-Emissions (OOBE), or transmissions from LightSquared's
signals that would bleed into GPS's band. Through collaboration between
federal agencies, LightSquared's predecessor, the GPS industry, and
NTIA, the FCC addressed the concerns in its rulemaking. Since then,
LightSquared invested considerable money to have custom filters
designed for their transmitters to meet OOBE restrictions. Government
testing confirms that LightSquared base station transmissions meet the
OOBE requirements established in the original rulemaking. We have not
yet conducted testing on potential OOBE created by LightSquared
handsets, since no handsets have been available for testing.
A second type of interference effect is called ``Intermodulation''
and occurs when transmissions from the two high power LightSquared
channels interact with the front end of a GPS receiver to create a
third signal (also called an ``Intermodulation Product'') inside the
receiver. NTIA raised this as a concern to FCC in 2002. At the time,
there were no LightSquared base stations or hardware available to
conduct testing. Recent government testing of actual hardware in 2011
found that intermodulation effects did occur with dual-channel
LightSquared transmissions and the intermodulations product is
unfortunately created in the center of the GPS receive frequency band.
LightSquared has acknowledged this effect and points out that it will
not occur if they only broadcast one channel in the lower half of their
spectrum. The issue is unresolved for the eventual dual-channel
transmissions.
A third type of interference called ``overload'' or
``desensitization'' interference involves the inability of current
filters on GPS receivers to screen out the high power signals from
nearby terrestrial base stations. Some GPS reveivers also intentionally
use filters wide enough to receive signals from across the MSS band.
One reason for this is to receive correction signals from MSS providers
(like LightSquared) that improve the accuracy of GPS signals.
LightSquared's proposed transmissions are properly within their own
band, but are billions of times more powerful than the weak satellite
signals that are currently operating in the Mobile Satellite Service
band. To the best of my knowledge, federal agencies did not raise
overload interference to GPS as an issue until December 2010, in part
because of assumptions GPS was protected by satellite ``gating''
requirements which forced terrestrial handsets to also be capable of
working with the MSS satellite.
Neither my office, nor the Executive Committee it serves, existed
in 2001-2002, when the federal agencies first raised concerns about
MSS/ATC interference. However, we have been involved in the current
issue concerning overload interference. The issue of overload
interference was brought to my attention on December 21, 2010, in the
context of LightSquared's application for a waiver to the integrated
service rules which would have resulted in a de facto repurposing of
the spectrum for terrestrial broadband instead of MSS. This represented
a significant change to the interference environment in terms of the
number and density of the ATC base stations we would expect to see. I
immediately brought the issue to the attention of the Executive
Steering Group (Assistant Secretary-level) and on December 27, I wrote
to NTIA to request that any action on LightSquared's request for waiver
be deferred until testing could be performed. On January 3, 2011, I
provided a point paper to all the members of the Executive Committee
(Deputy Secretary-level) and requested the Deputy Secretary of Defense
engage the FCC Chairman to seek a delay to the waiver decision until
specific interference effects and mitigation actions could be
identified.
Based on the engagement of the Co-Chairs of the Executive Committee
(Mr. Lynn and Mr. Porcari) with NTIA and FCC, as well as senior level
engagement from all of the departments that are GPS stakeholders, the
FCC agreed to grant the waiver only on a conditional basis. One of the
conditions stated that LightSquared is not to commence commercial
operations until the overload GPS interference concerns are resolved.
On September 13, the FCC issued a Public Notice [DA 11-1537] stating
additional targeted testing is needed to ensure any potential
commercial terrestrial service offered by LightSquared will not cause
harmful interference to GPS operations.

Q2.  A terrestrial network was envisioned by LightSquared's
predecessors as a fill-in to their mobile satellite services. They have
had permission to build an extensive terrestrial network for eight
years. Can you explain why federal agencies waited until just recently
to point out that such ground-based towers could drown out GPS signals?

A2.  This question contains an incorrect premise. Eight years ago,
LightSquared's predecessor received permission to build an ancillary
terrestrial network, not an extensive network. There are a number of
serious constraints that went along with this permsision, and ancillary
was defined by FCC (in part) as being ``for the purpose of augmenting
signals in areas where the principal service signal, the satellite
signal, is attenuated.'' The examples given were urban areas where the
buildings might block a satellite signal and inside buildings.
Eight years ago, the FCC Order authorizing ancillary terrestrial
service also contained strict technical limits on the transmit power,
the bandwidth, the total number of terrestrial base stations, and other
parameters. Many of these limits were changed over the years in
reconsideration actions, modfications, amendments, and waivers. There
is absolutely nothing wrong with this; requirements, market conditions,
and technology all evolve over time so the rules need to evolve also.
However it is not accurate to equate the system LightSquared proposes
today with what was envisioned when the predecessor received permission
in 2003.
Two important restrictions on ATC use did not change between 2003
and 2011: (1) The terrestrial service needed to remain ancillary to the
satellite service, and (2) terrestrial and space services must remain
integrated. The purpose for the latter requirement was acknowledged by
LightSquared's predecessor in its application in 2001. ``Because MSV's

own satellite system will be the most
affected by signals generated by ancillary terrestrial operations, it
will have every incentive to monitor and minimize these signal levels
in order to ensure that the quality of its satelllite service is not
compromised.'' In other words, the integrated service rules requiring
terrestrial handsets to be able to communicate with the satellite
ensure intererence protection fo GPS because of the self-interference
issue.
This integrated service rule is not a minor administrative
technicality. Two months before LightSquared applied for its waiver to
this rule, GlobalStar had its license suspended for failing to meet the
appropriate criteria. The criteria FCC established are `` . . .
intended to ensure compliance with the ancillary requirement.'' While
many of the technical criteria in the various FCC Orders are difficult
for non-spectrum experts to comprehend, the FCC's made its intent in
these Orders crystal clear. Examples from the 2003 Order:

``The purpose of our grant of ATC authority is to provide
satellite licensees flexibility in providing satellite services that
will benefit consumers, not to allow licensees to profit by selling
access to their spectrum for a terrestrial-only service.''

And

``We reiterate our intention not to allow ATC to become a
stand-alone system . . . We will not permit MSS/ATC operator to offer
ATC-only subscriptions . . . .''

So while it is legitimate to question why federal agencies did not
act more forcefully to the easing of some of the technical restrictions
that occurred incrementally throughout 2003-2011, the principal change
to the nature of the terrestrial service was not anticiated until
LightSquared's November 2010 request that essentially changes the
entire purpose of the spectrum. FCC's conditional waiver of the
integrated service rules allows changes that had asserted would
``never'' be permitted and now permits--for the first time in this
band--a primary and stand-alone terrestrial service. However, the FCC
also clearly made this change conditional on resolving the GPS
interference conerns and that work is in progress.

Q3.  NOAA's prepared statement says that its engineers are concerned
that a filter capable of blocking out the powerful LightSquared signal
at the lower channel may also prevent the receiver from detecting the
GPS signal, rendering it useless.

Q3a.  In your opinion, is it technically feasible to design a filter
that simultaneously allows GPS users to listen to signals in
LightSquared's allocated bandwidth and block LightSquared's signals?

A3a.  In my opinion, yes, it is possible to block LightSquared signals
in the lower channel while allowing GPS receivers to receive signals in
the upper part of LightSquared's band. LightSquared has recently
announced partnership with a GPS manufactureer and with a filter
company and has provided information to NTIA and FCC supporting the
feasibility of this. The federal agencies have not yet been provided
this information or conducted testing of these concepts.
However, the key issue is not simply blocking out LightSquared
signals, but being able to still perform the intended mission of the
receiver after adding this filtering. Filters add cost and weight to a
receiver and cause performance problems such as: signal attenuation,
increased thermal noise floor, phase and group delay variations with
temperature and between frequencies, and loss of narrow correlator
processing benefits. Because of the diversity of high precision GPS
applications, thorough testing of modified receivers integrated with
proposed changes to antennas and the new filter must be conducted
before we can evaluate whether LightSquared's proposal mitigates the
interference issues.

Q3b.  Can you estimate its cost?

A3b  No, we currently do not have sufficiant information.

Q3c.  What are the challenges associated with certifying such filters
for aviation use?

A3c.  The Federal Aviation Adminstration (FAA) could provide a more
complete answer, but I do know the airworthiness process requires a
very detailed assessment of all hardware and software functions to
ensure no unintended effects that would create a safety issue. This
process typically takes five years to certify new devices once there is
a new agreed-upon technical standard. Retrofitting aviation systems
with newly certified devices can take another 10 years or more.

Q4.  What can Congress do to protect the future value of spectrum and
ensure user receivers do not bleed into spectrum not assigned to them?

A4.  The Executive Committee has not sought any congressional action
and remains committed to working these concerns through the regulatory
process with NTIA and FCC.

Q4a.  What are the challenges associated with establishing receiver
standards to preclude devices from picking up unintended spectrum?

A4a.  The primary challenges are the size and diversity of the
installed user base and the lengthy transition time it would take to
implement significant changes.

Q5.  Your testimony highlights testing that was conducted by federal
agencies independent of the work mandated by the FCC. Can you quantify
the level of resources and staff time expended in doing such testing?

A5.  The original testing conducted by the National Space-Based
Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Engineering Forum (NPEF) was
initiated February 9, 2011, and concluded in a final report signed June
2, 2011. The effort involved support from all members of the agencies
that make up the Executive Committee. The total cost to government
agencies of this first round of testing was approximately $1.2M. This
does not include the considerable efforts that have been done in
support of LightSquared analysis outside of this particular test phase,
such as the 10 government personnel who were detailed to support the
Technical Working Group, the people who supported the FAA/RTCA
analysis, or the staff personnel who have been trying to keep senior
agency leaders, White House officials, and congressional staff informed
about the complex issues raised in this testing.

Q5a.  Were there any lessons learned that federal agencies might apply
if called on to conduct more interference testing?

A5a.  Yes. This testing has made us much more aware the government does
not have a standing infrastructure to conduct this type of technical
assessment in the very short time frames requested. The testing we did
was successful, but ad hoc and with significant limitations. More time
is needed in upfront planning to include the identification of
personnel, test facilities, and other resources. Because no funding or
personnel lines exist for this type of work, everything used to support
this testing had to be reallocated from other tasks and negatively
impacted the intended use of those resources. Limitations on resources
limited the test, especially in terms of the numbers and types of
devices that could be tested.
More time is needed regarding the identification of test articles
because GPS is essential to so many different applications. And more
time is needed for the coordination and staffing of results and
analyses at the end of testing because of the large number of
government agencies that are stakeholders.
Responses by Ms. Mary Glackin, Deputy Under Secretary,
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1.  How common are the wideband and high precision GPS receivers that
are at risk of interference from LightSquared's modified business plan
that starts commercial operations with just the ``lower'' portion of
its spectrum?

Q1a.  How much do they cost?

Q1b.  What is the normal upgrade or re-equipage cycle for these GPS
receivers at your agency?

A1, 1a, 1b.  Wideband, high-precision GPS receivers are commonly used
throughout the construction, mining, surveying, and agricultural
industries. They are also used in shipping port operations, offshore
oil rig positioning, pipeline and cable infrastructure mapping, and
other critical business operations. Within the government, such GPS
equipment is widely used for geodesy. surveying, earthquake monitoring,
weather forecasting, spacecraft control, space-based Earth
observations, sea level measurement, and many other applications.
Wideband GPS receivers are high-end products that are much more
expensive than consumer-grade GPS gear. A typical wideband receiver
costs thousands of dollars per unit. Some cost tens of thousands of
dollars. Many are used in broad networks consisting of hundreds or
thousands of high-precision receivers, such as NOAA's nationwide
network of over 1,800 Continuously Operating Reference Stations (CORS).
The receivers that make up CORS are owned and operated by over 200
government, academic, and private organizations. NOAA presently owns 85
receivers. The cost for replacing these receivers would be
approximately $22,000 to $27,000 per site.
Users in the government and in the commercial sector expect their
capital investments in high-precision GPS equipment to last for many
years--typically, a decade or longer. As a point of reference, in 2008,
when the U.S. Government announced its intent to phase out certain
types of wide band, high precision GPS equipment known as ``semi-
codeless'' receivers, it gave users until December 31, 2020--12 years--
to re-equip. This extended time period was chosen to allow users to
replace their costly GPS equipment as part of their normal
recapitalization and upgrade cycle.

Q2.  LightSquared has agreed to a ``standstill'' on the use of the
``upper'' portion of their spectrum, the portion closest to the GPS
signal. LightSquared has stated they would like to work with the GPS
community to develop mitigation strategies in order to initiate
commercial operations of the upper spectrum within two to three years.

Q2a.  Is NOAA prepared to upgrade or re-equip all their GPS equipment
in that time frame?

Q2b.  What would be the cost to implement this strategy within your
agency?

Q2c.  Is two to three years a reasonable time frame to expect federal
agencies to upgrade or re-equip?

A2-2c.  NOAA is not prepared to support a replacement or upgrade of all
our GPS equipment in order to mitigate LightSquared use of the upper
spectrum within two to three years. At this time, we do not have a
complete estimate of the cost of all NOAA GPS receivers. We do not
believe it is reasonable to expect federal agencies to upgrade or re-
equip any GPS equipment before suitable mitigations have been
identified, fully verified, costed, and made available.

Q3.  LightSquared's modified business plan starts commercial operations
with just the ``lower'' portion of its spectrum and will be limited to
urban areas. Does this satisfy your concerns about short-term
interference issues to wideband and high precision GPS receivers? If
not, why not?

A3.  No, the modifications to LightSquared's plans have not satisfied
NOAA's concerns about interference to wideband, high precision GPS
receivers. During the first round of GPS interference testing, the
limited tests performed using only the lower LightSquared channel
demonstrated significant interference to wideband, high precision GPS
receivers. NOAA supports recent calls for additional testing to better
understand the interference effects of the [ower channel on high
precision receivers, and to find out whether receiver mitigation
techniques proposed by LightSquared are effective.

Q4.  Given that LightSquared has clearly shown that it intends to
ultimately utilize both the upper and the lower portion of its
spectrum, even with its new business proposal to start with just the
lower portion, how is the new proposal really any different to your
agency than their original proposal?

A4.  In terms of the impacts to NOAA operations, and the potential
costs to re-equip, we still have the same concerns we had under
LightSquared's original operating plan.

Q5.  I understand there are now other companies exploring a similar
terrestrial broadband business plan but in an entirely different part
of the spectrum that would not interfere with the GPS signal If we can
accommodate the President's goals for the Broadband Initiative using
spectrum that doesn't interfere with GPS, why should we risk the
taxpayer investment in GPS?

A5.  The President has set a goal of repurposing 500 MHz. The
Administration continues to explore whether LightSquared can implement
its proposed system while protecting GPS.

Q6.  Does NOAA feel that adequate testing has been done on all of the
issues associated with LightSquared interference on the agency's
missions? Should there be more testing on high precision units?

A6.  NOAA concurs with the National Space-Based Positioning,
Navigation, and Timing Executive Committee (PNT EXCOM) that adequate
testing has now been completed and no additional testing is warranted
at this time.

Q7.  Will the filters proposed by JAVAD GNSS and LightSquared mitigate
the interference problem to wideband and high precision GPS receivers?
If not, why not? If so, what testing has been done to demonstrate their
effectiveness? Who should pay for this testing?

A7.  Javad GNSS announced new receivers in September, but we have not
had a chance to test them or review any test results associated with
them. In order to mitigate the interference to wideband and high
precision GPS receivers, the equipment must not only block out the
jamming effects of the LightSquared signal, but also demonstrate high
precision performance similar to today's equipment. In addition to new
receivers, Javad and other companies have also announced filters that
may be retrofitted onto existing high precision equipment. We have not
had an opportunity to test these filters. Again, it is not enough to
block out the jamming effects using filters; existing receivers must be
able to continue delivering high precision measurements, or they will
fail to perform their intended function.

Q8.  Are there currently any mitigation strategies that make sense for
wideband or high precision GPS receivers?

A8.  The National Space-Based PNT Systems Engineering Forum explored a
wide range of potential mitigation strategies but could not identify
any feasible solution other than to move LightSquared's terrestrial
transmissions to another part of the radio spectrum, far away from GPS
bands. At this time, there are no known mitigation strategies for
LightSquared's use ofthe upper 10 MHz band. We believe the power levels
proposed by LightSquared for the lower 10 MHz signal may be impossible
to overcome unless filter solutions are demonstrated that can mitigate
the interference without impacting receiver performance.

Q9.  How much would it cost your agency to mitigate the interference
issues from the LightSquared signal on your missions?

Q9a.  Does your agency currently have funds set aside for this purpose?

A9, 9a.  At this time, we do not have a complete estimate of the cost
of all NOAA GPS receivers that would need to be replaced or upgraded to
mitigate LightSquared's proposed signals. NOAA's current budget does
not include any funding for GPS interference mitigation.

Q10.  Since August 15, the FCC has had the ability to rule on the
LightSquared proposal, and to my knowledge, NTIA has yet to submit
comments to the FCC on behalf of affected agencies.

Q10a.  Has NTIA provided your comments to the FCC?

Q10b.  Will NOAA submit its comments directly to the FCC if NTIA fails
to do so? If so, when?

Q10c.  Would you agree that your agency's assessment should be made
public so that everyone can understand the extent to which LightSquared
interference to GPS will impact the ability of your agency to perform
its duties, and the costs that may be incurred due to this
interference?

A10c .  NOAA has followed, and will continue to follow, the established
process by which federal agencies provide comments to the FCC through
NTIA, the Administration's lead agency for spectrum policy matters,
rather than each agency submitting comments directly to the FCC. The
impact statements contain core deliberative communications from
Executive Branch agencies that provide critical advice to NTIA in its
role as spectrum manager on behalf of the Federal Government. Agency
inputs as part of this deliberative process have not been released to
the public.

Q11.  I understand from my staff that were briefed by NOAA officials
that there are significant issues with interference from the
LightSquared signal on the GPS signal utilized in major NOAA systems
used for weather forecasting, climate observation, search and rescue,
vessel navigation, emergency response mapping, geodesy, time
distribution, and census operations. Do you have an estimate on what
the costs to NOAA may be to mitigate interference from the LightSquared
signal?

A11.  We have some rough estimates on costs to mitigate LightSquared
interference to a few specific NOAA systems, but we do not have an
estimate for the total cost to mitigate all systems across NOAA. If
LightSquared is allowed to proceed with operations involving signals in
both the upper and lower 10 MHz, we are concerned that this would
negatively impact currently operational capabilities essential to our
mission.

Q12.  Given that LightSquared has modified its original business plan
to start commercial operations with just the ``lower'' portion of its
spectrum, the spectrum furthest away from the GPS signal, do you feel
that there has been adequate testing on the impacts to NOAA's systems
if their latest proposal is approved?

A12.  Adequate testing has not been completed at this time. NTIA and
FCC recently called for additional testing to better understand the
interference effects caused by LightSquared's lower channel only. Part
of this testing, focusing on cellular and general/personal navigation
receivers, has just been completed, but the data have not been
analyzed. NOAA actively participated in the latest testing and will
also engage in the future testing involving wideband receivers. Please
note that the latest testing, like the original testing, occurred on an
extremely compressed schedule that prevented us from testing all the
equipment that could potentially be affected by the LightSquared
proposals.

Q13.  I understand it is LightSquared's stated intent to eventually
utilize its entire authorized spectrum, including the upper portion
near the GPS signal, as it builds out its network. How much time would
be required to upgrade existing equipment, and how much would that
cost?

Q13a.  Does NOAA currently have funding available for these upgrades?

Q13b.  What would NOAA cut in order to fund these upgrades?

A13-13b.  At this time, we do not have a complete estimate of the cost
of all NOAA GPS receivers that would need to be replaced or upgraded to
mitigate LightSquarcd's proposed signals. NOAA's current budget does
not include any funding for GPS interference mitigation. NOAA cannot
plan to upgrade or re-equip any GPS equipment before suitable
mitigations have been identified, fully verified, costed, and made
available.

Q14.  The limited testing conducted by the TWG showed significant
interference from the LightSquared signal on high precision GPS
equipment even with the newly proposed LightSquared strategy to limit
initial commercials operations to the ``lower'' spectrum using less
power. LightSquared maintains that filters can be developed to minimize
their interference with the GPS signals.

Q14a.  Can you tell the Committee how NOAA plans to use filters to
mitigate the interference issues?

Q14b.  What are the costs associated with developing these filters?

Q14c.  Since NOAA weather satellites are already in orbit and future
satellites are already designed or built, how would those assets be
affected?

A14-14c.  We have no current plans to use filters to mitigate
interference to our high precision equipment, as the FCC has not
approved LightSquared network operations, and the proposed filters do
not exist yet. We do not know what the filters would cost, but they
will likely cost more than the $300-$800 price that Javad GNSS cited to
retrofit Javad's own products. It is important to note that this cost
only includes the hardware; it does not account for the significant
labor costs involved in retrofitting, re-certifying, and retraining,
nor does it include the operational impacts of taking systems offline
for upgrades. NOAA has hundreds of devices that may need upgrading. In
the case ofthe six COSMIC satellites in space and the NPP satellite
launched October 28, our latest analysis suggests that LightSquared's
lower channel will not affect the receivers used on the COSMIC
satellites. However, we remain concerned about potential interference
to COSMIC if LightSquared eventually operates using its upper channel
since we have no way of modifying the GPS receivers they carry on
board.

Q15.  Approximately two months ago I asked all agencies within this
Committee's jurisdiction to provide the Committee with the comments
they submitted to NTIA regarding the LightSquared proposal. I have not
yet received responses from NOAA, NIST, and DHS. Will NOAA agree to
provide those comments to the Committee so that we, and the American
people, can better understand the impact that the LightSquared proposal
would have on NOAA operations?

A15.  NOAA has followed, and will continue to follow, the established
process by which federal agencies provide comments to the FCC through
NTIA, the Administration's lead agency for spectrum policy matters,
rather than each agency submitting comments directly to the FCC. The
impact statements contain core deliberative communications from
Executive Branch agencies that provide critical advice to NTIA in its
role as spectrum manager on behalf of the Federal Government. Agency
inputs as part of this deliberative process have not been released to
the public.

Q16.  If LightSquared's modified spectrum plan on June 30, 2011 (which
only involves the lower 10 MHz) were to be implemented, what
capabilities in service would the agency lose?

A16.  NOAA has several major capabilities at risk under the lower
channel proposal. We need to do more testing to confirm the scope ofthe
potential impacts. The capabilities include:

(1) GPS-based surveying of airport runways and
shorelines;

(2) monitoring sea level trends (rise and fall), to
protect natural and human communities;

(3) the Ground-Based GPS Meteorology project, which
measures atmospheric moisture to improve short-term forecasts;

(4) issuance of the U.S. Total Electron Content product,
to inform the public of space weather conditions affecting GPS
accuracy; and

(5) maintaining the National Spatial Reference System, to
ensure compatibility among U.S. maps and surveys.

Q17.  Please list the systems and functions that would be impacted by
GPS interference.

Q17a.  How would weather forecasting bc impacted?

A17, 17a.  GPS interference--under both the original and modified
LightSquared plans--threatens to disable or degrade our environmental
satellites and sensors, causing data corruption and gaps that reduce
the accuracy of our weather forecasts and warnings. We are particularly
concerned that our Ground-based GPS Meteorology (GPS-Met) system, which
depends on wideband GPS receivers, could be significantly impacted by
LightSquared's use of the lower channel. Loss of the data from GPS-
based weather instruments would not stop us from predicting hurricanes
and other severe weather, but our forecasts would be less accurate. For
example, we would have to issue storm warnings to broader swaths of the
Nation, causing needless public concern and the expense of needless
evacuations, which can cost up to $1 million per mile of coastline. The
hurricane warnings would become less accurate as landfall is approached
due to LightSquared interference with GPS in the coastal areas.

Q17b.  How would climate observation be impacted?

A17b.  The same sensors we use for weather forecasting feed data into
our longer- term climate models. The term ``climate'' refers to weather
conditions any time in the future beyond two weeks. GPS interference
would lead to degraded climate modeling accuracy.

Q17c.  How wouId search and rescue be impacted?

A17c.  NOAA's Search and Rescue Satellite-Aided Tracking (SARSAT)
system relays distress signals via satellite from emergency beacons to
the ground stations and mission control center, which sends alerts and
beacon locations to search and rescue authorities. It is a major
component of the International COSPAS-SARSAT system, a critical life
and safety service with national and international requirements. SARSAT
ground stations (Local User Terminals, or LUTs) utilize multiple GPS
receivers to determine and maintain precise time. LUTs calibrate the
oscillators that keep time for the SARSAT instruments on GOES and POES
satellites. GPS is also integrated into some distress beacons to
determine the user's location and include it in the distress alert. The
ability of such beacons to independently and more accurately determine
and report their locations greatly improves response times and the
chances of a successful rescue. The current MSS/ATC rules require that
all base stations within 27 kilometer or within the radio horizon of a
SARSAT LUT earth station be coordinated. This requirement applies to
base stations operating throughout the 1525-1559 MHz band which would
cover both the upper and lower 10 MHz signal proposals from
LightSquared. Given the coordination requirements in the current rules
for SARSAT LUTs, GPS receivers used at LUTs should not be impacted by
the LightSquared original or current spectrum proposal. NOAA is
planning to conduct tests with LightSquared to verify the 27-kilometer
coordination distance provides sufficient protection. GPS interference
on land or along coasts would prevent GPS-enabled emergency beacons
from reporting accurate distress locations. We hope to perform
additional testing of GPS-enabled search and rescue beacons in the
future.

Q17d.  How would vessel navigation be impacted?

A17d.  NOAA operates a fleet of 19 vessels in the Pacific and Atlantic
Oceans for oceanographic, atmospheric, fisheries and coral reef
research, nautical charting, environmental monitoring and ocean
exploration. The fleet employs a variety of GPS and differential GPS
receivers for navigation and scientific use. Position Heading and
Attitude Sensors are used to determine the vessel's position, heading
and attitude (heave, pitch and roll) with input from GPS receivers. If
GPS service became unavailable and unreliable, NOAA vessels would be
unable to perform many of their operations and missions. Overcoming
these impacts would require extensive equipment purchases and
installations on NOAA vessels (assuming a replacement system and
equipment are available), the costs of which are not within our current
operational and capital budget.
The existing MSS/ATC rules require that the emissions from a base
station operating in the 1525-1541.5 MHz and 1547.5-1559 MHz bands at
the water edge of a navigable waterway is limited to a total power flux
density (PFD). Given the base station PFD requirements in the current
rules, GPS receivers on board vessels should not be impacted by the
original or current spectrum proposal made by LightSquared. NOAA hopes
to test some marine navigation equipment in a future round of
interference testing to verify this is the case.

Q17e.  How would emergency response mapping be impacted?

A17e.  Following major disasters, NOAA flies aircraft over the affected
areas to collect aerial imagery. Such imagery facilitates disaster
relief efforts in areas affected by natural disasters, such as
hurricanes, earthquakes, floods, etc., as well as manmade disasters
such as oil spills. NOAA also deploys vessels after severe storm events
to scan the seafloor for potential hazardous obstructions that may
impede safe passage of the Marine Transportation System. GPS is used to
georeference the aerial imagery and provides a spatial context to its
suite of ocean mapping sensors, making it possible to identify areas
devoid of landmarks and accurately map underwater hazards. Without
accurate GPS, the locations of these features might not be known, and
NOAA anticipates there would be resulting impacts on marine commerce,
as well as reductions in the U.S. government savings enabled by NOAA
emergency response. Potential loss of savings enabled by NOAA emergency
response imagery is estimated at $1.42 million per 10,000 affected
homes, while a marine transportation shut-down in just Hampton Roads
alone could impede an estimated $5 million worth of cargo every hour.
We have not identified any possible mitigation for the loss of GPS in
this function; NOAA would lose this capability.

Q17f.  How would geodesy be impacted?

A17f.  NOAA's National Geodetic Survey uses a nationwide network of
Continuously Operating Reference Stations (CORS) to define the National
Spatial Reference System (NSRS). CORS is a network of high precision
GPS receivers at over 1,800 fixed reference stations across the United
States that continuously observe the GPS satellite orbits and relay the
data to a central archive. The NSRS and CORS data are distributed to
users via the Online Positioning User Service (OPUS), which processes
and corrects collected GPS measurements with high precision. NSRS also
provides the basis for real time positioning networks (RTNs) operated
by states in support of agriculture, maritime operations, surveying,
floodplain mapping, etc.
Based on initial testing, we believe the wideband, high precision
GPS receivers in the CORS network are at risk of interference even if
LightSquared only uses its lower 10 MHz channel. Without reliable GPS,
the entire CORS network could become unusable, and we would be forced
to use less accurate, more labor-intensive, and more costly methods to
define the NSRS. For example, the cost to update the International
Great Lakes Datum would increase from less than $30 million using GPS
to $160 million using traditional line-of-sight survey methods. The
Nation could lose an estimated $758 million in annual socioeconomic
benefits from CORS. State investments in real time positioning networks
(RTN) that depend on CORS for NSRS access would be lost, as would the
significant economic activities RTNs support. OPUS would not function
as designed, affecting approximately 20,000 users/month, resulting in a
$12 million/month loss of economic benefits. It is unclear at this time
whether filtering is possible without losing the functionality of high
precision GPS receivers. If filtering is possible, upgrading every CORS
site would be time and labor intensive, and likely cost millions of
dollars, a cost that would be borne largely by the States,
universities, and other CORS stakeholders. There would also be
significant outreach and training costs, and increased operating costs.

Q17g.  How would time distribution be impacted?
A17g.  We use GPS time to synchronize nearly all of our environmental
sensors to the same time scale. This ensures that millions of data
inputs are kept in proper chronological order as they are ingested into
models and analyzed. GPS time synchronization is also critical to the
transmission of data from more than 23,000 land, sea, and mobile-based
observational platforms via the GOES and POES Data Collection Systems
(DCS). Examples of platforms include the National Water Level
Observation Network, National Estuarine Research Reserves System-wide
Monitoring Program weather and water quality stations, Coastal Marine
Automated Network, and weather and hurricane observing buoys. Each
platform transmits at predefined wavelengths and times. GPS receivers
discipline the platform transmitters to maintain their frequency and
time assignments. GPS receivers at the GOES and POES ground stations
keep the satellites in time synchronization with the DCS platforms.
Prolonged, continuous GPS interference at DCS platforms would lead
to clock drift. Data could be transmitted at the wrong times, resulting
in lost, missing, or corrupt data affecting weather forecast models and
climate records. After a certain amount of time without access to GPS,
the DCS platform radios are programmed to cease transmission and shut
down, resulting in data gaps. Interference to the GPS receiver on the
GOES-R satellite could prevent it from properly relaying any data from
DCS platforms. To mitigate widespread GPS interference, the entire DCS
would have be re-engineered so fewer platforms transmit data on the
same frequencies per hour. The result would be a drastic (roughly one
order of magnitude) reduction in data collection capability. The cost
to apply the fix to all of the deployed platforms could be
prohibitively expensive, leading to losses of capability.

Q17h.  Would the entire fleet of NOAA satellites be put at risk?

A17h.  Yes. There is a real possibility that GPS interference from
LightSquared's network could adversely affect our satellite ground
stations' ability to command and control our current satellites. Our
future satellites could also be affected if LightSquared transmissions
interfere with their onboard GPS equipment.

Q18.  Does NOAA have any way to mitigate the loss of GPS service?

A18.  We would need to implement mitigations on a system-by-system
basis, as there is no single solution that addresses all types of GPS
uses across NOAA. We have identified potential mitigations to some of
our systems, but almost none of these have been demonstrated, costed,
or tested. Some NOAA functions could be accomplished by reverting to
older technologies and methods, but we would lose operational
capabilities and cost efficiencies associated with GPS. For certain
systems, such as satellites already in space, we have no way to
mitigate potential GPS interference.

Q19.  How much would it cost to replace all of NOAA's GPS receivers?

A19.  At this time, we do not have a complete estimate of the cost of
all NOAA GPS receivers that would need to be replaced or upgraded to
mitigate LightSquared's proposed signals. NOAA cannot plan to upgrade
or re-equip any GPS equipment before suitable mitigations have been
identified, fully verified, costed, and made available.

Q20.  How much would it cost to retrofit all of NOAA's GPS receivers,
if a filter could be developed?

A20.  At this time, we do not have a complete estimate of the cost of
all NOAA GPS receivers that would need to be replaced or upgraded to
mitigate LightSquared's proposed signals. NOAA cannot plan to upgrade
or re-equip any GPS equipment before suitable mitigations have been
identified, fully verified, costed, and made available.

Q21.  What programs would NOAA cut in order to pay for these upgrades?

A21.  If and when we get to the point when we need to pay for upgrades,
we will analyze all of our mission priorities to determine what lost
GPS-based capabilities we need to preserve and what future improvements
or other activities we may need to defer in order to do so. Given that
the cost of mitigation is unknown at this time, it would be impossible
to perform such analysis.

Q22.  Does NOAA have any way to modify, replace, or retrofit GPS
receivers in space, or being prepared for launch?

A22.  No, we do not. If LightSquared transmissions affect those
satellites, we will have no way to mitigate the interference. Those
satellites could lose capability to maintain accurate orbits and orient
themselves correctly, leading to degraded weather forecasts and climate
data collection.

Q23.  If LightSquared was allowed to use both the upper and lower 10
MHz of its spectrum (as it has states it eventually intends to do), how
would NOAA operations be impacted?

A23.  It is expected that interference to GPS from both the upper and
lower LightSquared channels would cause serious performance degradation
or a total loss of mission for a wide range of NOAA's operational
systems, resulting in the loss of critical services and potential loss
of life and property. These systems include major satellite, airborne,
sea-based, and terrestrial systems used for weather forecasting,
climate observation, search and rescue, vessel navigation, nautical
charting, emergency response, and geodesy. Since virtually all of
NOAA's operational systems and functions are integrated with GPS
technology, the impacts would be felt across all of our Line Offices.
The American public, which relies on NOAA for weather forecasting,
research, and life-saving capabilities, could experience severe
degradation or total loss of some products and services.

Q24.  Please describe how the following systems would be impacted by
the LightSquared network (as planned on June 30, 2011). Please include
an assessment of the costs associated with each individual system/
program.

A24.  The LightSquared operating plan of June 30, 2011, still includes
eventual use of the problematic upper 10 MHz channel next to GPS. The
information below is based on our concerns about the upper channel. We
have not yet had a chance to test whether all of the systems and
functions below would be adversely affected by use of the lower 10 MHz
channel only.

GOES/POES/NPP/JPSS

The Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) system
provides continuous monitoring of the Western Hemisphere to support
warnings of tornadoes, hurricanes, and other severe weather directly
affecting U.S. public safety, protection of property, and economic
health and development. The current Polar-orbiting Operational
Environmental Satellite (POES) system, the National Polar-orbiting
Operational Environmental Satellite System Preparatory Project (NPP),
and the future Joint Polar-orbiting Satellite System (JPSS) collect
global data to support weather forecasting, climate change research,
monitor volcanic eruptions, detect forest fires, and support search and
rescue. Today's GOES and POES satellite operation centers use GPS on
the ground to maintain the accuracy of local frequency standards used
for system timing applications in their respective mission systems. The
ground stations routinely upload time corrections to the satellites to
keep them synchronized with the GPS time scale used at the ground
stations and across NOAA. The GOES and POES ground stations also use
GPS time to generate and upload highly accurate spacecraft ephemeris
(orbit information) essential for attitude control and navigation.
Any loss of GPS lock at the operational centers takes a minimum of
20 minutes to re-establish. Prolonged, continuous GPS interference at
the ground stations would cause timing systems to drift out of
specification, causing widespread errors that could not be effectively
managed, even with constant, manual application of time corrections.
This would cause attitude control and timing inaccuracies on the
satellites, degrading the quality of weather and climate measurements
and leading to less accurate warnings of severe weather. Eventually, if
the timing systems get into errors on the order of a few microseconds,
spacecraft could become unstable and ground stations could completely
lose the ability to command and control them. If NOAA ground stations
cannot be protected from interference through LightSquared exclusion
zones or physical relocation, the satellite operation centers would
likely need to procure and maintain new cesium clocks for time
reference at high initial and annual cost.
NOAA's next-generation satellites, including GOES-R, NPP, and JPSS,
will use on-board GPS receivers to provide autonomous orbit
determination and a time reference accurate to 250 nanoseconds. Loss of
GPS on board these satellites would cause them to rely on less accurate
star trackers for pointing, degrading data quality and forecasts. The
next-generation satellites cannot be upgraded as long as a mitigating
filter has not been developed, proven, space-qualified, and made
available. This is especially true for those satellites that are now
being readied for launch. We would have to develop ground-based
ephemeris products and time corrections for the next-generation
satellites, adding cost and labor requirements to the programs.

GOES and POES Data Collection Systems (DCS)

The GOES and POES Data Collection Systems (DCS) enable the
collection of essential data from over 23,000 land, sea, and mobile-
based observational platforms, which use the GOES and POES satellites
as data relays. Examples of platforms include the National Water Level
Observation Network, National Estuarine Research Reserves System-wide
Monitoring Program weather and water quality stations, Coastal Marine
Automated Network, and weather and hurricane observing buoys. Each
platform transmits at predefined wavelengths and times. GPS receivers
discipline the platform transmitters to maintain their frequency and
time assignments. GPS receivers at the GOES and POES ground stations
keep the satellites in time synchronization with the DCS platforms.
Prolonged, continuous GPS interference at DCS platforms would lead
to clock drift. Data could be transmitted at the wrong times, resulting
in lost, missing, or corrupt data affecting weather forecast models and
climate records. After a certain amount of time without access to GPS,
the DCS platform radios are programmed to cease transmission and shut
down, resulting in data gaps. Interference to the GPS receiver on the
GOES-R satellite could prevent it from properly relaying any data from
DCS platforms. To mitigate widespread GPS interference, the entire DCS
would have be re-engineered so fewer platforms transmit data on the
same frequencies per hour. The result would be a drastic (roughly one
order of magnitude) reduction in data collection capability. Applying
the fix to all of the deployed platforms would incur costs in terms of
hardware, labor, and travel to many remotely located platforms.

COSMIC and COSMIC-2

The Constellation Observing System for Meteorology, Ionosphere and
Climate (COSMIC) is designed to fill in global gaps in atmospheric data
where weather balloon observations are scarce. COSMIC involves six
satellites in low Earth orbit that use the GPS radio occultation
(GPSRO) technique to perform atmospheric soundings of pressure,
temperature, water vapor, and electron density. The technique involves
the observation of the GPS satellite signals from other satellites in
space. The signals refract (bend) as they pass through the limb of the
Earth's atmosphere. Measuring the amount of GPS signal refraction
through different ``slices'' of the atmosphere allows researchers to
derive the physical properties of those slices. COSMIC data
significantly improves the modeling of hurricanes and other storm
patterns. COSMIC also collects global data on electron density to
improve space weather forecasts.
GPS interference from the LightSquared network could prevent the
collection of GPSRO data over the United States. At this time, our
analysis suggests that receivers on the COSMIC satellite will not be
affected if LightSquared uses its lower channel only. However, we
remain concerned about potential interference to COSMIC, which is
already suffering from degraded operations as it operates beyond its
design life, if LightSquared eventually operates using its upper
channel. If interference occurs under any scenario, there would be no
possible mitigation; this entire capability would be lost.

SARSAT

NOAA's Search and Rescue Satellite-Aided Tracking (SARSAT) system
relays distress signals via satellite from emergency beacons to the
ground stations and mission control center, which sends alerts and
beacon locations to search and rescue authorities. It is a major
component of the International COSPAS-SARSAT system, a critical life
and safety service with national and international requirements. SARSAT
ground stations (Local User Terminals, or LUTs) utilize multiple GPS
receivers to determine and maintain precise time. LUTs calibrate the
oscillators that keep time for the SARSAT instruments on GOES and POES
satellites. GPS is also integrated into some distress beacons to
determine the user's location and include it in the distress alert. The
ability of such beacons to independently and more accurately determine
and report their locations greatly improves response times and the
chances of a successful rescue.
GPS interference on land or along coasts would prevent GPS-enabled
emergency beacons from reporting accurate distress locations. We hope
to perform additional testing of GPS-enabled search and rescue beacons
in the future.
The current MSS/ATC rules require that all base stations within 27
kilometer or within the radio horizon of a SARSAT LUT earth station be
coordinated. This requirement applies to base stations operating
throughout the 1525-1559 MHz band which would cover both the upper and
lower 10 MHz signal proposals from LightSquared. Given the coordination
requirements in the current rules for SARSAT LUTs, GPS receivers used
at LUTs should not be impacted by the original or current spectrum
proposal made by LightSquared. NOAA is planning to conduct tests with
LightSquared to verify the 27-kilometer coordination distance provides
sufficient protection.

NOAA Emergency Response Imagery

Following major disasters, NOAA flies aircraft over the affected
areas to collect aerial imagery. Such imagery facilitates disaster
relief efforts in areas affected by natural disasters, such as
hurricanes, earthquakes, floods, etc., as well as manmade disasters
such as oil spills. NOAA also deploys vessels after severe storm events
to scan the seafloor for potential hazardous obstructions that may
impede safe passage of the Marine Transportation System. GPS is used to
georeference the aerial imagery and provides a spatial context to its
suite of ocean mapping sensors, making it possible to identify areas
devoid of landmarks and accurately map underwater hazards. Without
accurate GPS, the locations of these features might not be known, and
NOAA anticipates there would be resulting impacts on marine commerce,
as well as reductions in the U.S. Government savings enabled by NOAA
emergency response. Potential loss of savings enabled by NOAA emergency
response imagery is estimated at $1.42 million per 10,000 affected
homes, while a marine transportation shut-down in just Hampton Roads
alone could impede an estimated $5 million worth of cargo every hour.
We have not identified any possible mitigation for the loss of GPS in
this function; NOAA would lose this capability.

Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (GMDSS)

GMDSS is used to facilitate worldwide rescue of distressed vessels
and aircraft. It disseminates navigational warnings, meteorological
warnings and forecasts, and other urgent safety-related information to
all ships on the world's oceans, regardless of location or atmospheric
conditions. The National Weather Service participates in the GMDSS by
preparing meteorological forecasts and warnings for broadcast via
systems that use GPS to program the receiver properly for receipt of
the appropriate data.
The existing MSS/ATC rules require that the emissions from a base
station operating in the 1525-15415 MHz and 1547.5-1559 MHz bands at
the water edge of a navigable waterway is limited to a total power flux
density (PFD). The PFD limits in the current rules were developed in
coordination with the Coast Guard specifically to protect GMDSS
operations in navigable waterways. Given the base station PPD
requirements in the current rules, GMDSS receivers on board vessels
should not be impacted by the original or current spectrum proposals
made by LightSquared. NOAA hopes to test some marine navigation
equipment in a future round ofinterference testing to verify this is
the case.

Next-Generation Radar (NEXRAD)

NEXRAD is a network of 159 high resolution weather surveillance
radars that transmit data that can be processed to show patterns of
precipitation and its movement. Each radar contains a GPS unit for time
stamping of data, troubleshooting, and auditing purposes. NEXRAD
communications require extremely accurate timing and rely on GPS for
Universal Time Coordinated (UTC) stamps.
If the radar loses GPS time, it will rely on local equipment. Over
a prolonged period, the equipment will begin to drift, causing radar
pointing errors and system alarms. Forecasters and air traffic
controllers could generate erroneous reports. This problem is somewhat
mitigated by software that ensures internal timing sources match, even
if they are wrong. If GPS service is not available, the Radar
Operations Center will need to engineer a separate time server and make
a significant number of changes, mostly in software, to rehome radar
sub-components to the new time source.

Continuously Operating Reference System (CORS)

CORS is a network of high precision GPS receivers at over 1,800
fixed reference stations across the United States that continuously
observes the GPS satellite orbits and relays the data to a central
archive. CORS provides the means for defining the National Spatial
Reference System (NSRS), the common standard for all U.S. geospatial
activities such as mapping and surveying. The NSRS and CORS data are
distributed to users via the Online Positioning User Service (OPUS),
which processes and corrects collectcd GPS measurements with high
precision. NSRS also provides the basis for real time positioning
networks (RTNs) operated by states in support of agriculture, maritime
operations, surveying, floodplain mapping, etc.
Based on initial testing, we believe thc wideband, high precision
GPS receivers in the CORS network are at risk of interference even if
LightSquared only uses its lower 10 MHz channel. Without reliable GPS,
the entire CORS network could become unusable, and we would be forced
to use less accurate, more labor-intensive, and more costly methods to
define the NSRS. For example, the cost to update the International
Great Lakes Datum would increase from less than $30 million using GPS
to $160 million using traditional line-of-sight survey methods. The
Nation could lose an estimated $758 million in annual socioeconomic
benefits from CORS. State investments in real time positioning networks
(RTN) that depend on CORS for NSRS access would be lost, as would the
significant economic activities RTNs support. OPUS would not function
as designed, affecting approximately 20,000 users/month, resulting in a
$12 million/month loss of economic benefits. It is unclear at this time
whether filtering is possible without losing the functionality of high
precision GPS receivers. If filtering is possible, upgrading every CORS
site would be time and labor intensive and likely cost millions of
dollars, a cost that would be borne largely by the states,
universities, and other CORS stakeholders. There would also be
significant outreach and training costs, and increased operating costs.

Aeronautical Survey Program

NOAA provides airport geodetic control, runway, navigational aid,
obstruction, and other aeronautical data that is critical to the
operation of the National Airspace System. This data is used to develop
runway approach procedures and obstruction charts. We use high
precision GPS equipment to perform the field surveys.
Based on initial testing, we believe the wideband, high precision
GPS receivers we use for aeronautical surveying are at risk if
LightSquared uses its lower channel only. If our aeronautical surveying
equipment were to cease functioning, we would have to conduct the
surveys using traditional methods that are less accurate, resulting in
decreased safety at the airports we survey in the future. Using
traditional surveying methods would also significantly increase the
time and cost, and reduce the number of surveys that could be performed
each year. A single survey mark cost $14,649 in 1984 using traditional
methods vs. $822 in 2004 with GPS, and the team costs dropped from
$439,455 to $24,647.
The existing MSS/ATC rules require that the emissions from a base
station operating in the 1525-1559 MHz band at the edge of all airport
runways and aircraft stand areas, including takeoff and land paths, is
limited to a total power flux density (PPD). The planned future round
of interference testing involving high precision GPS equipment should
provide data on whether the existing PFD limits provide adequate
protection for ground surveying equipment at airports.

Coast Mapping Program

NOAA provides the critical baseline data for demarcating the
Nation's marine territorial limits, including its Exclusive Economic
Zone, and for the geographic reference needed to maintain coastal
resources and many other uses. We use GPS to georeference shoreline
information during data collection.
GPS interference would prevent the georeferencing. We have not
identified any possible mitigation for the loss of GPS; NOAA would lose
capability.

National Data Buoy Center Observation System

NOAA's National Data Buoy Center operates a network of weather and
hurricane observing buoys, coastal stations, the Tropical Atmosphere
Ocean climate monitoring buoys, and tsunami detection stations that
provide hourly observations on wind, atmospheric, and sea surface
conditions. The system depends on continuous GPS capability for
positioning, data acquisition system timing, and transmission of data.
GPS interference in coastal areas would cause weather and hurricane
observing buoys and Coastal Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) stations
to cease transmitting all weather data via GOES satellite (see GOES and
POES Data Collection Systems). The positions of affected buoys would be
unknown. Affected buoys that break free of their moorings would not be
tracked, causing a navigation hazard and loss of the buoy. To mitigate
the loss of GPS, we could outfit the weather and hurricane buoys and
the C-MAN stations with IRIDIUM data transmission capability at an
estimated cost of $2 million (one-time cost) plus an annual maintenance
cost of $1 million. If expedited deployment of new equipment were
required to restore service, the additional cost is estimated to be $25
million for additional labor and ship time. The estimated cost to
replace buoys that go adrift and become lost at sea due to the
inability to track buoy position, cover additional logistics costs for
transportation to and from ports, and provide larger vessels for the
additional buoy spares would be $14 million per year. This is a
recurring cost and includes equipment purchases and preparation of 35
spare buoys per year.

Radiosonde Upper-Air Observing System

NOAA flies instruments called radiosondes on weather balloons to
measure profiles of pressure, temperature, and relative humidity from
the Earth's surface to the mid-stratosphere. The data is used by
weather forecasters in numerical prediction models and by the aviation
industry for use in air traffic. Each instrument includes a GPS
receiver to provide accurate position and velocity data as it is
carried aloft. The velocity data is used to compute the winds aloft and
the positioning data is used to determine the instrument's height. One
site uses GPS height data to derive the air-pressure measurement, and
there are actions under way to implement the same technology in all
radiosondes.
Prolonged, continuous GPS interference would render our radiosondes
incapable of reporting any wind data, directly impacting the National
Weather Service's numerical weather prediction models, aviation weather
products, independent reference for calibration of satellite remote
sensing systems, and international commitments to exchange global
atmospheric wind and thermodynamic information. Alternate methods would
cost approximately $1 million for research and development and up to
$20 million to implement. They would require at least five years to
develop and as long as 15 years to implement, yet produce less data
accuracy and quality. One alternative method is to triangulate
radiosonde course and speed for computation of wind data. A second
method is to modify the system to operate as a radio-theodolite and use
radio-direction finding to compute wind data.

GPS Dropsondes

NOAA's ``hurricane hunter'' aircraft release instruments called
dropsondes into the eye of hurricanes to obtain data, enabling
forecasters to track and predict hurricane movements. This results in
warnings that save human lives and property. These data are also used
by the hurricane research community. Each dropsonde contains a GPS
receiver, along with pressure, temperature, and humidity sensors to
capture atmospheric profiles and thermodynamic data.
Interference with the GPS signals would affect hurricane
reconnaissance and surveillance missions, especially along the
immediate coast of the United States, and would hamper any ability to
accurately predict the strength, location, and direction of a hurricane
or cyclone and to implement disaster management plans. If the
LightSquared system interferes with the signals from dropsondes, this
would require dropsonde redesign efforts exceeding $200,000, including
redesign, prototypes, and testing.

Hydrological and Geospatial Data

NOAA's National Weather Service relies upon geospatial hydrologic
data received from numerous internal and external sources, with over
14,000 data collection platforms. These data support weather forecasts
and storm alerts of significant rainfall/snowfall. The data collection
platforms use GPS to correct normal clock drift.
Disruption of the GPS signal would result in transmission of data
at incorrect times, which may result in lost, missing, or corrupt data,
affecting the National Weather Service's ability to provide hydrologic
forecast services. To mitigate widespread GPS interference, the entire
data collection system would have be re-engineered so fewer platforms
transmit data on the same frequencies per hour. The result would be a
drastic (roughly one order of magnitude) reduction in data collection
capability. Applying the fix to all of the deployed platforms would
incur costs in terms of hardware, labor, and travel to many remotely
located platforms.

Digital Gamma Radiation Detection Systems

NOAA flies digital gamma radiation detection systems on aircraft to
measure soil moisture and snow water. These systems are often the sole
source of in situ data available during floods driven by spring
snowmelt, such as those experienced recently in the Upper Midwest. The
data streams provided by these systems contain GPS-derived location
information, necessary for assimilating gamma-based measurements into
river forecasting decision support systems.
Imprecise gamma flight line location would decrease the accuracy,
precision, and confidence of flood forecast models dependent on these
data. The gamma survey system's GPS data stream could be replaced with
the aircraft's GPS location data stream at a cost of about $10,000. But
if the avionics were also degraded by LightSquared transmissions, no
mitigation would be possible, and this current NOAA capability would be
lost.

Observation Station Location Data

Accurate and precise measurements of observation station locations
are essential to the assimilation and validation of ground-based
observations of hydrometeorological variables. Station locations are
routinely measured using commercial GPS receivers.
In the absence of GPS, the National Weather Service would use USGS
topographic maps to determine the locations of observation stations.
This imprecise data will have an unacceptable effect on model-generated
forecasts of water levels and flooding by decreasing model confidence
levels. We have not identified any possible mitigation for the loss of
GPS; NOAA would lose capability.

Tsunami Warning Centers

The National Weather Service operates tsunami warning centers in
Alaska and Hawaii as part of an international cooperative effort among
26 member states to save lives and protect property. Both centers are
highly dependent on reliable GPS to conduct their mission. Both use
seismic and sea-level data, nearly all of which are timed using GPS
clocks, to detect and analyze earthquakes for their tsunami potential
and to detect and measure tsunami waves to forecast their impact.
Further, all of the computers within the two centers that are used to
do the analysis and create and issue the products are timed using GPS
clocks.
In the presence of GPS interference, the clocks would begin
drifting such that within a fairly short time--probably less than a
day--timings would be affected, degrading the tsunami warning centers'
performance. Also, many of the coastal sea level stations have a small
(as small as five seconds) time window in which to send their data to
the satellite. If the local clock drifts out of the window, then the
transmission can overlap with the transmission from another gauge,
destroying both sets of data. To mitigate widespread GPS interference,
the entire data collection system would have be re-engineered so fewer
platforms transmit data on the same frequencies per hour. The result
would be a drastic (roughly one order of magnitude) reduction in data
collection capability. Applying the fix to all of the deployed
platforms would incur costs in terms of hardware, labor, and travel to
many remotely located platforms.

Pacific Island GPS Sensors

These sensors provide continuous total accumulated moisture within
the atmosphere for a better depiction of the atmosphere as conditions
change. They also support atmospheric modeling. The sensors provide
geologic information on island vertical and horizontal displacement.
These data also provide information about the duration and strength of
seismic activities. GPS provides time and position data as well as
detection of water vapor based on the atmospheric effects on the GPS
signals.
GPS interference would result in a loss of sensor data. We have not
identified any possible mitigation for the loss of GPS; NOAA would lose
capability. These sensors provide valuable information in the Pacific
that cannot otherwise be obtained without great cost to the Nation.

Alaska Fisheries Science Center (AFSC)

The Alaska Fisheries Science Center (AFSC) generates scientific
information and analysis necessary for the conservation, management,
and utilization of the Alaska region's living marine resources, and GPS
is linked to every geo-referenced piece of data collected for this
purpose. It is used for accurate data mapping, precise sampling, and
geographic information system analysis to understand distributions of
fish, protected species, habitat biota, oil, and marine chemistry. For
instance, it is used to follow marine mammals through tracking collars
and geo-referenced photography. Without GPS, mammal positions would
have to be calculated with Service Argos, with a significant loss of
precision. Additionally observer data, fisheries survey data, acoustic
mapping and hydrographic mapping all rely on the accuracy and
dependability of GPS. The above-mentioned benefits of GPS are not
specific to AFSC. Over the last decade almost every fisheries science
program and commercial fishing operation has come to rely on GPS to
provide economical, accurate, high-quality positioning information.
Emergency beacon (G-EPIRB) signals use GPS positions and are
critical to personnel safety, particularly for those operating in
remote and harsh environments such as the Alaska region. AFSC issues
hundreds of personal locator beacons to staff and contracted fishery
observers. It also distributes several dozen GPS units used by field
researchers and small vessel operators when operating in remote areas.
NOAA vessels and small boats rely entirely on GPS for positioning and
navigation of field operations, even in waters considered near shore.
In emergency situations, GPS degradation could prevent fast responses
and position certainty. As a result, personnel would be exposed to more
safety risks than their jobs currently pose.
Without GPS, economical and accurate positioning and geospatial
referencing will be much more expensive, time consuming, and
inaccurate. At a minimum, service interruptions would compromise our
ability to enforce fishing regulations (vessel monitoring system
accuracy), monitor habitat changes, and collect accurate geospatial
research and commercial catch data. At worst, it could invalidate data
needed to support decision-making actions required by the Magnuson-
Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act, the Endangered Species
Act, the Marine Mammal Protection Act, and a host of other legislation.

National Estuarine Research Reserve System (NERRS)

The NERRS System-wide Monitoring Program provides high-resolution
data on water quality and weather at 28 coastal reserves across the
Nation. Sentinel site networks are now being established to track the
impacts of coastal uplift and sea level rise on coastal ecosystems.
Monitoring of ecological observations within an accurate and consistent
geospatial framework requires high precision GPS. It is used to connect
tidal and geodetic datums, establish spatial relationships between
trends observed within a network of surface elevation tables, and
monitor the rate of local vertical land movement, as well as the height
of the marsh surface and ground water relative to local sea level. In
many locations, elevation changes below one centimeter can have
profound effects on the structure and function of coastal ecosystems;
therefore high-precision GPS capability is critical.
Based on initial testing, we believe the wideband, high precision
GPS equipment used to measure sea level trends is at risk even under
the LightSquared lower channel only. If high precision GPS service
became unavailable or unreliable, it would have profound effects on the
ability to monitor impacts of sea level changes and inundation from
storms and coastal flooding on coastal communities and ecosystems. This
would undermine the ability of communities to identify their risk to
sea level change and episodic storm events. The loss of GPS service
would require extensive reliance on field-based leveling, which is
exponentially more expensive in terms of time and labor costs.

Coastal Services Center

The Center works with state and local coastal programs to determine
data needs and deliver the data, tools and training needed to turn
these data into useful information relative to socioeconomics,
orthoimagery, marine boundaries, land cover, hydrography, elevation,
etc. GPS receivers are used in marking boundaries and mapping
shorelines, monitoring erosion, assisting with dock permitting and
other management plans, tracking endangered animals, and rapidly
assimilating post-storm damage assessments. LIDAR elevation mapping and
aerial photography use high precision GPS. Validation of the mapped
data also requires high precision GPS.
If GPS services were not available, elevation products needed to
meet requirements for flood mapping and sea level rise mapping may not
be possible. It was only with the advent of high precision GPS that
wide-area coverage at the required accuracies became feasible. Aerial
photography could still be done, but at additional costs for crews to
put down target panels and survey them in. That surveying would also
have to be done with older, more expensive, technology. Costs might be
anywhere from 50-100 percent greater.

Center for Operational Oceanograpbic Products and Services (CO-OPS)

CO-OPS provides the national infrastructure, science, and technical
expertise to monitor, assess, and distribute oceanographic data for
coastal waters, including historical and real-time observations and
predictions of tide, current, water level, and other coastal
oceanographic data. GPS time synchronization is necessary for the time
stamping of data shared and ingested to produce products (six-minute
data, high and low data, hourly heights, and datums).
If the GPS signals are degraded or not reliable, all CO-OPS
operations would be affected. Loss of GPS time stamps would prevent
data processing and reduce support to the Physical Oceanographic Real-
Time System, hydrographic surveys photogrammetry, National Water Level
Observation Network, VDatum, COASTAL partners, OCS, other federal
agencies, and the general public. We have not identified any possible
mitigation for the loss of GPS; NOAA would lose capability.

Bench Mark Elevation Data

This data is necessary to vertically reference water level
observations to establish tidal datums. Without a vertical datum
reference, water level data have minimal value and cannot be used to
update tidal datums, derive nautical chart depths from bathymetric
survey data, or establish privately owned land, state-owned land,
territorial sea, exclusive economic zone, and high seas boundaries. CO-
OPS collects GPS observations on bench marks and submits the data to
the OPUS database.
Lost or degraded GPS signals would affect the collection of
ellipsoid elevations, geodetic elevations and hence would affect the
compilation of the VDatum Complete List for the VDatum Program, which
in turn would affect the development and update of the VDatum models.
We have not identified any possible mitigation for the loss of GPS;
NOAA would lose capability.

National Current Observations Program (NCOP)

NCOP supports tidal current predictions for various coastal regions
and location as well as recovery of expensive subsurface measurement
systems. It relies on GPS position data to mark locations of moored
current measurement instrumentation.
Loss of GPS would result in inaccurate or missing position data and
potential loss of instrumentation. We have not identified any possible
mitigation for the loss of GPS; NOAA would lose capability.

Sea Surface Radar Altimeters

These instruments measure sea state and ocean currents to improve
weather and climate models, as well as models used to inform NOAA and
Coast Guard search-and-rescue efforts and other operations at sea. GPS
time synchronization enables time-based sharing of radio frequencies
among dozens of radars. This capability will soon become a requirement
by international and domestic regulations for all high frequency
radars, as it allows for nearly simultaneous use of the same transmit
frequency.
Loss of GPS time synchronization would prevent the radar network
from properly sharing the radio frequencies, degrading data collection
capabilities and reducing the accuracy of meteorological models. The
systems would not comply with the impending regulations. The systems
would be required to operate on a non-interference basis. Radars would
need much more spectrum to continue operating at current levels.
Increased spectrum requirement will result in lost capability due to
lack of available frequencies. Capability would be lost in support of
Coast Guard search and rescue activities and NOAA/Coast Guard oil spill
response. We have not identified any possible mitigation for the loss
of GPS; NOAA would lose capability.

Ship Mounted Current Profiler Systems

NOAA vessels measure sea currents by combining GPS motion data
(ship's speed over ground, course over ground, and heading) with
acoustic profiler data to obtain current measurements referenced to
earth-fixed coordinates. In coastal areas where the impact would be
greatest, interference to GPS on our vessels would lead to inaccurate
or missing position and motion data. We have not identified any
possible mitigation for the loss of GPS; NOAA would lose capability.

NOAA

Vessel Navigation Systems

NOAA operates a fleet of 19 vessels in the Pacific and Atlantic
Oceans for oceanographic, atmospheric, fisheries and coral reef
research, nautical charting, environmental monitoring and ocean
exploration. The fleet employs a variety of GPS and differential GPS
receivers for navigation and scientific use. Position Heading and
Attitude Sensors are used to determine the vessel's position, heading
and attitude (heave, pitch and roll) with input from GPS receivers.
The existing MSS/ATC rules require that the emissions from a base
station operating in the 1525-J541.5 MHz and 1547.5-1559 MHz bands at
the water edge of a navigable waterway is limited to a total power flux
density (PFD). Given the base station PFD requirements in the current
rules GPS receivers on board vessels should not be impacted by the
original or current spectrum proposal made by LightSquared. NOAA hopes
to test some marine navigation equipment in a future round of
interference testing to verify if this is the case.

Electronic Chart Display (ECDIS) and Information System/Electronic
Navigational Charts (ENC)

ECDIS and ENCs replace paper nautical charts aboard maritime
vessels. The International Maritime Organization (IMO) mandated
carriage of ECDlS and ENCs aboard commercial vessels starting in July
2012. An ECDIS displays the information from an ENC and integrates
current position information from GPS and other navigational sensors.
Interference to GPS on vessels would lead to incorrect operation of
IMO-mandated ECDIS and ENCs for navigation. We have not identified any
possible mitigation for the loss of GPS; NOAA would lose capability.

Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUV)

NOAA uses AUVs in robotic studies of lakes, the ocean, and the
ocean floor. A variety of sensors measures the concentration of various
elements or compounds, the absorption or reflection of light, and map
features of the ocean. AUVs navigate using an underwater acoustic
positioning system. Surface references, such as a support ship, use
baseline positioning to calculate where the AUV is relative to the
known (GPS) position of the surface craft. When operating completely
autonomously, the AUV will surface and take its own GPS fix.
Interference with GPS positioning data along U.S. coasts would
render information mapped by the UAV inaccurate or speculative. We have
not identified any possible mitigation for the loss of GPS; NOAA would
lose capability.

Ocean Mapping Sensor Network

NOAA uses this network to acquire hydrographic data to update the
Nation's nautical charts and navigation products. NOAA is responsible
for surveying 3.2 million miles of the U.S. Exclusive Economic Zone.
GPS provides precise positioning for acquiring hydrographic survey
data. NOAA's Office of Coast Survey relies heavily on this data to
accurately position its sensors.
Our analysis ofthe LightSquared testing data suggests that our
survey boats could be affected from as far as 1.2 miles from shore. We
have not identified any possible mitigation for the loss of GPS; NOAA
would lose capability.

Ground-Based GPS Meteorology Project (GPS-Met)

GPS-Met provides atmospheric profiles across the United States in
support of improved weather forecasting, climate monitoring, and
satellite sensor calibration and validation. GPS-Met utilizes high
precision GPS receivers co-located with surface meteorological sensors
to calculate the total precipitable water vapor directly above the
site, vastly improving short-term weather forecasting.
Based on initial tests, we believe the wideband, high-precision GPS
equipment used by GPS-Met is at risk even if LightSquared uses its
lower channel only. GPS interference would prevent GPS-Met data and
products from being assimilated into operational weather models used by
forecasters for nowcasting. Model and forecaster prediction skill,
especially during severe weather, would fall. Atmospheric river
observatories and warning systems would be rendered largely useless.
Independent monitoring of weather balloon and aircraft moisture
observation quality would stop, allowing increased inclusion of errors
in models, time series, climate records, and satellite data products.
As GPS-Met is based entirely on wideband GPS observations, we stand to
lose this entire capability.

Scanning Doppler Lidar Systems

These systems measure atmospheric wind velocity in a large cone and
produce three-dimensional portraits of atmospheric activity. The Lidar
systems are operated on moving platforms, including research vessels
and aircraft. Differential GPS is used to measure the platform
orientation and motion, control the pointing of the scanning device,
and remove the impact of the platform's motion from the measurements.
GPS interference is already a problem for the sensitive
differential GPS navigation systems around ports. Increased
interference to vessels near coastal urban areas or to aircraft over
land would worsen the situation. There is currently no backup
navigation system for making stabilized Doppler Lidar wind
measurements. We have not identified any possible mitigation for the
loss of GPS; NOAA would lose capability.

Wind Profiling Radars

NOAA operates a network of 35 wind profiling radars around the
United States. They detect wind speed and direction at various
elevations to support forecasting and timely reporting for flight
planning. GPS is used to synchronize the time stamps across the
national network and provide location information for collected data.
Without GPS time stamps and georeference information, data cannot
be properly ingested into weather models, degrading the accuracy of
forecasts. To mitigate GPS interference, NOAA could purchase and
maintain atomic time standards for each of the 35 radar sites at great
expense. However, even absent GPS interference, the wind profilers arc
expected to experience interruptions in the future once the European
Galileo satellites, which operate on the same frequency as the
profilers, are launched.

Space Weather Prediction Center

SWPC provides space weather information and warnings to a variety
of customers including airlines, power distribution systems, oil rigs
and survey vessels, marine construction surveyors, satellite operators,
and GPS users. It also produces ionospheric models that can be applied
as corrections to improve GPS positioning accuracy. SWPC uses networks
of high precision GPS reference stations to observe GPS signal delays
that reveal the electron content of the upper atmosphere.
Based on initial testing, we believe the wideband, high precision
GPS equipment used by SWPC is at risk even if LightSquared uses its
lower channel only. GPS interference would degrade the accuracy and
usefulness of SWPC products such as the U.S. Total Electron Content
(US-TEC) product, which informs surveyors, construction operations, and
other customers about space weather conditions affecting GPS accuracy.
We have not identified any possible mitigation for the loss of GPS;
NOAA would lose capability.

Frequency Measurement and Analysis Service; Time Measurement and
Analysis Service/Phasor Measurement Units/Inter-American
Metrology System

NOAA is not involved with these particular systems and functions.
Responses by Mr. Victor Sparrow, Director, Spectrum Policy,
Space Communications and Navigation,
Space Operations Mission Directorate,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1.  How common are the wideband and high precision GPS receivers that
are at risk of interference from LightSquared's modified business plan
that starts commercial operations with just the ``lower'' portion of
its spectrum?

Q1a.  How much do they cost?

Q1b.  What is the normal upgrade or re-equipage cycle for these GPS
receivers at your agency?

A1, 1a, 1b.  Radio occultation techniques used by Global Positioning
System (GPS) receivers (also known as GPS occultation science) are
believed to be the most susceptible to severe interference from the
LightSquared network and were studied both in the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC)-mandated technical Working group (TWG)
and the National Space-based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing (PNT)
Systems Engineering Forum (NPEF). Both space-based and ground-based
radio occultation science programs would be affected:

Space Missions Affected: NASA estimates 20-plus
satellites will be launched for radio occultation measurements over the
next 10 years. The normal upgrade cycle for flight receivers is 10
years, and the effective mission length of these satellites has been
about eight years.

Ground-based Tracking Networks Affected: For impacts to
NASA ground-based GPS occultation science on the Global Differential
GPS (GDGPS) network, the cost is approximately $50 thousand per
station, for a total of at least 100 NASA sites, which results in a
conservative estimate of $5 million. An additional 500-plus sites for
International Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) Service (IGS)
totals $25 million, with an additional $50 million for the National
Science Foundation (NSF) Plate Boundary Observatory.

Uninhabited Aerial Vehicle Synthetic Aperture Radar
(UAVSAR): NASA operates aircraft-based radar which uses both augmented
GPS to provide accurate real-time navigation and centimeter-level post
processed positioning to achieve the precision required for
interferometric synthetic aperture radar.

There are, however, additional impacts to other programs and
missions, including:

Geodetic Science: It is difficult to estimate the costs
associated with disturbing the GPS-based measurements used to maintain
and update the reference frame, but these could be significant because
such errors will in turn affect high precision applications that use
GPS for climate and environmental monitoring.

Tracking of Launch Vehicles: NASA uses GPS for tracking
launch vehicles at Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) and as the primary
tracking source for the Autonomous Flight Safety System (AFSS) being
developed by WFF and Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA also uses
commercial rockets to launch science missions from the Eastern and
Western Air Force Ranges that increasingly rely on GPS. Not knowing
where a vehicle is during a launch because of GPS interference could
result in a rocket and its payload being destroyed unnecessarily.

Since the interference degradation from LightSquared emissions is
highly dependent on the specific design of the GPS receiver front-end,
the effect on other space receivers is unknown at this time.

Q2.  LightSquared has agreed to a ``standstill'' on the use of the
``upper'' portion of their spectrum, the portion closest to the GPS
signal. LightSquared has stated they would like to work with the GPS
community to develop mitigation strategies in order to initiate
commercial operations of the upper spectrum within two to three years.

Q2a.  Is NASA prepared to upgrade or re-equip all their GPS equipment
in that time frame?

Q2b.  Can you tell the members of the Committee what the cost would be
to implement this strategy within your agency?

Q2c.  Is two to three years a reasonable time frame to expect federal
agencies to upgrade or re-equip?

A2-2c.  The proposed filters are not yet available to NASA, and
preliminary discussions with filter manufacturers (e.g., Delta
Microwave, which was referred to NASA by LightSquared) indicate that
filtering for high precision GPS receivers would result in significant
degradation in receiver performance and accuracy. If interference
mitigation techniques are identified, testing would be necessary to
determine the impact on receiver performance.
A more realistic time frame to upgrade and/or re-equip missions
under development has been demonstrated by the U.S. Department of
Defense (DoD), which provided a decade of transition time for worldwide
GPS codeless/semi-codeless users to migrate to the new L2C signal by
2020 to enable unfettered GPS Precise Positioning System (GPS PPS) Flex
Power on the modernized GPS constellation.
It will take 10 or more years for most of the GPS receivers that
are operating in space today (or close to launch now) to reach the end
of their operational life. It is not feasible to retro-fit satellites
that are already on orbit, so harmful interference would directly
compromise these missions.

Q3.  LightSquared's modified business plan starts commercial operations
with just the ``lower'' portion of its spectrum and will be limited to
urban areas. Does this satisfy your concerns about short-term
interference issues to wideband and high precision GPS receivers? If
not, why not?

A3.  NASA testing shows that the use of just the lower 10 MegaHertz
(MHz) band still results in significant interference to NASA's next
generation space-based GPS receiver and terrestrial high precision
science receivers. Further, NASA expects that the addition of filters
to reduce the interference from the lower 10 MHz LightSquared signal
would cause significant performance degradation. If interference
mitigation techniques are identified, testing would be necessary to
determine the impact on receiver performance.

Q4.  Given that LightSquared has clearly shown that it intends to
ultimately utilize both the upper and the lower portion of its
spectrum, even with its new business proposal to start with just the
lower portion, how is the new proposal really any different to your
agency than their original proposal?

A4.  For GPS high precision receivers, there would be very little
difference; NASA's testing shows that the use of just the lower 10 MHz
band still results in significant interference to the Agency's
missions, particularly Uninhabited Aerial Vehicle-Synthetic Aperture
Radar (UAVSAR), geodetic science, and launch operations. Future GPS
flight receivers will need to be equipped to deal with all LightSquared
signals that may be broadcast during the mission lifetime.

Q5.  I understand there are now other companies exploring a similar
terrestrial broadband business plan but in an entirely different part
of the spectrum that would not interfere with the GPS signal. If we can
accommodate the President's goals for the Broadband Initiative using
spectrum that doesn't interfere with GPS, why should we risk the
taxpayer investment in GPS?

A5.  NASA fully supports the Administration's goal of identifying
additional spectrum for broadband use, and will continue to
cooperatively investigate and assess mitigation strategies, while
seeking not to compromise the performance of NASA's GPS-dependent
systems or missions.

Q6.  Does NASA feel that adequate testing has been done on all of the
issues associated with LightSquared interference on their agency's
missions? Should there be more testing on high precision units?

A6. Since the interference degradation from the LightSquared emission
is highly dependent on the specific design of the GPS receiver front-
end, the effect on other space receivers is unknown at this time.
Additional analyses are also needed for ``non-high-precision''
receivers used by NASA and other space operators, in applications such
as: (1) International Space Station (ISS) operations, including human
and/or automated space vehicles performing rendezvous with the Station;
and (2) launch vehicles and/or space vehicles performing re-entry and
landing where a vehicle could be operating much closer to an
interfering source.
The issue of interference with GPS receivers from LightSquared
handset emissions has not been completely tested. In NASA's view,
extensive testing of handset emissions is a necessity before any
LightSquared field use.

Q7.  Will the filters proposed by JAVAD GNSS and LightSquared mitigate
the interference problem to wideband and high precision GPS receivers?
If not, why not? If so, what testing has been done to demonstrate their
effectiveness?

A7.  These filters have not been made available to NASA for assessment.
Preliminary discussions with experienced filter manufacturers (e.g.,
Delta Microwave) indicate that filtering for high precision GPS
receivers would result in significant degradation in receiver
performance and accuracy.
The JAVAD website states, ``We have also invented a unique solution
for timing applications in which we dynamically compensate for group
delay variations with the accuracy of better than 100 picoseconds. We
are developing techniques to reduce this to better than 10
picoseconds.'' NASA has not had the opportunity to test the accuracy of
these statements but, even if accurate, 10 picoseconds is 30 times
higher than nominal system noise error at C/No = 52 dB-Hz, which
amounts to independent 1-second errors of 0.3 ps at the GPS L1
frequency (100 picoseconds is 300 times higher), and would still fail
to meet the requirements of NASA missions such as GRACE (which requires
0.060 nanosecond precision to enable gravity field measurements).
In addition, these filters would only remove the signals in the
lower portion of the spectrum allocated to LightSquared; if the company
eventually utilizes the upper portion, as well, the filters would not
mitigate signal interference.

Q8.  Are there currently any mitigation strategies that make sense for
wideband or high precision GPS receivers?

A8.  NASA is not aware of any mitigation strategies at the proposed
LightSquared frequencies that would not impose significant performance
penalties on the high precision receivers. If interference mitigation
techniques are identified, testing would be necessary to determine the
impact on receiver performance.

Q9.  How much would it cost your agency to mitigate the interference
issues from the LightSquared signal on your missions?

Q9a.  Does your agency currently have funds set aside for this purpose?

A9, 9a.  NASA is not aware of any mitigation strategies that would not
impose significant performance penalties on its high precision
receivers. No funds have been authorized or set aside for mitigation of
interference impacts due to LightSquared emissions in the upper 10 MHz
portion of the spectrum. Additionally, many receivers are already
serving operational missions on-orbit, so there is no way to retrieve
the satellite to retrofit the impacted receivers if the upper 10 MHz is
used by LightSquared. We are also concerned about the impact to the
next generation of GPS receivers used for future missions that could be
impacted by LightSquared emissions in both the upper and lower 10 MHz
areas.

Q10.  Since August 15, the FCC has had the ability to rule on the
LightSquared proposal, and to my knowledge, NTIA has yet to submit
comments to the FCC on behalf of affected agencies.

Q10a.  Has NTIA provided your comments to the FCC?

Q10b.  Will NASA submit its comments directly to the FCC if NTIA fails
to do so? If so, when?

Q10c.  Would you agree that your agency's assessment should be made
public so that everyone can understand the extent to which LightSquared
interference to GPS will impact the ability of your agency to perform
its duties, and the costs that may be incurred due to this
interference?

A10-10b.  To NASA's knowledge, NTIA has not provided formal comments,
on behalf of the Administration, to the FCC on the LightSquared
proceedings. However, NTIA did provide the NPEF Report to the FCC on
July 6, 2011. NASA has no plans to submit comments directly to the FCC,
but reserves the option to do so. NASA provided its assessment in
testimony to the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology on
September 8, 2011.

Q11.  The NASA letter to the NTIA states that NASA extensively uses
high precision GPS receivers for scientific applications and ``we have
seen no evidence that these receivers can be filtered without
significantly reducing receiver accuracy and performance.''

Q11a.  Is additional testing necessary to determine the impacts on
these high precision GPS receivers?

Q11b.  Should LightSquared be required to satisfy all members of the
GPS community, including those high precision users that are not
represented by industry, before they're allowed to commence commercial
operations?

A11-11b.  The interference degradation from the LightSquared emission
is highly dependent on the specific design of the GPS receiver front-
end, so the effect on other high precision space receivers is unknown
at this time.
Additional testing could help to quantify the degree of impact to
high precision GPS receivers, but it is clear that significant impacts
will be introduced with current LightSquared plans unless interference
mitigation techniques are identified that do not impact performance. In
NASA's view, commercial operations should not be allowed to commence if
significant interference would occur to existing NASA operations and
scientific research that benefits the Nation as a whole. NASA cannot
speak for all members of the GPS community.

Q12.  One possible solution proposed by NASA is to ``find alternative
spectrum, including spectrum holdings LightSquared already has, in
which to conduct LightSquared's planned terrestrial operations.'' Can
you expand on this solution for the Committee? What other spectrum
could be utilized by LightSquared for its operations? Would that
spectrum be far removed from the GPS signal and not cause significant
interference issues?

A12.  NASA fully supports the Administration's goal of identifying
additional spectrum for broadband use, and will continue to
cooperatively investigate and assess mitigation strategies, while not
compromising the performance of NASA's GPS-dependent systems or
missions.
LightSquared press releases refer to its control of 59 MHz of
spectrum, some of which is presumably available for terrestrial use.
Some of the spectrum is around 1.4 GigaHertz (GHz) and some is around
1.6 GHz, both removed from the 1.5 GHz region where GPS operates. While
testing and analysis would be necessary for verification, the use of
spectrum away from GPS helps reduce interference considerably.

Q13.  Since it is well established that LightSquared intends to operate
on the upper 10 megahertz of the L-Band after some interim period, and
since it is also well established that such use of the upper 10
megahertz channel will have catastrophic negative results for GPS
reception, is the use of the Low-10 option a viable option?

A13.  Testing by NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) engineers
indicates the use of just the lower 10 MHz band still results in
significant interference to NASA's next generation space-based GPS
receiver and terrestrial high precision science receivers. These are
similar to receivers used by other nations to process GPS and other
similar PNT systems such as Galileo. Moreover, with respect to the
interference impact to NASA space receivers from LightSquared emissions
in the lower 10 MHz band, it should be noted that only two space
receivers were tested during the TWG process. Since the interference
degradation from the LightSquared emission is highly dependent on the
specific design of the GPS receiver front-end, the affect on other
space receivers, including those used onboard the ISS and NASA launch
vehicles, is unknown at this time. NASA has identified this to NTIA as
an area for further study.
The implementation of a system that causes GPS ``dead spots'' would
have a significant impact on NASA's scientific research. There are many
examples where this interference would be detrimental, some of which
are described below.

Ground-truth measurements. In order to calibrate on-orbit
instruments, scientists often use ground-truth measurements. Precise
knowledge of the location of these measurements is critical to enabling
accurate calibration of the on-orbit instrument. For example, for a new
spacecraft instrument taking a measurement of algae blooms in lakes or
air samples, measurements are taken over a precisely identified time
and location, as defined by the spacecraft GPS location data. The
ground measurement is also precisely known (in time and location) based
on GPS data. If the measurements on the spacecraft match the
measurements on the ground, scientists know the on-board instrument is
working properly. This important calibration procedure is completely
dependent on the availability of the in situ GPS location data. Without
this ground truth of the instrument data, the resulting observations
and data interpretations will be suspect.

Ground-based infrastructure. The National Research
Council recently published a report on the national imperatives for a
precision positioning infrastructure. NASA is a lead agency in the
operation and maintenance of this infrastructure, and interference with
GPS operations would compromise the utility of this infrastructure.
There are numerous applications of ground-based science that are
dependent on the precise location information available from GPS. One
critical type of science is research on natural hazards such as
earthquakes, landslides, and volcanic eruptions. In this research area,
the smallest movement of the Earth's surface is tracked to better
understand the possibility of catastrophic events. These measurements
must be extremely precise if scientists are to have insight into the
pressures building up within fault zones or volcanoes that ultimately
result in a release of the pressure in the form of an earthquake or
volcanic eruption. Natural hazards research has become increasingly
dependent on GPS data, the loss or impairment of which could be
devastating and jeopardize thousands of lives.

Ionospheric measurements. The sun routinely sends out
radiation that, on Earth, is trapped by the ionosphere. When a
particularly strong solar flare erupts, it has the potential to send
enough radiation to disrupt (and even disable) the country's electric
power grid and to disrupt communications and radar tracking. By using
very precise GPS measurements, scientists can watch for changes in the
ionosphere to mitigate the effect of these changes or to prepare for
impending events. This information is useful to a broad group of users
including electric companies (which can take action to protect their
systems), radar and radio operators, and scientists who seek to better
understand and respond to this phenomenon. Without these GPS
measurements, notification of potential disruptions would be delayed,
resulting in damage to the power grid or interference to radar and
radio transmissions.

Uninhabited Aerial Vehicle (UAV) and Aircraft operations.
Not all science data are collected from satellites or in situ
measurements; some are collected using UAVs and other aircraft. For
example, NASA's highly successful UAV Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR)
project recently flew a sophisticated radar to study the Gulf of Mexico
oil disaster and the impact of the Mississippi floods on levees and
farmland. These UAVs and other aircraft use GPS for navigation, and
would not be usable for this type of science without it (or without a
costly change to perform navigation using another method). In the case
of interferometric SAR, no other navigation is capable of determining
the relative position between repeat UAV passes with sub-centimeter
accuracy to allow successful data collection.

Precision spacecraft navigation. Spacecraft use GPS for
precise navigation. While the LightSquared transmission towers would
not interfere with the use of GPS signals that are directly overhead of
the spacecraft, there would be interference with ultra-precise
navigation that requires the input of multiple GPS signals
simultaneously. In this instance, the scientific satellite would be
looking at a very low angle to obtain the signals from GPS satellites
that are farther away. The high power emissions from the LightSquared
transmission towers would interfere with these low look-angle signals,
thereby reducing the accuracy of the navigation information and leading
to a degradation of the science data. Many spacecraft also use a
reference system of ground networks that would be dramatically impacted
by this GPS interference. The U.S. hosts a significant number of ground
observatories that function as reference sites for the precision
navigation of satellites and aircraft, and interference to the GPS
signal would degrade the science data.

Weather sensing. GPS radio occultation uses the bending
of GPS signals by the atmosphere as they travel from the GPS satellites
to an orbiting spacecraft. This NASA-developed technique is now used
operationally by NOAA to improve their long-range weather forecasts.
The interference to the GPS signal would render this technique, which
looks all the way down to the Earth's surface, useless over the
continental U.S., thus impacting the accuracy of NOAA's weather
forecasts. Radio occultation is also used to help set an absolute
benchmark to answer the question of global climate change. Geographical
biases due to, for example, degraded results near the continental
United States, would be a severe challenge to this important benchmark.

In addition, although the plans of LightSquared are for towers
within the continental United States, approval for this U.S. Company
could have global implications. There is great concern that companies
outside the U.S. will pick up this technology, causing scientific
impacts across the globe and eroding the capabilities of all Global
Navigation Satellite Systems, not just the U.S. GPS. In short, use of
just the lower 10 MHz for high-precision GPS receivers does not appear
technically acceptable to NASA.
In summary, due to the very physics of GPS-based PNT, there is no
apparent option that would allow the high-precision GPS receivers to
operate in the presence of the LightSquared lower 10 MHz signal unless
interference mitigation techniques are developed that do not impact
performance.

Q14.  Now that the United States is dependent on Russia for access to
the International Space Station and the failure of the Soyuz Launch
Vehicle leaves the U.S. grounded, how would NASA operations be impacted
if the U.S. was dependent upon Russia's GLONASS system, or any other
precision, navigation, and timing system?

A14.  The impact to NASA is minimal since the cause of the Soyuz
failure has been determined and Soyuz flights have resumed. The
Progress 45 mission was successfully launched on a Soyuz vehicle on
October 30, 2011.
The proposed LightSquared network, however, does have the potential
to cause significant impact to NASA and other U.S. rocket launches.
NASA uses GPS for tracking launch vehicles at Wallops Flight Facility
(WFF) and as the primary tracking source for the Autonomous Flight
Safety System being developed by WFF and Kennedy Space Center (KSC).
NASA also uses commercial rockets to launch science missions from the
Eastern and Western Air Force Ranges that increasingly rely on GPS. Not
knowing where a vehicle is during a launch because of GPS interference
could result in a rocket and its payload being destroyed unnecessarily.
The costs of a failed mission depend on the vehicle and payload, but
could be in excess of $1 billion.
In terms of using the Russian GLONASS system for navigation, as
suggested in the question, the Russian GLONASS system uses a very
different signal structure that requires its own receivers. It is not
fully interoperable with GPS receivers, although there are receivers
that process both GPS and GLONASS signals. Also, GLONASS has had
serious reliability problems in the past. Therefore, GLONASS is not a
substitute for GPS today, and other international systems are not yet
operational.

Questions Submitted by Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson

Q1.  I understand that NASA uses high precision receivers on its
satellites. Limited tests have shown that such high precision receivers
may be more prone to interference from the proposed LightSquared
network than say, the GPS receiver in cell phones.

Q1a.  What NASA applications require high precision receivers?

A1a.  NASA scientists use GPS science receivers, in combination with
other measurement techniques such as laser ranging and radar
altimeters, to monitor our environment. This includes, for example,
monitoring the changes in Earth's surface, sea level height, and
atmospheric measurements, and providing precise knowledge of Earth's
shape and rotation (Figure 1). Global Positioning System (GPS)
technology has become an essential tool for monitoring and improving
our understanding of Earth systems, including climate change and solid
earth hazards, such as earthquakes and volcanic activity. This
knowledge of our environment and its changes is also used for resource
management, protection, and environmental impact mitigation.
Some examples of the use of GPS to improve our knowledge of the
Earth are: determining the atmosphere's water content; improving the
accuracy of weather forecasts; sensing changes in the small-scale
distribution of ground water; accurately measuring the mass changes in
glaciers and polar ice caps; setting an accurate present-day benchmark
for the global averaged atmospheric temperature; generating ``now-
casts'' of space weather; and enabling ocean topography measurements to
determine currents and long-term changes in sea height. Ground-based
GPS networks are also playing an increasingly prominent role in
monitoring ground movement to identify potential conditions that may
precede earthquakes and volcanic activity. In addition, some insurance
companies use GPS-based maps of accumulated tectonic strain to predict
risk. The same data are used by other Government agencies beyond NASA.
GPS technology assists NASA scientists in understanding the physical
characteristics of the Earth and its atmosphere, and changes over time.
The Earth system, like the human body, comprises diverse components
that interact in complex ways. Scientists work to understand the
Earth's ionosphere, atmosphere, oceans, interior, and biosphere as a
single connected system. The planet is changing on all spatial and
temporal scales.

Specific satellite-based NASA GPS-based science applications
include, but are not limited to: radio occultation, gravity field
modeling, altimetry, surface reflectometry, precise time transfer,
global topography, and aeronomy.

Radio Occultation: GPS facilitates weather forecasts and
also provides an unbiased benchmark for analyzing climate change. Early
use of radio occultation (RO) data from the COSMIC-1 constellation has
been incorporated into weather models and has demonstrated an 8-hour
improvement in weather forecast skill at day four and 15-hour
improvement at day seven. This means without RO data, scientists could
predict with a certain confidence 48 hours in the future. After adding
RO data, they can now predict with the same confidence out to 56 hours.
Radio occultation data provide a very well calibrated measure of the
global average atmospheric absolute temperature and, thus, measurements
can be compared from one mission to another with very low systematic
errors. This will provide a key benchmark for climate change studies.

Gravity Field: GPS enables measurement of the Earth's
gravity field with high resolution in time and space. For example, the
GRACE mission can measure a one-centimeter change in ground water level
over the state of Ohio with one-month temporal resolution. Some
applications include hydrology, measurement of variations in mass
captured in ice caps and glaciers due to global temperature changes,
and determination of ocean currents at depths which have societal
applications to fisheries and transportation.

Altimetry: GPS facilitates precise orbit determination in
altimetry (measuring sea level height and/or ice sheet thickness).
Ocean altimetry data from missions such as TOPEX/Poseidon, Jason, the
Ocean Surface Topography Mission (OSTM), and Jason-3 use GPS to
translate radar altimeter measurements to place the ocean surface in an
Earth fixed reference frame, which supports applications such as
fisheries, transportation, weather, and sea level rise. Data from
missions such as the Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite (ICESat),
and ICESat Follow-On enable the determination of ice sheet thickness
and estimation of the ``global ice budget'' to observe the effects of
climate change.

Surface Reflectometry: The use of GPS signal surface
reflections is currently being developed to provide synoptic altimetry
and scatterometry observables. This is an important tool for
applications such as, for example, measuring sea level height in real
time.

Time Transfer: GPS facilitates precise time transfer
between satellites as needed for coordinated observations from separate
satellite platforms. For example, the GRACE constellation used GPS time
transfer with 0.060 nanosecond precision to enable gravity field
measurements.

Global Topography: GPS supports orbit determination for
global topographic mapping. For example, GPS provided 60-centimeter
navigation of the Space Shuttle during the Shuttle Radar Topography
Mission (SRTM), which used Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar
(InSAR) to obtain the first global topographic map.

Aeronomy: The inference of atmospheric state (aeronomy)
from observed drag using precise GPS-determined orbits is used to
improve models of the upper atmosphere. These models enable space
missions to better estimate the effect of atmospheric drag and orbit
decay of spacecraft in Low Earth Orbit (LEO).

The science data obtained using GPS enable the continually improved
precise navigation provided by GPS to all other GPS users. In turn,
these scientific data have enabled GPS to continue improving. Thus, the
data from Earth science missions support the continued improvement of
GPS capabilities while, at the same time, GPS provides data for
scientific research.
The potential disruption of GPS reception due to interference from
the LightSquared terrestrial wireless network could affect a number of
terrestrial and space-based NASA science missions. Affected terrestrial
missions include primarily Earth science applications such as geodesy
(e.g., earthquake monitoring and measurement of changes on the Earth's
surface) and environmental monitoring relying on GPS measurements at
the ground sites of the Global Differential GPS System (GDGPS) and
International Global Navigation Satellite Systems Service (IGS). Space-
based science missions potentially affected would include receivers
used for GPS occultation measurements for atmospheric and ionospheric
monitoring and characterization.

Q1b.  Are these high precision receivers only space-based?

A1b.  No, as described in the response to the previous question.

Q1c.  Are there any alternatives to GPS for conducting such science
missions?

A1c.  GPS is a valuable tool that supports a broad range of NASA
science applications. The proposed mitigation techniques do not address
the concerns of GPS-based science applications. There are no practical
alternatives to GPS since they'd have to be specific to each of the
areas described in the response to question 1a and, thus, prohibitively
expensive. Should GPS not be available to support high precision
science, it is likely that most of these science applications would
quite simply not be performed.

Q1d.  What current missions would be impacted, and what science is NASA
at risk of losing? What upcoming missions would be affected?

A1d.  There are substantial risks to ongoing and planned NASA missions
and science. In addition to impacts to space missions, and ground-based
networks, there are also impacts when supporting operations such as
rocket launches.
Direct Impact to NASA Science

Space Missions Affected: NASA estimates 20-plus
satellites will be launched for radio occultation measurements over the
next 10 years. The normal upgrade cycle for flight receivers is 10
years, and the effective mission length of these satellites has been
about eight years.

Ground-based Tracking Networks Affected: For impacts to
NASA ground-based GPS occultation science on the Global Differential
GPS (GDGPS) network, the cost is approximately $50 thousand per
station, for a total of at least 100 NASA sites, which results in a
conservative estimate of $5 million. An additional 500-plus sites for
International Global Navigation Satellite Systems Service (IGS) totals
$25 million with an additional $50 million for the National Science
Foundation (NSF) Plate Boundary Observatory.

A conservative overall estimate of the cost to NASA space and
ground-based science missions directly at risk from LightSquared is
$2.1-plus billion.

Impact to Rocket Launches

NASA uses GPS for tracking launch vehicles at Wallops Flight
Facility (WFF) and as the primary tracking source for the Autonomous
Flight Safety System (AFSS) being developed by WFF and Kennedy Space
Center (KSC). NASA also uses commercial rockets to launch science
missions from the Eastern and Western Air Force Ranges that
increasingly rely on GPS. Not knowing where a vehicle is during a
launch because of GPS interference could result in a rocket and its
payload being destroyed unnecessarily.

Additional Impacts

NASA Geodesy: It is difficult to estimate the costs
associated with disturbing the GPS-based measurements used to maintain
and update the reference frame, but these could be significant because
these errors would in turn affect high precision uses such as climate
and environmental monitoring.

In summary, over the coming decade, scientists will be analyzing
the data from orbiting spacecraft to characterize, understand, and
predict variability and trends in Earth's system for both research and
applications. Over a third of the U.S. economy is influenced by
climate, weather, space weather, and natural hazards, and other
applications of Earth Science. Thus, costs to society and the nation of
losing NASA's existing GPS-dependent capabilities would go well beyond
the estimated $2.1-plus billion in direct costs.

Q2.  NASA said in the Technical Working Group report that ``it was
impossible to adequately evaluate and thoroughly investigate potential
interference mitigation options for space-based and high precision
receivers.'' LightSquared said in the same section of the report that
it believes that a new type of receiver currently in development could
be modified to achieve complete mitigation with minimal impact on NASA
science missions.

Q2a.  What receivers did NASA and the Technical Working Group test?

Q2b.  What is required to evaluate a mitigation technology?

Q2c.  What is your view of LightSquared's assessment that a receiver
currently in development could be modified to provide complete
mitigation?

A2-2c.  Only two space receivers (IGOR and TriG) were tested during the
TWG process. Since the interference degradation from the LightSquared
emission is highly dependent on the specific design of the GPS receiver
front-end, the effect on other space receivers, including those used
onboard the ISS and NASA launch vehicles, is unknown at this time.
The proposed filters have not yet been made available to NASA from
LightSquared or the filter manufacturers and, therefore, would need to
be evaluated before a complete mitigation can be implemented. However,
preliminary discussions with filter manufacturers (e.g., Delta
Microwave, which was referred to NASA by LightSquared) indicate
filtering for high precision GPS receivers would result in significant
degradation in receiver performance and accuracy.
A mitigation technology must be evaluated analytically (e.g., via
simulations), tested under controlled conditions (e.g., in anechoic
chambers), and be operationally practical in real-world scenarios.
Lacking an actual filter or other mitigation technology to test, it
is not possible to prove claims that mitigation is possible or to
measure the degree of performance degradation likely to be experienced
by the GPS receiver. Complete mitigation is a desirable goal, but as
yet there is no evidence to prove that this is possible, and much to
suggest that it is not. If interference mitigation techniques are
identified, testing would be necessary to determine the impact on
receiver performance.
Responses by Hon. Peter H. Appel,
Administrator, Research and Innovative Technology Administration,
Department of Transportation

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1.  How common are the wideband and high precision GPS receivers that
are at risk of interference from LightSquared's modified business plan
that starts commercial operations with just the ``lower'' portion of
its spectrum?

Q1a.  How much do they cost?

Q1b.  What is the normal upgrade or re-equipage cycle for these GPS
receivers at your agency?

A1-1b.  Many Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers use wide
portions of the GPS frequency band to provide extremely precise
measurements used for applications such as safety-of-life
transportation applications, precision agriculture, earthquake and
infrastructure monitoring, severe weather forecasting, and surveying.
The wider bandwidth allows for better signal tracking, which
improves the accuracy over low-cost GPS units that often are designed
to function using a narrow bandwidth. These wideband GPS receivers
include 90 percent of those used for aviation today in the U.S. (more
than 60,000 aircraft), another 5,600-8,000 receivers on international
operators' aircraft from 105 nations coming into the U.S., and all of
those receivers planned to be used in the future to support the Next
Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) navigation and
surveillance. Wideband and high-precision receivers are also used in
Unmanned Aircraft Systems and National Airspace System infrastructure.
Many of the high-precision applications for transportation involve
surveying, machine control for construction, airborne and ground flight
inspection, and reference receivers for differential networks. The cost
for these receivers is generally a few thousand dollars. The Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS)
Program uses this class of receiver in all its ground reference station
sites. The WAAS receivers generally cost on the order of $40,000 per
unit. Beyond federal use, State and local governments and their
contractors employ tens of thousands of high precision and timing
receivers on a daily basis for road construction, asset management, and
infrastructure monitoring.
Timing receivers are used nationwide for traffic signal and
operations coordination in road and rail, in ground stations for
Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast and the Automatic
Identification System, and serve a number of applications at Air Route
Traffic Control Centers.
The retrofit of existing aircraft occurs at points of opportunity
as industry cycles its respective aircraft through maintenance cycles.
The normal upgrade cycle ranges from 10 to 20 years. For other
transportation applications, it is usually on the order of seven to 10
years. For positive train control (PTC) systems, however, the
anticipated upgrade cycle will be much closer to the 15- to 20-year
range.

Q2.  LightSquared has agreed to a ``standstill'' on the use of the
``upper'' portion of their spectrum, the portion closest to the GPS
signal. LightSquared has stated they would like to work with the GPS
community to develop mitigation strategies in order to initiate
commercial operations of the upper spectrum within two to three years.

Q2a.  Is DOT prepared to upgrade or re-equip all their GPS equipment in
that time frame?

Q2b.  What would be the cost to implement this strategy within your
agency?

Q2c.  Is two to three years a reasonable time frame to expect federal
agencies to upgrade or re-equip?

A2-2c.  No mitigation measures have been identified for LightSquared's
use of the upper 10 megahertz (MHz) portion of the band. If mitigation
measures are identified, it would then take a minimum of 10 years to
re-equip systems, based on an assumption of three years to complete
standards and product development, followed by seven years to complete
the retrofit. Based on these considerations, DOT cannot upgrade or re-
equip GPS equipment in a two- or three-year period.
The cost for DOT and its stakeholders to implement this strategy is
likely over $10 billion, based on historical standards and equipment
development and certification costs, in addition to the costs to
industry of an upgrade/re-equip investment cycle. FAA estimates $6
billion in unplanned aviation retrofit costs alone.
In addition, the lack of mitigation measures would preclude many
freight railroads' and commuter railroads' deployment of PTC by
December 31, 2015, which is mandated by section 104 of the Rail Safety
Improvement Act of 2008 (RSIA) (49 U.S.C. 20157). With the exception of
the Northeast Corridor, the railroad industry is progressing with the
implementation of GPS-based PTC systems. The same mitigation-time
considerations would be applicable the current GPS-based PTC systems.
Shifting to non-GPS-based PTC systems, in an attempt to meet the RSIA's
deadline, would result in nonrecoverable expenditures for GPS-based PTC
systems on the order of $3 billion to $4 billion or more as a yet-to-
be-determined cost for alternative non-GPS-based PTC technology. As the
GPS-based technology is cheaper than non-GPS-based technology, the
current, roughly 20-to-1 adverse cost-benefit ratio would become
significantly worse.

Q3.  LightSquared's modified business plan starts commercial operations
with just the ``lower'' portion of its spectrum and will be limited to
urban areas. Does this satisfy your concerns about short-term
interference issues to wideband and high precision GPS receivers? If
not, why not?

A3.  Initially limiting LightSquared service to urban areas does not
satisfy DOT's concerns, as aviation and other transportation safety and
timing applications are widespread in urban areas. Per the U.S.
National Space-Based PNT [Position, Navigation, and Timing] Policy, DOT
is responsible for representing the space-based PNT interests of
partner civilian Federal agencies, as well as our own.
The impact of LightSquared's initially operating on the lower 10
MHz will not be fully understood until additional testing is conducted.
However, limited testing on the lower 10 MHz has demonstrated it is
incompatible with many existing GPS high precision and timing receivers
that operate both in urban and rural environments.
Additional testing of the lower 10 MHz is required to assess the
impact to general navigation and cellular devices that are prevalent
within urban areas.
Additionally, no testing has been performed on the effects of the
LightSquared user handsets on GPS receivers. The frequency band
proposed by Light Squared for these devices is 1620.5-1660.5 MHz. No
testing has been performed on the handsets due to non-availability of
hardware.

Q4.  Given that LightSquared has clearly shown that it intends to
ultimately utilize both the upper and the lower portion of its
spectrum, even with its new business proposal to start with just the
lower portion, how is the new proposal really any different to your
agency than their original proposal?

A4.  The new proposal is substantively no different than LightSquared's
original proposal, other than it delays implementation of the upper 10
MHz channel, which testing has demonstrated to have significant impact
on virtually all GPS applications.
As noted previously, the impact of LightSquared initially operating
on the lower 10 MHz will not be fully understood until additional
testing is conducted; however, limited testing on the lower 10 MHz has
demonstrated it is incompatible with many existing GPS high precision
and timing receivers.

Q5.  I understand there are now other companies exploring a similar
terrestrial broadband business plan but in an entirely different part
of the spectrum that would not interfere with the GPS signal. If we can
accommodate the President's goals for the Broadband Initiative using
spectrum that doesn't interfere with GPS, why should we risk the
taxpayer investment in GPS?

A5.  DOT recognizes that there are other satellite-based terrestrial
broadband business plans being proposed. DOT supports the President's
National Broadband Plan and welcomes approaches to providing increased
wireless broadband services that do not impact existing critical
infrastructure systems, such as GPS.

Q6.  Does DOT feel that adequate testing has been done on all of the
issues associated with LightSquared interference on the agency's
missions? Should there be more testing on high precision units?

A6.  Testing and analysis to date have clearly demonstrated that
LightSquared operations on the upper 10 MHz are incompatible with
virtually all GPS applications. Limited testing on the lower 10 MHz has
demonstrated that the proposed LightSquared signal emissions are
incompatible with many existing GPS high-precision and timing
receivers.
Additional testing of the lower 10 MHz is required to assess any
impact to general navigation and cellular devices, as well as for high
precision and timing receivers once the LightSquared-proposed filters
and antennas for these devices are available.

Q7.  Will the filters proposed by JAVAD GNSS and LightSquared mitigate
the interference problem to wideband and high precision GPS receivers?
If not, why not? If so, what testing has been done to demonstrate their
effectiveness? Who should pay for this testing?

A7.  The proposed filter offered by LightSquared and a GPS receiver
manufacturer, JAVAD, is designed to address LightSquared emissions only
in the lower 10 MHz. It does not resolve the interference problem with
LightSquared's potential use of both the lower and upper 10 MHz
channels. There is no known filter solution that could mitigate the
degradation caused by an upper 10 MHz channel LightSquared signal
emission.
To our knowledge, no tests have been performed regarding the
filter's ability to reject the LightSquared signal while still
maintaining GPS receiver capability. LightSquared has stated that the
filter for the high-precision and timing devices will be available for
Federal Government testing in November 2011 and March 2012,
respectively.
LightSquared has offered to pay for testing, but it is not clear
that the Federal Government can legally accept this offer. DOT has no
position on who should pay for this testing. DOT continues to pursue
ways to participate in the testing within existing resources, as DOT
could not have anticipated this unexpected expense and made the
appropriate budgetary request.

Q8.  Are there currently any mitigation strategies that make sense for
wideband or high precision GPS receivers?

A8.  There are currently no known mitigation strategies that make sense
for wideband or high precision GPS receivers. Mitigation measures have
not been identified for LightSquared's use of the upper 10 MHz portion
of the band. LightSquared and JAVAD have proposed a filter designed to
address LightSquared emissions only in the lower 10 MHz. To our
knowledge, no tests have been performed regarding the filter's ability
to reject the LightSquared signal while still maintaining GPS receiver
capability.

Q9.  How much would it cost your agency to mitigate the interference
issues from the LightSquared signal on your missions?

Q9a.  Does your agency currently have funds set aside for this purpose?

A9-9a.  There are currently no known mitigation strategies that make
sense for wideband or high precision GPS receivers. Mitigation measures
have not been identified for LightSquared's use of the upper 10 MHz
portion of the band. If mitigation measures are identified, it would
take a minimum of 10 years to re-equip systems, as previously stated.
As previously stated, the cost for DOT and its stakeholders to
implement this strategy is likely over $10 billion. FAA estimates $6
billion in unplanned aviation retrofit costs alone.
DOT does not have any funds identified to mitigate interference
issues from the LightSquared signal for our mission, and it is not
clear that the issues could be mitigated at any cost.

Q10.  Since August 15, the FCC has had the ability to rule on the
LightSquared proposal, and to my knowledge, NTIA has yet to submit
comments to the FCC on behalf of affected agencies.

Q10a.  Has NTIA provided your comments to the FCC?

Q10b.  Will DOT submit its comments directly to the FCC if NTIA fails
to do so? If so, when?

Q10c.  Would you agree that your agency's assessment should be made
public so that everyone can understand the extent to which LightSquared
interference to GPS will impact the ability of your agency to perform
its duties, and the costs that may be incurred due to this
interference?

A10-10c.  To our knowledge, the National Telecommunications and
Information Administration (NTIA) has not formally provided DOT's July
21, 2011, comments on LightSquared's proposal to the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC). DOT does not plan to submit its
comments directly to the FCC. DOT supports NTIA's role as the principal
Executive Branch adviser on telecommunications policies.
DOT looks forward to participating in the upcoming test of the
lower 10 MHz on general navigation and cellular devices and then
testing precision and timing receivers early next year. We anticipate
that NTIA will provide the outcome of those tests to the FCC.

Q11.  The DOT letter to the NTIA provides many details on the impact on
the Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) from the latest
LightSquared proposal. Estimates range from 10 years to design and
certify modified equipment in the civil aviation fleet, delayed
deployment of NextGen by 10 years, and additional costs of billions of
dollars.

Q11a.  How is DOT planning to pay for these delays and the necessary
mitigation implementation?

A11-11a.  Current technology does not provide a mitigation capability
for certified aircraft avionics without severe performance degradation.
If a compatible GPS equipment mitigation were identified and determined
acceptable, the FAA estimates that the cost impact to modify all
aircraft would be $6 billion. The necessary avionics modification costs
would normally be an airlines and aircraft operators' expense.
Additionally, approximately $17 billion in NextGen investments would
need to be replanned including civil aviation industry estimated
investments of $9 billion and $8 billion in FAA infrastructure
investments. The FAA would require additional obligation authority to
address cost growth as a result of replanning and procurement,
integration, and logistics support for U.S. National Airspace System
(NAS) GPS timing and high-precision infrastructure equipment.

Q12.  Your testimony mentions a possible mitigation technique where
NextGen would rely on the navigation signals of the Russian GLONASS
System instead of GPS. To what extent will the NextGen program rely on
the Russian GLONASS system if the FAA is forced to proceed with this
mitigation strategy?

A12.  The FAA would not find it acceptable to base the U.S. National
Airspace System, as a key element of U.S. critical infrastructure,
solely on the use of a foreign global navigation satellite system
(GNSS). FAA NextGen infrastructure is currently based upon the use of
GPS and the Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS). The 2010 National
Space Policy states ``Foreign positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT)
services may be used to augment and strengthen the resiliency of GPS.''
When the Russian Federation achieves full GLONASS operational
status and provides GLONASS performance standard commitments to the
international community that are consistent with International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) standards and recommended practices, the
FAA and GPS manufacturers could assess the cost effectiveness of
developing GPS/GLONASS equipment that might provide acceptable function
in the presence of LightSquared's proposed upper 10 MHz channel
emissions. However, GLONASS-capable receivers, which operate on
frequencies further away from the proposed LightSquared base station
frequencies, would also need to be assessed for potential interference
from LightSquared user handsets that transmit at GLONASS frequencies.
It should be noted that the FAA has worked with other elements of
the U.S. government to encourage interoperability of other governments'
GNSS with GPS. Most foreign GNSS providers plan to transmit an
interoperable wideband L1 signal that is compatible with the modernized
GPS L1C signal. These new wideband GNSS signals are expected to have
greater susceptibility to the effects of LightSquared interference.

Q13.  DOT estimates that aircraft retrofit costs will be $6 billion and
take six to 10 years to fully deploy. What are the costs associated
with the loss of productivity or environmental impacts from the delays
to the NextGen system?

A13.  The FAA estimated that if LightSquared were to use the upper 10
MHz channel starting in 2014, the loss of productivity and
environmental impacts over a 10-year retrofit/replanning period would
result in an estimated impact to aviation community of at least $2
billion in baselined GPS aviation efficiency benefits. In addition, it
would severely impact the NextGen program, with a loss of $59 billion
in estimated benefits and an associated 31 million tons of additional
carbon dioxide emissions savings.

Q14.  What is the impact on safety if the GPS signal is unavailable or
degraded because of interference from the LightSquared network signal?

A14.  DOT provided the results of an operational, economic, and public
safety impact assessment of the original LightSquared Concept of
Operations (upper and lower 10 MHz channels) in a letter to NTIA on
July 21, 2011, which is posted on the Committee's website. DOT supports
the statement made by FCC Chairman Genachowski during an August 9,
2011, press conference on LightSquared, ``We're not going to do
anything that creates problems for GPS safety and service as we explore
technical solutions that will both protect GPS and allow a new service
to launch.''

Q15.  DOT has stated that use of the LightSquared ``upper'' portion of
its spectrum, the portion closest to the GPS signal, is unacceptable at
any power level. However, LightSquared's newly proposed plan still
relies on the utilization of the upper spectrum in the 2013-14 time
frame. How long would it take the Department to implement mitigation
measures and re-equip its systems to be compatible with this time
frame?

A15.  As previously stated, no mitigation measures have been identified
for LightSquared's use of the upper 10 MHz portion of the band, and if
mitigation measures are identified, re-equipping systems would take at
least 10 years.

Q16.  Your testimony states that approximately 60,000 civil aircraft
would need to be retro-fitted with new GPS equipment to mitigate the
impacts of the interference from the LightSquared signal. How much
would it cost the FAA and the airlines to retro-fit those aircraft?

A16.  A mitigating technology has not been developed and may not be
feasible. The FAA estimate was based on an assumed replacement of
existing GPS avionics equipment. The FAA estimated that aircraft
equipment retrofits would cost the airlines and aircraft operators $6
billion to retrofit, if LightSquared deployed using both the upper and
lower 10 MHz channels.

Q17.  LightSquared has stated that their new approach will solve ``99.5
percent'' of the interference problems for GPS. Do you agree with that
assumption? Can you explain how LightSquared has quantified this claim?

A17.  DOT does not agree with that assumption based upon an
understanding of current technology. No one knows exactly how many GPS
receivers are in use today. Moreover, none of the testing groups--the
Technical Working Group, RTCA, Inc. or the National Space-Based PNT
Engineering Forum--performed comprehensive testing of just the lower 10
MHz option. More testing is needed to determine which users would be
affected.
DOT has no insight into how LightSquared quantified this estimate.

Questions submitted by Acting Ranking Member Mr. Costello

Q1.  Your prepared statement indicates that FAA has initiated an
Alternative Positioning, Navigation, and Timing research program to
identify technologies that meet the requirements of NextGen in the
event that GPS is disrupted. What is the nature of the research
program, when was it initiated, and what has been accomplished so far?

A1.  The Alternate Positioning Navigation and Timing (APNT) research
program is tasked to assess various architectures to provide position,
navigation, and timing (PNT) services, as a backup to GPS for the U.S.
National Airspace System (NAS) in the 2025 time frame. This program was
initiated in 2009, with a goal of identifying a more cost-effective
backup for temporary GPS disruptions (e.g., testing or interference).
The APNT program is not intended to replicate the full performance and
economic efficiencies provided by GPS and the Wide Area Augmentation
System (WAAS). APNT studies and public meetings are being conducted to
scope the requirements for, and technical trade-offs of, a cost-
effective GPS backup for the NAS.

Q2.  How is the safety of General Aviation impacted by the potential
loss of GPS capability? Has FAA documented any decrease in fatalities
in General Aviation as a direct result of the use of GPS?

A2.  The safety benefits associated with General Aviation (GA) use of
GPS have been significant. The earliest hard evidence of the benefits
from such equipment came from the CAPSTONE program in Alaska and its
demonstration of GPS navigation, moving maps and Automatic Dependent
Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B). Based on a before-and-after comparison
of accidents in Alaska from FY 2002 through FY 2005 (before the surge
in glass cockpits as standard equipment in the GA fleet improved
visibility), a detailed study by FAA and Mitre found that CAPSTONE
alone would reduce fatal accidents in Alaska by one-third.
Nationally, in the past five years fatal Controlled Flight Into
Terrain (CFIT) accidents in GA and Part 135 (commuter and on-demand)
operations have decreased 44 percent from the preceding five years,
while fatal approach-and-landing accidents and all fatal accidents at
night have decreased by 30 percent. GPS and glass cockpits together are
a primary explanation for these improvements, and these rapid
improvements will likely continue for several more years as GPS-based
equipment continues to penetrate the GA market. The actual decrease in
fatalities from CFIT, approach-and-landing, and nighttime accidents has
averaged 76.6 per year over the past five years versus the preceding
five years. Part of this decrease can be attributed to the fact that GA
and on-demand Part 135 hours flown are down an average of about 6.2%
annually in the past five years versus the preceding five years, so one
would expect at least some decline in various types of accidents.
However, if one were to adjust the annual average to account for this
reduction in volume, there remains an annual average observed reduction
of about 73 fatalities per year that FAA believes is attributable
directly to GPS.
With the loss of GPS, those benefits already achieved would be
immediately reversed, and the opportunity for even more long-term
benefits would be lost. Unlike air carriers, GA losses would not be
offset by air traffic control and Instrument Landing Systems (ILS)
because the GA fleet would either not be equipped with ILS or may not
be under air traffic control.

Q3.  Assuming filters can be developed, what is involved in certifying
new electronics incorporating such filters and retrofitting the
aircraft fleet? What is the basis for FAA's projected time frame of 10
years to perform retrofits?

A3.  It is technically questionable if filters can be developed that
would mitigate the negative effects of GPS on aviation users and still
provide the required performance, and comply with the size and
environment constraints required to install them on aircraft. Assuming
such a technical breakthrough is possible, it typically takes several
years to develop a revised technical standard that is agreed to by the
industry. The development of an approved product takes several more
years, as a specific design is updated to ensure reliable performance
under the stressing conditions of an aircraft and to ensure there are
no failure conditions that adversely affect safety.
Once the equipment is available, it can take years to retrofit all
aircraft. The retrofit of existing aircraft occurs at points of
opportunity as industry cycles its respective aircraft through
maintenance cycles, in order to reduce the costs of the retrofit. The
current level of GPS equipage has been achieved after 17 years of
equipment availability, and has been motivated by the benefits that GPS
delivers. There are a number of factors which can reduce this time,
including mandates or cost-sharing or reimbursement (e.g., if
LightSquared or another entity paid for the retrofit). An estimate of
ten years assumes an effective mandate and is based on an assumption of
three years to complete standards and product development, followed by
seven years to complete the retrofit.

Q4.  In describing the impact of the proposed LightSquared network on
its operations to NTIA, FAA stated that LightSquared's proposal ``could
adversely affect U.S. international leadership in aviation.'' Could you
expand on this statement by identifying areas in which U.S. leadership
would be affected?

A4.  GPS is used globally for aviation, and has spurred development of
similar systems by the European Union, Russia, Japan, India, and China.
Due to the market dominance and excellent record of service of GPS, the
U.S. has maintained an international leadership position, to protect
GPS reception from interference, to promote signal compatibility, and
to promote acceptance of GPS for aviation in countries that do not have
their own infrastructure. Recognizing that the protection of GPS from
interference has been a significant component of the U.S. position, a
decision to approve any system that causes widespread interference
would jeopardize our credibility and damage our leadership position in
aviation use of GPS.
Responses by Dr. David Applegate,
Associate Director, Natural Hazards, U.S. Geological Survey

Questions Submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1.  How common are the wideband and high precision GPS receivers that
are at risk of interference from LightSquared's modified business plan
that starts commercial operations with just the ``lower'' portion of
its spectrum?

Q1a.  How much do they cost?

Q1b.  What is the normal upgrade or re-equipage cycle for these GPS
receivers at your agency?

A1-1b.  Wideband high precision GPS receivers are fairly commonplace.
The Department of the Interior owns over 6,000. They are used for a
variety of applications from surveying and mapping to earthquake and
volcano monitoring. The testing conducted to date shows that high
precision GPS receivers are susceptible to interference from the lower
portion of the spectrum proposed for use by Lightsquared. These
receivers come in a variety of makes and models and their prices vary
from about $5,000 to as much as $30,000. The typical upgrade cycle for
this type of equipment ranges from eight to 15 years.
For example, the U.S. Geological Survey's (USGS) Earthquake Hazards
Program is in the process of upgrading high precision GPS receivers
that monitor crustal deformation in earthquake-prone southern
California. Of the 102 high precision receivers operated by the USGS in
that region, 38 are 15 years old, 35 are less than 10 years old but are
now obsolete and no longer manufactured, and 29 are the new modern
receivers. The USGS is in the process of upgrading all 38 of the oldest
receivers, and most of the 35 older receivers.

Q2.  LightSquared has agreed to a ``standstill'' on the use of the
``upper'' portion of their spectrum, the portion closest to the GPS
signal. LightSquared has stated they would like to work with the GPS
community to develop mitigation strategies in order to initiate
commercial operations of the upper spectrum within two to three years.

Q2a.  Is USGS prepared to upgrade or re-equip all their GPS equipment
in that time frame?

Q2b.  What would be the cost to implement this strategy within your
agency?

Q2c.  Is two to three years a reasonable time frame to expect federal
agencies to upgrade or re-equip?

A2-2c.  There are no known mitigation strategies that have been shown
to be effective, particularly for the upper portion of the LightSquared
spectrum. So it seems very unlikely that effective mitigation can be
accomplished for the upper portion of the spectrum in two to three
years. It would be equally difficult for the USGS to re-equip all of
our GPS equipment even if mitigation for the upper portion were
realized. For instance, the USGS has replaced 38 receivers in one year
as part of the modernization effort by the USGS Earthquake Hazards
Program. The USGS upgrades were delayed because of technical problems
that are now resolved but which added months to the modernization
process, which is expected to be completed later this year. This small
number of receivers took over a year to be replaced, and the process is
still not complete.
It is difficult to estimate the cost of replacing GPS equipment in
a two-three year time frame. However, based upon the 2010 DOI GPS
Survey, the USGS estimates $20-40 million has been invested for current
USGS GPS hardware and software. If we include labor and training cost,
the USGS believes a GPS replacement strategy would double the estimated
cost resulting in expenditures between $40-80 million. It does not seem
reasonable for federal agencies to re-equip in this short time frame
even if we had the resources to do so.

Q3.  LightSquared's modified business plan starts commercial operations
with just the ``lower'' portion of its spectrum and will be limited to
urban areas. Does this satisfy your concerns about short-term
interference issues to wideband and high precision GPS receivers? If
not, why not?

A3.  No, LightSquared has acknowledged, and the testing showed,
operations in the lower portion of their spectrum cause harmful
interference to high precision GPS receivers. No known techniques have
yet been shown to mitigate this harmful interference. The USGS has a
range of applications in urban areas using high precision GPS
receivers. For example, the USGS and its partners operate a network of
high precision GPS receivers for monitoring earthquakes in urban areas
of Alaska, California, Nevada, Utah and Washington states. In addition,
of the 9,000 nationwide USGS watergages, many are located in or near
urban areas and may also be impacted because they use GPS timing
receivers for data transmissions.

Q4.  Given that LightSquared has clearly shown that it intends to
ultimately utilize both the upper and the lower portion of its
spectrum, even with its new business proposal to start with just the
lower portion, how is the new proposal really any different to your
agency than their original proposal?

A4.  LightSquared`s new plan is different in that it starts with the
lower portion of the spectrum. Testing on this lower portion of the
spectrum has been limited so further testing on this lower portion of
the spectrum is needed to better understand whether LightSquared's
signal causes harmful interference for GPS.
The higher portion of the spectrum is clearly problematic for the
foreseeable future. The use of LightSquared's transmissions in the
higher portion of their proposed spectrum is already known to cause
harmful interference to GPS.

Q5.  I understand there are now other companies exploring a similar
terrestrial broadband business plan but in an entirely different part
of the spectrum that would not interfere with the GPS signal. If we can
accommodate the President's goals for the Broadband Initiative using
spectrum that doesn't interfere with GPS, why should we risk the
taxpayer investment in GPS?

A5. GPS is a critical technology for the USGS. If different spectrum
can be found located further from the GPS band for broadband signals,
such a move would solve the harmful interference concerns.

Q6.  Does USGS feel that adequate testing has been done on all of the
issues associated with LightSquared interference on their agency's
missions? Should there be more testing on high precision units?

A6.  The USGS believes that additional testing of the lower portion of
LightSquared's spectrum is needed. This new approach by LightSquared
was not tested nor was it part of LightSquared's original plan. High
precision receivers were particularly impacted in the limited testing
that has been done on LightSquared's lower portion of the spectrum. The
USGS believes that additional testing of high precision receivers is
needed particularly to evaluate whether mitigation techniques to
eliminate harmful interference are feasible without impacting
performance.

Q7.  Will the filters proposed by JAVAD GNSS and LightSquared mitigate
the interference problem to wideband and high precision GPS receivers?
If not, why not? If so, what testing has been done to demonstrate their
effectiveness? Who should pay for this testing?

A7.  USGS has examined the filtering techniques that are proposed by
JAVAD GNSS. USGS believes this is a serious effort that holds some
promise of mitigating the harmful interference effects of the lower
portion of LightSquared's spectrum. It should be noted, however, that
this filtering technique does not mitigate the higher portion of
LightSquared's spectrum, nor was it designed to. As of Oct 7, 2011, no
equipment or filters have been manufactured by JAVAD GNSS. Once this
equipment is available, it will need thorough testing and evaluation to
see if it does effectively mitigate the harmful interference without
impacting the performance of high precision receivers.
Plans for testing are under consideration, and the USGS believes
that government-led testing is appropriate to obtain unbiased results
and analysis. The cost of the testing, however, would not be
insignificant and is not included the FY 2012 Budget.

Q8.  Are there currently any mitigation strategies that make sense for
wideband or high precision GPS receivers?

A8.  No known mitigation techniques have been shown to work for harmful
interference from LightSquared's signals. High precision receivers that
employ a wide bandwidth are particularly susceptible to this harmful
interference. Alternative spectrum has been recommended by the Space-
Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Advisory Board.

Q9.  How much would it cost your agency to mitigate the interference
issues from the LightSquared signal on your missions?

Q9a.  Does your agency currently have funds set aside for this purpose?

A9-9a.  No known mitigation techniques have been shown to work for
harmful interference from LightSquared's signals. It is not clear what
the cost of mitigation would be. The USGS estimates the replacement
cost of current GPS equipment to be about $40-80 million. The USGS does
not have funds set aside to mitigate harmful interference from
LightSquared's signals, nor are those costs included in the FY 2012
Budget.

Q10.  Since August 15, the FCC has had the ability to rule on the
LightSquared proposal, and to my knowledge, NTIA has yet to submit
comments to the FCC on behalf of affected agencies.

Q10a.  Has NTIA provided your comments to the FCC?

Q10b.  Will USGS submit its comments directly to the FCC if NTIA fails
to do so? If so, when?

Q10c.  Would you agree that your agency's assessment should be made
public so that everyone can understand the extent to which LightSquared
interference to GPS will impact the ability of your agency to perform
its duties, and the costs that may be incurred due to this
interference?

A10-10c.  The USGS is unaware of what specific actions NTIA has taken
with the information that has been provided by the Department of the
Interior. The USGS will continue to work within the Department to
convey additional comments as appropriate. These comments contain core
deliberative communications from Executive Branch agencies that provide
critical advice to NTIA in its role as spectrum manager on behalf of
the Federal Government. Agency comments have not yet been released to
the public in keeping with this deliberative process.

Q11.  The Department of Interior letter to the NTIA states that impacts
to natural disaster response, law enforcement, and seismic and volcanic
monitoring will be caused by the LightSquared network. The Department
estimates the costs to mitigate the problems associated with those
areas range from $250M to $500M.

Q11a.  Do these costs stay the same if LightSquared is allowed to begin
commercial operations utilizing the ``lower'' portion of its spectrum?

Q11b.  Does this level of additional funding currently exist in the
Department's budget? In other words, would the Department need
additional funding to carry out its mitigation strategy or are there
sufficient funds available?

Q11c.  What sort of hard choices would need to be made to offset that
spending? Are there modernization plans or capabilities that would be
put on hold to deal with the interference issues?

A11-11c.  The Department of the Interior estimated the replacement
costs of the existing GPS infrastructure within the Department. The
Department, including the USGS, does not know what the cost to mitigate
LightSquared's signals will be because it has not yet been shown they
can be mitigated. Without additional testing, including demonstration
of mitigation techniques, it will be difficult to know what mitigation
actions will be effective, the impact on performance, and what their
cost might be.
Whatever the cost, the USGS has not planned for any funding to pay
for receiver-based mitigations.
Any decision about how to implement a receiver-based mitigation
strategy over a short period of time would pose a significant
challenge. It is likely our services that rely on GPS would be
impacted. As we learn more about mitigation techniques and
implementation decisions, the USGS will be able to refine its approach
to mitigation.
At present, the USGS is continuing to implement GPS equipment
modernization. For example, the USGS is planning on installing 60
modern high precision GPS receivers in the next year to enhance its
earthquake monitoring capabilities.

Q12.  The Department of Interior letter to the NTIA states that the
Department has approximately $100M to $200M invested in GPS technology.
Of particular note, the letter states that The Department spent almost
$2M last year on state-of-the-art GPS equipment for its Earthquake and
Volcano Hazards Programs. If LightSquared is allowed to begin
commercial operations, would that new expensive equipment essentially
become obsolete?

A12.  No, the equipment would still be state-of-the-art, but it would
be susceptible to interference from LightSquared's signals. The
equipment would work fine in areas far enough away from LightSquared
base station transmissions. For example, the equipment could be used
for post-disaster missions in foreign countries, where Lightsquared is
not operating.

Q13.   This summer the country battled forest fires in Texas, flooding
in the northeast, and recently experienced a rare earthquake here in
the Washington area. How would our understanding of these events be
impacted by the LightSquared network?

A13.  Our understanding of the potential impact of the LightSquared
network is based on an understanding of our current activities and
those of other bureaus in the Department of the Interior. The
LightSquared signals would make it more difficult to fight fires, and
to collect earthquake, flood, and volcano data, because of the harmful
interference to GPS. In short, it would set back USGS mission
activities, and our understanding of these events would be more
limited, compromising situational awareness for emergency response.
Responses by Mr. Jeffrey J. Carlisle,
Executive Vice President, Regulatory Affairs
and Public Policy, LightSquared

Questions Submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1.  Given that LightSquared has clearly shown that it intends to
ultimately utilize both the upper and the lower portion of its
spectrum, even with its new business proposal to start with just the
lower portion, how is the new proposal really any different than the
original proposal?

A1.  Our new proposal is entirely different from our old business plan
and is a significant concession to the use of our spectrum by GPS
manufacturers. Importantly, it eliminates the need for replacing
hundreds of millions of GPS devices used by consumers and the aviation
industry.
We respectfully disagree with the premise of the question.
Eventually, LightSquared will need to add additional capacity to its
network, assuming retailers using the network bring enough subscribers
to require such capacity. We do not expect to need such capacity for
five to six years at least. When needed, this additional capacity could
be added by bringing the upper portion of our spectrum online. However,
it could also be met by (1) adding more towers in the lower part of our
spectrum, (2) using the upper portion in ways that are substantially
different from the old plan (lower power, etc.), and (3) using
alternative spectrum. Moreover, it must be borne in mind that our
customers are retailers who can reasonably be expected to have
alternatives in the marketplace by the time we would need to add more
capacity.
Accordingly, our intent is exactly what we proposed to the FCC: to
move forward with deployment on the lower portion of the spectrum,
while setting aside the upper portion in order to allow a further
discussion of how safe deployment of that spectrum could be achieved
within a commercially reasonable time frame. The above alternatives
must be explored in an objective way, but there is no need for that
process to delay the deployment of an urgently needed network on the
lower portion of spectrum.
Implementing this proposal will cost the company $100 million. This
is a significant cost to LightSquared, particularly in light of the
fact that the interference problem at issue is caused by GPS receivers
looking into the spectrum licensed to LightSquared. This proposal,
however, allows us to move forward with a network deployment while
removing the need for anyone to replace cellular, personal navigation,
timing or aviation devices.

Q2.  I understand there are now other companies exploring a similar
terrestrial broadband business plan but in an entirely different part
of the spectrum that would not interfere with the GPS signal. If we can
accommodate the President's goals for the Broadband Initiative using
spectrum that doesn't interfere with GPS, why should we risk the
taxpayer investment in GPS?

A2.  LightSquared's proposals eliminate the need to replace all but a
small portion of precision GPS devices. As discussed in further detail
below, GPS manufacturers are already stepping forward with solutions
for the remaining number of precision devices--estimated to number
about 750,000 devices total but those requiring replacement or retrofit
are likely to be far fewer. Thus, it is not accurate to say that
development of our spectrum puts the taxpayer investment in GPS at risk
in any way. Taxpayers will continue to have access to a robust GPS
system and also have the substantial benefits of a competitive
nationwide wireless broadband network.
With respect to alternatives, while all alternatives should be
pursued, the U.S. cannot afford to turn its back on a privately funded
network that will bring significant amounts of spectrum to market and
invest $14 billion in the U.S. economy. Even though there are
initiatives underway to make more spectrum available, it will be some
number of years before any of this spectrum will actually be made
available to consumers. The National Broadband Plan identified 300 MHz
of spectrum that should be made available for mobile broadband within
five years, and 500 MHz within 10 years. LightSquared's spectrum is
included in that 300 MHz, along with all other spectrum that could
reasonably made available. Yet more than a year and a half after
release of the Plan, only the LightSquared spectrum is on the verge of
deployment. None of the other spectrum identified has any clear
timetable for deployment.

The 700 MHz ``D Block'' has not been auctioned as planned
and may be needed for the national public safety broadband network.

Little progress has been made in preparing the ``AWS''
spectrum for auction, in part because of the difficulty of reallocating
government spectrum, which required relocating government users.

The companies that held the MSS S-band spectrum in 2009
have been through bankruptcy and the buyers of that spectrum are
awaiting approval from the FCC.

Although the WCS spectrum has been licensed, none of the
owners have announced any plans to deploy it.

The FCC does not have authority to reclaim and auction
television broadcast spectrum, as the National Broadband Plan proposed.
Even if Congress grants authority, it appears that perhaps 60 to 84 MHz
of broadcast spectrum could be made available at most, rather than the
120 MHz originally planned. Auction of that spectrum is many years
away.

Moreover, deployment of much of this spectrum will be delayed by
the inevitable presence of existing users and nearby operators who
deploy inefficient receivers (like GPS manufacturers). In the meantime,
Americans will continue to live and work at a significant disadvantage
to other countries--the U.S. is currently 15th in the world in terms of
broadband adoption. Additional spectrum and competitive networks are
desperately needed to address this situation, and LightSquared could
start providing service next year.
Finally, it is important to understand that this is not the first
technology GPS has threatened and it will not be the last. GPS
receivers are, in some cases, so poorly designed that they can be
sensitive to transmissions many tens of megahertz to either side of the
frequencies actually authorized for GPS. The only spectrum suitable for
mobile wireless broadband network is at frequencies of 3 GHz or less,
and GPS sits square in the middle of that range at 1.6 GHz. The threat
to taxpayers thus comes from the insistence of a few GPS manufacturers
on selling inefficient receivers that have the effect of blocking
needed services in other bands. Our network is threatened by this
inefficiency, and proposed future spectrum is close enough to GPS to
conceivably raise interference issues. Given that the interference
problem can be solved, it should be, as otherwise GPS manufacturers
will continue to delay or even stop beneficial technologies from
reaching the public.

Q3.  Will the filters proposed by JAVAD GNSS and LightSquared mitigate
the interference problem to wideband and high precision GPS receivers?
If so, what testing has been done to demonstrate their effectiveness?
Who should pay for this testing?

A3.  The new Javad device eliminates potential overload interference to
wideband and high precision GPS devices, and shows that all
manufacturers can quickly and inexpensively deploy such solutions. The
Javad solution was accomplished simply by upgrading the components and
signal processing in an existing product. Prior to this, many in the
GPS industry had claimed that it was impossible to design a high
precision GPS receiver that could operate in this environment. Javad is
expected to have units ready for testing as early as November 14, 2011.
These can be tested by the government by the terms prescribed by NTIA
in its letter of September 9 to PNT ExCom. Alternatively, LightSquared
has also engaged an independent laboratory for testing if necessary. To
be clear, LightSquared is happy to pay for any testing necessary to
validate this or any other solutions.

Q4.  In your testimony you state that LightSquared's ``ground network
will provide over 260 million people with wireless broadband service.''
Can you meet that goal by only utilizing the lower portion of your
spectrum, as you recently proposed?

Q4a.  Have no other companies proposed developing spectrum for 4G
Broadband?

A4-4a.  Yes. We can meet the FCC coverage requirement of reaching 260
million people by the end of 2015 utilizing the lower portion of our
spectrum. As discussed in response to question 1, above, adding the
upper portion is one way of addressing the eventual need for capacity
assuming subscribers (and data usage) increases, but not the only way.
As of this date, the only companies that have proposed deploying
nationwide 4G networks are AT&T, Verizon Wireless, Clearwire, and
Sprint (building out both their own and our spectrum). There are no
other nationwide networks currently proposed. Moreover, as mentioned in
response to question 2, there are no alternatives for spectrum that
could be deployed for the next several years. The United States, then,
cannot afford a ``not in my back yard'' approach to spectrum. There are
no ``clear'' portions of spectrum proposed to be brought online in the
foreseeable future--there will always be transition costs given that
spectrum is extremely crowded and will remain so. Accordingly, it is
crucial that the U.S. resolve all spectrum issues--such as the current
one--in ways that (1) promote coexistence and (2) prevent inefficient
users of spectrum from blocking infrastructure investment.

Q5.  The media has reported that LightSquared believes its move to the
lower part of the Mobile Satellite Service band resolves GPS
interference problems for 99.5% of receivers. Can you explain to us how
you arrived at that 99.5% number? Is your analysis of that data
consistent with industry standards for analyzing interference?

A5.  These numbers were derived based on the testing that was conducted
by the members of the GPS community and LightSquared as part of the
Technical Working Group. LightSquared estimates that there are over 400
million GPS units currently in use in the United States. Of these,
approximately 300 million reside within cellular phones, 100 million
reside in general location/navigation (GLN) devices, 500 thousand in
high precision devices and another 500 thousand used in timing and
aviation devices.
Representative samples of all classes of devices were tested by the
TWG and LightSquared's assessment of the efficacy of its mitigation
plan is based entirely on the results attained in the TWG testing, and
for aviation devices on the results of an analysis of existing minimum
performance standards and testing of some aviation devices.

Cellular

Every cellular device tested by the TWG showed no degradation of
operation according to established industry and regulatory standards.
Thus, LightSquared was able to conclude that none of the 300 million
cell phones in use would be impacted by its operation on the lower 10
MHz channel.

General Location/Navigation (GLN)

The results of the testing of the GLN devices also showed that they
would be unaffected by LightSquared's operation on the Lower 10 MHz
channel. There was initially disagreement between GPS manufacturers and
LightSquared on the appropriate interference threshold and on
propagation models to predict LightSquared's on-the-ground signal
strength. The LightSquared commitment to initially limit its measured
power to a power level of -30 dBm eliminates any basis for
disagreement. Even though TWG testing showed that there were two
outlier devices that did experience a slight rise in the noise floor at
this signal strength, there was no indication whatsoever that this
would impact the normal performance of the devices tested. Thus the TWG
results confirm that none of the 100 million GLN devices would be
impacted by LightSquared's proposed operating parameters.

Timing

Timing devices showed similar results, with all but one tested
showing no impact from LightSquared's proposed operation even using the
GPS industry's very conservative interference criteria. The
confidentiality requirements imposed by the TWG prevent LightSquared
from disclosing specific information about the one outlier device, but
LightSquared believes this device to be in very limited use and has
already identified mitigation options which it can address directly
with the manufacturer and users of the device in question.

Aviation

The limited number of aviation devices tested by the TWG showed
complete resilience to LightSquared's lower 10 MHz operation. However
the FAA and aviation industry have previously indicated that the
preferred approach for determining potential impact to aviation uses of
GPS is through an analysis of LightSquared's operating parameters in
the context of existing minimum performance standards for GPS devices
used in Aviation. The TWG report concluded that additional study was
needed to determine whether LightSquared's proposed operations were
compatible with existing aviation standards. That work is ongoing and
LightSquared is optimistic that it will be able to reach a mutually
acceptable conclusion with the FAA on the analytical parameters and
ultimate determination.

High Precision

The sole area that the TWG report identified that was not
automatically solved by LightSquared's proposed mitigation plan is for
high precision GPS units. A significant percentage of these devices
showed in tests that they could operate with no perceptible
interference from LightSquared's operation on its Lower 10 MHz. There
are an estimated 500,000 high precision GPS devices in use, with some
estimates as high as 1 million devices. Even using the upper bound of 1
million high precision GPS devices and assuming all the devices would
be adversely affected, LightSquared's mitigation proposal would resolve
interference for 400 million devices, which yields a measure of 99.75%.

Q6.  We have seen in the public comments filed at the FCC a discussion
about possible interference from, not only the LightSquared grid
network, but also the LightSquared handsets. It is my understanding
that no handsets were available to be tested. When will LightSquared
make their handsets available so they can be tested? Do you think it is
a major oversight that no handsets are available? There could
potentially be hundreds of thousands or millions of LightSquared
handsets in circulation--should this issue be tested now before they
are on the market?

A6.  The unavailability of LightSquared handsets in no way limited the
TWG in its testing protocol. First, it should be noted that the test
procedures for most of the sub-teams simulated LightSquared's base
station signal, even though actual base stations were available to the
TWG. This is normal practice as the design of the anechoic chamber test
environment often makes it impractical to utilize production equipment.
Additionally, using signal generators tuned to the exact parameters of
the expected transmission produce more reliable test results by
allowing the setting of very precise parameters and varying such
parameters according to the test methodology. This type of flexibility
is often not afforded when production devices are used. It is for this
reason that most sub-teams chose to simulate base station signals.
The sub-team that tested high precision devices in fact used a
simulated signal in order to test the potential impact of user devices
operating in proximity to high precision receivers. This sub-team,
which included representatives from Trimble and John Deere, among
others, did not raise any issues with the simulation of user device
transmissions, nor would one expect them to do so as this is consistent
with quality testing practices. Other sub-teams could have employed a
similar test setup, but chose not to perform tests including
LightSquared simulated user devices.
The recent letter from NTIA to PNT ExCom does call for testing to
include configurations simulating a LightSquared user device.
LightSquared is confident that, as was done in the TWG, this signal can
be accurately generated in the laboratory environment.

Q7.  LightSquared has argued that the GPS industry has been developing
defective equipment because it produced receivers that ``look'' into
LightSquared's spectrum. When did you become aware that high-precision
GPS receivers used part of LightSquared's spectrum? Has LightSquared
ever been compensated for the use of this spectrum? If so, how much? If
so, when did it first receive compensation? Did any of LightSquared's
predecessor company's ever receive compensation for the use of their
spectrum? If so, when, and how much?

A7.  High precision GPS devices, which as we note above represent a
small fraction of the total GPS devices in use, are generally designed
to receive two signals: (1) the signal from GPS satellites and (2) an
``augmentation'' signal. The devices listen to the GPS signal across
the widest possible bandwidth in order to increase their accuracy and
use the augmentation signal to provide additional information to boost
accuracy even further. The augmentation signal can come from a number
of sources, such as a satellite signal in a number of different
spectrum bands, including the L-band (LightSquared's spectrum) or a
terrestrial network.
Many high precision receivers were designed by GPS manufacturers
without the filtering needed to prevent their listening to the far ends
of the GPS signal all the way into the LightSquared spectrum.
LightSquared did not learn of this design decision until late 2010 when
GPS manufacturers first raised it with LightSquared. LightSquared and
its corporate predecessors have never received compensation for this
use of its spectrum--such as a royalty paid by the GPS manufacturers--
by GPS devices. With respect to high-precision GPS devices that receive
an augmentation signal from an L-band satellite, LightSquared was aware
of such receivers from the time that it first began providing this
service to resellers that offer this service. \1\ LightSquared's
predecessors began offering this service in 1997, and the annual
revenue has been approximately $500,000. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  We have also been aware that Inmarsat provides a similar
augmentation signal to GPS manufacturers.
\2\  Since 1997, LightSquared (and its predecessors) have sold
satellite capacity to a company called, Omnistar, which resold that
capacity to supply augmentation services to GPS manufacturers,
including Trimble Navigation Limited. Omnistar was purchased by Trimble
in March 2011. We understand that the GPS manufacturers charge a
significant mark up on their subscriptions to end users for
augmentation signals. For instance, we understand that a typical annual
subscription can range from $800 to several thousands of dollars a
year.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In this respect, it is important to note that LightSquared has
received nothing from any of the high precision manufacturers that use
other L-band augmentation services, and it has received nothing from
manufacturers of GPS devices that look into the upper portion of our
spectrum and do not rely on our satellite signal for augmentation.
Effectively, these manufacturers use LightSquared's licensed spectrum
for free, and are trying to establish a continuing right to do so.
LightSquared has never dictated or been aware of the design choices
made by manufacturers of high precision GPS devices, including those
that use an L-band augmentation signal. Despite ample notice, the GPS
manufacturers have had more than sufficient time to make appropriate
design decisions to ensure that their devices were compatible with
LightSquared's planned network. LightSquared continues to believe that
such devices can be designed to be compatible with its terrestrial
network.
The results of the Technical Working Group confirm that the GPS
``interference'' issue is caused by the design choices made by GPS
device manufacturers. \3\ The TWG confirmed that this incompatibility
is not caused by LightSquared's emissions ``bleeding'' into the GPS
spectrum--it is solely a matter of GPS receiver design. In 2002 and
2003, LightSquared and the GPS industry reached agreement to limit
strictly such emissions--known as ``out of band emissions''--to ensure
that LightSquared's network did not interfere with GPS devices. \4\ The
GPS industry raised other concerns along the way, including as late as
2009, all of which LightSquared resolved. The GPS industry never raised
any concerns about ``overload'' at any of those times.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  As one GPS manufacturer conceded to the FCC, ``[a]ll GPS
receivers use filters that overlap in the MSS band.'' http://
www.saveourgps.org/pdf/fcc/
Deere
-
Co
-
Ex
-
Parte.pdf
\4\ That same GPS manufacturer noted that ``[out of band emissions]
is not a problem in the GPS band if LightSquared filters their signals
as they have committed.'' http://www.saveourgps.org/pdf/fcc/
Deere
-
Co
-
Ex
-
Parte.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Apparently, GPS manufacturers designed high precision GPS devices
to use a single, open front-end (which consists of antennas,
amplifiers, and filters) to receive both GPS and augmentation signals.
The GPS manufacturers could have designed their high precision GPS
devices to separate the GPS signal from the satellite augmentation to
avoid the overload issue. As one commentator has noted, ``the common
analog front end amplifies the [LightSquared] allocation when it should
be filtered, a very bad design indeed and one that blatantly violates
design guidelines issued by the DoD's 2008 Global Positioning System
Standard Positioning Service Performance Standard.'' http://
www.itif.org/publications/itif-comments-lightsquaredgps-testing.
As we discuss in response to Representative Neugebauer's first
question, the GPS industry has been on notice as a result of the FCC
proceedings and decisions since 2003 that LightSquared intended to
build an integrated terrestrial and satellite network. In addition,
OmniSTAR's customers, including presumably Trimble, should have known
since 2008 that their operations would have to change to accommodate
changes in the service that LightSquared was providing to Omnistar. For
example, in February 2008, OmniSTAR was told by LightSquared that after
2011, ``OmniSTAR must have converted its network to MSV's next-
generation service . . . moved to another operator, or shut down its
network.''
In short, the GPS manufacturers made deliberate design decisions
that created the potential for overload by LightSquared's network
terrestrial network. Since 2003, the GPS manufacturers were on notice
that they needed to review their design decisions to ensure that they
were compatible with LightSquared's network. In addition, with respect
to those GPS manufacturers that purchased an augmentation signal from
LightSquared, they received further notice since 2008 about
LightSquared's transition to an integrated terrestrial and satellite
network.

Q8.  Agencies that use high precision GPS have indicated that the use
of the upper band of LightSquared's spectrum will never be able to be
used without interfering with high precision GPS. Will LightSquared
commit to never using that upper band of spectrum that is closest to
the GPS signal?

A8.  Please see our answers to questions 1 and 4. We take the concerns
expressed by federal agencies seriously. They must be taken into
account as we engage in the discussion of whether the upper portion of
our spectrum could be safely deployed in a commercially reasonable time
frame.
Please note, however, that regardless of use of the upper portion
of the spectrum for a ground network, the upper portion of this
spectrum can continue to be used for satellite services, which have
been provided for 15 years without any interference with GPS receivers.

Q9.  When will you submit filters for high-precision GPS for testing?
Who will conduct this testing? How long will it take? Will federal
agencies be able to conduct their own independent testing, similar to
the TWG and the NPEF, prior to LightSquared operations?

A9.  On its own initiative, LightSquared has recently completed a
request for information (RFI) process that requested filter suppliers
to deliver filters meeting the specifications defined by the GPS
industry. In less than 30 days from issuing the RFI, LightSquared began
receiving shipments of filters and testing on these filters can begin
immediately. LightSquared intends to conduct its own testing of these
filters using respected, independent laboratories. These filters are
also available for testing according to the terms outlined by NTIA in
its September 9, 2011, letter to the PNT ExCom.

Questions Submitted by Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson

Q1.  What can Congress do to protect the future value of spectrum and
ensure user receivers do not bleed into spectrum not assigned to them?
What are the challenges associated with establishing receiver standards
to preclude devices from picking up unintended spectrum?

A1.  Spectrum will become much more intensively used in the next few
years as more and more Americans use smartphones--which use 24 to 25
times the data as cellphones--and businesses begin to take advantage of
the capabilities of new wireless infrastructure. But there is no
spectrum available that does not already have existing users.
Accordingly, new networks and existing users will have to find ways of
coexisting, as otherwise the U.S. will never be able to bring
sufficient spectrum to meet increasing demand. The losers in that
scenario will not be the companies arguing over spectrum--it will
inevitably be the American consumer, who will pay more for worse
service.
Coexistence should be a question of technology and economics: how
do you fix it and who pays? These are questions that can normally be
solved by agreement of new networks and existing users, and we strongly
believe that should continue to be the model.
The current issue, however, shows what happens when a powerful
entrenched industry decides that it would rather take the chance that
it cannot be stopped from deploying inefficient technology. We believe
that this issue can be solved, and are more confident in this belief
with each passing week as more manufacturers announce solutions.
However, to the extent some continue to try to hold out, there are
three things Congress should do:

Instead of taking sides, Congress should encourage
parties to work these issues out as success means benefits to all
Americans from new uses of spectrum while retaining and strengthening
old uses.

The current regulatory regime--Part 15--makes clear that
devices that look outside their authorized bands are not entitled to
interference protection. Indeed, I have attached hereto an excerpt from
a Garmin GPS receiver manual that provides standard language to this
effect. Accordingly, the FCC today has the tools in its hands to allow
networks to move forward, simply by allowing them to do so and thus
making clear that device manufacturers have to innovate and adapt.
Congress should encourage FCC to stand by this rule and its own
longstanding precedent.

Finally, in order to avoid future situations where the
current tools may prove insufficient, Congress should explicitly
authorize the FCC to apply receiver standards that would protect
authorized adjacent band operations. Many countries apply receiver
standards today, and if limited to these specific issues, the effect of
such requirements would be to maximize efficient use of spectrum while
minimizing regulatory burden.

Q2.  LightSquared claims that its service has been beneficial to
federal, state, and local governments and first responders in times of
national emergencies as it provides an interoperable network for first
responders to utilize when cell phone service is not an option. Can you
elaborate on the services provided by LightSquared to our first
responders? Does this service require use of your mobile satellite
assets? In what way is the terrestrial network used?

A2.  LightSquared and its predecessor companies have a long history of
providing satellite-based communication services to federal, tribal,
state, and local governments on a continuing basis and during times of
emergencies. The company currently has hundreds of federal, tribal, and
state and local government accounts representing thousands of end users
and offers a broad variety of satellite services including telephony
voice, two-way radio, push-to-track and mobile data. LightSquared also
offers Satellite Mutual Aid Radio Talkgroups (``SMART'') nationwide and
regionally that enable critical and interoperable communications among
homeland security officials, law enforcement, emergency responders, and
public safety officials from various departments and agencies across
the United States. LightSquared's satellite-based communication
services have facilitated critical emergency communications among
nationwide and local first responders during disasters such as
Hurricane Katrina, Hurricane Ike, Hurricane Irene, the Kentucky ice
storms in 2009, the California wild fires and the earthquake in Haiti--
for U.S.-based first responders operating in Haiti following that
disaster.
While LightSquared's current network is satellite based, such a
network involves some terrestrial equipment such as earth stations to
receive and transmit signals. When a satellite-initiated telephone call
is connected to an Earth-based, traditional cellular or wireline
telephone, the call also transits another carrier's terrestrial
network.

Q3.  Former lawmakers, now lobbyists for LightSquared, recently wrote
an Op-Ed claiming that tests indicate LightSquared's new wireless
service would not cause any interference for 99.95 percent of all GPS
users.

Q3a.  What is the basis for the 99.95 percentage figure?

Q3b.  Are there tests and analysis to support this claim?

Q3c.  Were these tests conducted using federal agency equipment and
observed by federal agency personnel?

A3-3c.  Please see our answer to Chairman Hall's question number 5,
above, for the basis for our 99.5% figure, which in the worst case is
actually 99.75%.
To our knowledge, LightSquared has never claimed that our proposal
would protect 99.95% of all receivers. If you have an example of such a
claim, however, we would be happy to review it and provide a response.
The Technical Working Group (TWG) tests included the participation
of representatives from the Department of Defense, the Federal Aviation
Administration and NASA. These participants had full access to all of
the deliberations of the TWG, test methodologies, and testing data.
Testing was performed on commercial receivers, some of which are used
by federal agencies. Information regarding the types of facilities and
resources utilized is as follows:

Testing for the Cellular and General Location/Navigation
categories were performed by engineers at independent laboratories,
with all costs paid for by LightSquared.

Testing for the High Precision, Networks and Timing
categories occurred at the US Navy's NAVAIR facility, for which
LightSquared paid the facility's standard commercial rate; testing of
these devices was performed by employees of the manufacturers of the
devices tested.

Testing for the Space-Based device category was conducted
at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory by NASA and JPL employees.

Testing of aviation devices was performed at Zeta
Associates, Inc. (ZAI) by ZAI employees, under the terms of a then-
existing contract with the FAA.

Additionally, the U.S. Air Force, Space Command conducted
testing of certain classified and unclassified special purpose
receivers, though this testing was not part of the work undertaken by
the TWG.

Q4.  How long would LightSquared operate its network using only the
lower portion of the spectrum allocated to it by the FCC? If FCC
granted you permission to build out a broadband system in your lower 10
MHz portion of the spectrum band, would you expect to need to go back
to the FCC for approval to expand your build out into your upper 10 MHz
portion of the band--those that sit next to GPS?

A4.  As stated in response to Chairman Hall's question number 1, above,
we expect to be able to operate our network on the lower portion of the
spectrum for at least five to six years. Under our current proposals,
we would want to have a further discussion of how safe deployment of
the upper portion of the spectrum could be achieved within a
commercially reasonable time frame. In any event, however, we would not
be able to deploy that spectrum unless we were specifically authorized
by the FCC, which would consult with NTIA, the Department of Defense,
and other government agencies before taking any action.

Questions Submitted by Rep. Randy Neugebauer

Q1.  LightSquared continuously makes claims that the GPS community knew
this was coming, but I would venture to say it is the other way around.
The FCC has always firmly opposed a ground-based network in this
spectrum band (and the FCC's allowance of an ancillary terrestrial
network does not indicate willingness to allow a plan like
LightSquared's), and LightSquared's attempts are clearly against the
grain. Since years and years of explicit FCC precedent has reserved the
spectrum band in question for only ancillary terrestrial use because of
the obvious impacts on GPS technology, why did LightSquared invest so
much money in this plan to severely expand a ground-based system in the
first place? Why did your company not look for other spectrum that
would not impact GPS systems at all?

A1.  LightSquared's plan--to build an integrated satellite and
terrestrial broadband network in its spectrum--is fully consistent with
FCC precedents and has been fully authorized by the FCC since 2003. The
FCC, under both the current and prior Administrations, has confirmed
this view. As recently, as April 6, 2011, the FCC noted that ``[i]n the
case of GPS, we note that extensive terrestrial operations have been
anticipated in the L-band for at least 8 years (emphasis added).''
http://fjallfoss.fcc.gov/edocs
-
public/attachmatch/FCC-11-
57A1.pdf.
In addition, in October 2008, the FCC further stated that:
[T]he integration of an ATC into MSS systems would have several
benefits, including the filling of gaps in MSS coverage, increasing MSS
network capacity, and the development of new and innovative service
offerings that satellite-only MSS systems cannot offer, including,
e.g., ubiquitous digital telecommunications and broadband services and
other services that take advantage of the unique coverage and capacity
characteristics of ATC-enabled MSS (emphasis added).
http://licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/
download.do?attachment
-
key=678085
LightSquared (and its corporate predecessors) worked for almost a
decade with the GPS industry to ensure that its plans for a terrestrial
broadband network could co-exist with GPS devices. The kind of
interference that GPS manufacturers now complain of--overload
interference--should have been just as much of a concern then as it is
now, but the GPS manufacturers failed to raise the overload issue until
late 2010. The only exception is Deere, which raised the issue briefly
in 2001 and then without explanation failed to raise it again until
late 2010. Under the circumstances, LightSquared had every reason to
believe that GPS manufacturers were designing their devices so that
their only concern was LightSquared emissions into the GPS band (the
``out-of-band emission'' or ``OOBE'' issue), and not overload.

In 2002, LightSquared and the GPS industry submitted a
voluntary agreement under which LightSquared would limit its emissions
to avoid interference with GPS devices. When it submitted that
agreement, the GPS industry stated that ``[LightSquared's] proposed
terrestrial augmentations are also well known.'' http://
fjallfoss.fcc.gov/ecfs/document/view?id=6513283601

In 2003, the GPS industry trade association requested
that the FCC approve this voluntary agreement because these limits ``to
protect GPS represent a `win-win' for [LightSquared], for the
Commission's reliance on OOBE to limit interference, and for GPS safety
of life and public safety use.'' http://fjallfoss.fcc.gov/ecfs/
document/view?id=6515082621

In July 2009, the GPS industry raised concerns about
possible interference with GPS devices, but, as the FCC itself recently
noted, ``[o]ne month later . . . the [GPS industry association] filed a
joint letter with LightSquared agreeing that the GPS interference
issues had been resolved (emphasis in original).'' http://
fjallfoss.fcc.gov/ecfs/document/view?id=7021686751

Not only has the GPS industry fully participated in all regulatory
proceedings, known about potential interference issues, and worked with
LightSquared to resolve those issues--it actually applauded
LightSquared's efforts and urged the FCC to approve its application to
build an integrated satellite and terrestrial broadband network. In a
March 24, 2004, letter from the GPS trade association to the FCC, which
is worth quoting in full, they stated:
The U.S. GPS Industry Council (``the Council'') . . . urges the
Commission to grant the above-referenced applications of [LightSquared]
and to do so as soon as possible. [T]he Council and [LightSquared]
worked diligently to develop out-of-band emission (``OOBE'') limits
from MSV ancillary terrestrial component (``ATC'') base stations and
terminals into the GPS band, which are intended to protect GPS
receivers and at the same time allow [LightSquared] to maximize the
utility of its ATC service to its users.
[LightSquared] proposes to operate at OOBE levels that are even
more stringent than those set out in its agreement with the Council. We
believe that [LightSquared] is to be commended for its proposal to use
its spectrum in a responsible manner that ensures the continued utility
of GPS receivers operating in the vicinity of [LightSquared] ATC
stations. The major issues raised in its application have been before
the Commission and fully briefed since at least mid 2003 and, in many
cases, for far longer. Thus, the Commission's granting [LightSquared's]
applications expeditiously would validate [LightSquared's] adherence to
best commercial practices and advance the public and national interests
in promoting the responsible use of spectrum (emphasis added). http://
licensing.fcc.gov/myibfs/download.do?attachment
-
key=366878
We note that some in the GPS industry have recently attempted to
deny this extensive regulatory record and their own words in asserting
that ``FCC rules also did not allow the terrestrial-only broadband
services LightSquared now wants to provide.'' http://www.amerisurv.com/
index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=9208&Itemid=2. This is simply
revisionist history for the following reasons:

The GPS industry told the FCC in 2003 that it knew of the
extent of LightSquared's plans. In a filing to the FCC in 2003, the GPS
industry noted that LightSquared's network would have ``increased user
density from potentially millions of MSS mobile terminals operating in
ATC mode in the 1626.5-1660.5 MHz bands will transmit back to
potentially tens of thousands of ATC wireless base stations in the
1525-1559 MHz bands . . . (emphasis added).'' http://fjallfoss.fcc.gov/
ecfs/document/view?id=6515082621.

The GPS industry warned its own investors as early as
2001 about possible interference issues. For example, in 2001, Trimble
Navigation Limited, in its Form 10-K stated that: ``[E]missions from
mobile satellite service and other equipment operating in adjacent
frequency bands or inband may materially and adversely affect the
utility and reliability of our products, which could result in a
material adverse effect on our operating result.'' http://
files.shareholder.com/downloads/TRMB/1422870148x0x34031/919048BF-0668-
4353-97B5-7EFDF7718E64/2001
-
10K.pdf.

The undisputed regulatory record shows that, as early as
2003, LightSquared was intending to build, and the FCC had approved, an
extensive integrated satellite and terrestrial broadband network. This
chart summarizes the regulatory history of the number of base stations
and the power levels that those base stations that LightSquared was
authorized to operate:

Contrary to the suggestions of the GPS industry, the
FCC's rules do not require that satellite service be the
``predominant'' or ``primary'' use of LightSquared's licensed L-band
spectrum. Indeed, such a requirement--as well as other restrictions,
such as limiting base stations to areas without satellite coverage and
requiring user devices to first look to the satellite before connecting
to the terrestrial network--was explicitly rejected by the FCC in 2003
and 2005 as spectrally inefficient, unnecessarily costly, and
operationally inefficient. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  These FCC's conclusions completely rebut Dr. Scott Pace's
written testimony at the Committee's hearing that LightSquared was only
authorized to build a ``fill in'' terrestrial network for gaps in
satellite coverage. http://science.house.gov/sites/
republicans.science.house.gov/files/documents/hearings/
0908011
-
Pace.pdf. Dr. Pace also grossly errs in his
recitation of the regulatory history, stating that LightSquared was
limited to the construction of only 1725 base stations in 2003 and 2145
base stations in 2004. This is plainly and demonstratively wrong, as
explained in the footnote above.

The GPS industry's argument--that the January 2011
conditional waiver of the integrated services rule represented a
fundamental change in LightSquared's network--is wrong. As the chart
above illustrates, it has been well-known for nearly eight years that
LightSquared had the authority to build an integrated satellite and
terrestrial network consisting of over 10,000 base stations at power
levels that are as high as or exceed LightSquared's current plans. As
the FCC itself noted recently, ``[t]he [conditional waiver of the FCC
integrated services rule] was not the trigger to permit LightSquared
access to the spectrum in the band adjacent to GPS. LightSquared's
predecessors have had access to this L-Band satellite spectrum since
1995 and have been authorized to provide terrestrial service since
2004. (emphasis added).'' http://fjallfoss.fcc.gov/ecfs/document/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
view?id=7021686751

The GPS industry has never offered that LightSquared
could begin to operate under its pre-January 2011 authorizations. If
the January 2011 conditional waiver represented a fundamental change in
LightSquared's network, as the GPS industry argues, they should be
comfortable in allowing LightSquared to deploy its network under its
earlier authorizations. They have never offered that compromise because
they know that the technical characteristics approved by the FCC from
2003 to 2005 and blessed by the GPS industry are the same as the
network that LightSquared intends to deploy today.

In summary, LightSquared chose to invest $14 billion in private
capital to build an integrated satellite and terrestrial network in its
own spectrum because:

Over the course of eight years, it had the undisputed
legal and regulatory authorization to build its integrated satellite
and terrestrial network. Those FCC authorizations occurred in 2003,
2004, 2005, and 2010.

Over that same period, it worked extensively with the GPS
industry to resolve any interference issues. The GPS industry itself
has characterized that cooperation as a ``win-win,'' ``intended to
protect GPS receivers and at the same time allow [LightSquared] to
maximize the utility of its ATC services to its users,''" and in ``the
public and national interests in promoting the responsible use of
spectrum.''

LightSquared does not need to find new spectrum farther
away from GPS receivers because it has the legal right to build and
operate an integrated satellite and terrestrial network in its own
spectrum. While LightSquared is fully committed to finding technical
solutions to co-exist with the GPS industry, as a legal matter, it has
no obligation to move from its spectrum to accommodate GPS devices that
were intentionally designed to look into LightSquared's spectrum.

Q2.  LightSquared has claimed that your new plan resolves interference
problems for 99.5 percent of GPS receivers. I have not seen this claim
substantiated. Could you please provide evidence for this claim? Also,
have you estimated the economic impacts of the supposedly small
percentage of receivers that will be affected by your current plan? It
seems to me, from the testimonies of the experts at the hearing and
from various studies, that the most economically valuable and
critically important GPS users will be the ones still affected by
LightSquared's use of the lower half of the spectrum.

A2.  With regard to the first part of the question, substantiation of
the 99.5% figure, please see our answers to Chairman Hall's question
number 5 and Ranking Member Johnson's question number 3, above.
With regard to the second part of the question regarding economic
impact on precision receivers, LightSquared's position is that there
should be no economic impact on any users, as manufacturers should be
responsible for providing their users devices that can operate
consistent with rules the FCC issued years ago, which as discussed
above in response top Chairman Hall's question number 3, has been shown
to be completely feasible with a minimal investment of time and
resources. As explained in response to your question 1, above, the
public record clearly shows that LightSquared's planned use of its
network was anticipated for years. GPS manufacturers, however, have
repeatedly tried to focus debate on how LightSquared will impact GPS
users in order to distract policymakers and the public from the real
question of their own responsibility for replacing or retrofitting
devices.
It is important to note in this respect that while use of precision
devices is important, the hundreds of millions of devices
LightSquared's proposals address contribute significantly to the
economy. Hundreds of millions of smartphones and personal navigation
devices--used by consumers but also used by business, government and
public safety--will not need to be replaced. Devices used in aviation--
the economic importance of which is clear--will not need to be
replaced. And timing devices--used in wireless and other critical
networks that contribute tens of billions of dollars of value every
year to the U.S. economy--will not need to be replaced. This is the
result of an investment by LightSquared of over $100 million to solve
the problem for these devices, thus absolving the GPS manufacturers if
responsibility to do so.
What is left is something less than the estimated 500,000-1,000,000
precision devices used largely in agriculture, surveying and
construction. There will be no impact from our deployment for a
significant number of these devices for three reasons:

Testing has demonstrated that, even using the most
restrictive definitions of harmful interference proposed by the GPS
manufacturers, 10 out of 38 precision devices--26%--did not suffer
harmful interference.

Assuming LightSquared is operating in the spectrum
farthest from GPS, harmful interference for the remaining devices would
be limited to a relatively close distance from our base station,
meaning that many precision receivers used in remote areas and for
agriculture will never be close enough to our network to suffer any
effect.

Our network will be deployed over five years, meaning
that some portion of devices would have been traded out for new devices
in the ordinary course of business.

After accounting for these factors, what is left is a portion of
the total number of devices, which could be as few as 100,000-200,000,
but under any set of reasonable assumptions will not be as many as 1
million.
For these devices, we have recently demonstrated, together with our
partners, Javad and Partron America, that filters for precision
receivers could be developed within days and would cost as little as
$6. \7\ This proves three concepts: that the interference issue can be
solved; that it can be solved quickly; and that it can be solved
inexpensively.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\  LightSquared News Release, October 13, 2011, LightSquared
Shows Filtering Technology: ``In addition to receivers developed by
Javad GNSS, several other high-tech companies have also created
LightSquared compatible components that can be integrated into
receivers. For example, PCTEL has developed LightSquared compatible
chip sets, and Partron America has created a filtering component that
only costs $6.'' http://www.lightsquared.com/press-room/press-releases/
lightsquared-shows-filtering-technology/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In this respect it is important to compare this with a recent
recall of GPS devices by Garmin. Issued in August, 2010, Garmin
recalled 1.2 million devices because of battery issues. This is one
manufacturer. The present situation involves only a portion of this
number, spread out over a GPS industry that is manifestly capable of
bearing the cost. Not only do GPS manufacturers enjoy the use of
government spectrum for free, but they are well funded, with John Deere
alone carrying over $3 billion in cash, Garmin over $1.5 billion, and
Trimble over $250 million.
Given the limited scope of the remaining receivers--the receivers
not already protected by the investment LightSquared is making--there
is simply no reasonable argument as to why this cannot be solved.
LightSquared will invest $14 billion of private funds in the American
economy, support 15,000 jobs a year for each year of our build out, and
create an unprecedented integrated network that will allow dozens of
retail competitors to offer broadband across the U.S. The economic cost
of solving this last portion of devices should not stand in the way of
bringing this investment at a time when jobs, infrastructure, and
innovation are sorely needed in the U.S. economy.
If we fail to solve it because certain GPS manufacturers are
allowed to continue to avoid responsibility for addressing the issue,
the economic consequences to the country will be extremely damaging.
Companies and investors will have serious doubts about the ability of
the U.S. government to bring more spectrum to market. They will also
doubt the government's willingness to enforce longstanding license
rights in spectrum. The combined effect will push the value of spectrum
down, and therefore reduce significantly the receipts the Federal
Government can expect from the auction of licensed spectrum. Investors
will direct investment to countries where spectrum rights are enforced,
and where operators can expect to be able to deploy networks as
authorized. The United States has long drawn private investment in
wireless telecommunications because it has stood by these principles,
and must continue to do so.

Responses by Dr. Scott Pace,
Director, Space Policy Institute,
George Washington University

Questions Submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1.  How common are the wideband and high precision GPS receivers that
are at risk of interference from LightSquared's modified business plan
that starts commercial operations with just the ``lower'' portion of
its spectrum?

Q1a.  How much do they cost?

Q1b.  What is the normal upgrade or re-equipage cycle for these GPS
receivers at federal departments and agencies?

A1-1b.  Wideband and high precision GPS receivers are not as common as
mobile phones, but they are standard equipment in multiple sectors of
the global economy, from machine control, survey, mapping, and
construction, to precision agriculture and timing/network
synchronization. More than 100,000 receivers for high precision
applications are sold in North America each year.
Prices for high precision receivers can range from $1,000 to in
excess of $100,000 but currently average between $9,000 and $13,000
(NDP Consulting 2011). Typical re-equipage times can average around 15
years. Software upgrades occur on faster cycles but proposed
mitigations to the effects of LightSquared emissions have typically
been to change external antennas or modify the receiver front ends.
These are not software fixes. Federal agencies may hold on to equipment
for longer periods of time and, as with commercial users, employing
older receivers as base stations while using more current equipment in
mobile applications.

Q2.  LightSquared has agreed to a ``standstill'' on the use of the
``upper'' portion of their spectrum, the portion closest to the GPS
signal. LightSquared has stated they would like to work with the GPS
community to develop mitigation strategies in order to initiate
commercial operations of the upper spectrum within two to three years.

Q2a.  Is two to three years a reasonable time frame to expect federal
agencies to upgrade or re-equip? What would be the costs?

A2-2a.  Two to three years is not a reasonable time frame. When major
changes were made to GPS in the past, such as turning Selective
Availability to zero or transitioning semi-codeless users to a second
coded civil signal, transition times of a decade or more were used. The
potential interference from LightSquared is more disruptive and
technically difficult to mitigate.
It is not yet clear that use of the lower band by LightSquared is
technically possible without unacceptable harm to GPS high precision
and other users (e.g., specialized receivers used in spaceflight). The
upper band is even more problematic and the consensus in the GPS
community seems to be that use of the upper band should be ``off the
table.''
Despite press releases, no proposed filters have been made
available for independent testing. Even if they function as claimed,
filters alone are not sufficient to make a regulatory decision. Actual
high precision equipment with the proposed filter fully integrated must
be tested to assess degradation in receiver performance and accuracy.
Equipment that is proven able to function in the face of lower band
interference may or may not be able to provide the same level of
performance if LightSquared uses both the upper and lower bands.
It is virtually impossible to provide a cost estimate on upgrading
or re-equipping the GPS receivers used by federal agencies as key
pieces of information are missing: (1) is it possible to suppress the
effects of LightSquared emissions without significant harm to GPS
receiver performance? (2) What are the operational characteristics of
the ``new'' receivers? (e.g., thermal stability, weight, form and fit
factors, degree of hardware and software modifications, etc.), and (3)
If there is a solution that works at the lower band, does it also work
at the upper band or would another round of changes be required?
Even assuming technical feasibility, there are applications where
upgrades and/or re-equipage are not possible. Examples could include
satellite constellations performing radio-occultation science where the
receiver lifetimes can be up to 15 years and the only `mitigation'
possible is to launch new satellites at a cost of hundreds of millions
of dollars each.

Q3.  Given that LightSquared has clearly shown that it intends to
ultimately utilize both the upper and the lower portion of its
spectrum, even with its new business proposal to start with just the
lower portion, how is the new proposal really any different to federal
agencies than the original proposal?

A3.  In my opinion, it is merely a change in sequencing and timing of
LightSquared's proposed deployment plan and does not represent a
fundamental technical change.
Since the upper band is still allowed by the current FCC
regulations, the GPS community must assume its use in their assessments
of LightSquared interference. If and when the FCC officially and
publicly rules that the upper band will not be used for terrestrial
transmissions, the GPS community can modify its assessments to focus
only on the lower band.
The same is true for the maximum authorized power of LightSquared's
terrestrial signals. Current FCC regulations allow maximum power ten
times greater than LightSquared's current planned power. Unless the FCC
regulations are updated to document a new, lower maximum authorized
power for LightSquared terrestrial transmissions; the assessment of
interference to GPS must be based on the higher authorized power.

Q4.  I understand there are now other companies exploring a similar
terrestrial broadband business plan but in an entirely different part
of the spectrum that would not interfere with the GPS signal. If we can
accommodate the President's goals for the Broadband Initiative using
spectrum that doesn't interfere with GPS, why should we risk the
taxpayer investment in GPS?

A4.  The taxpayer investment in GPS need not and should not be put at
risk. The MSS satellite part of the LightSquared network is compatible
with neighboring GPS uses and thus can coexist with all GPS services,
applications and existing user equipment if it is used solely for
space-service links. The terrestrial component of the LightSquared
network has not yet been built therefore it is at least technically
feasible to move to a different band from the outset, thus avoiding
large scale disruption to GPS users across the United States. Possible
locations include the S-Band (above 2 GHz) or the 700 MHz bands already
allocated to terrestrial 4G wireless services.
In addition, handsets are an important part of the LightSquared
terrestrial network; they are the user terminals that subscribers will
use for high-speed broadband applications. These user terminals have,
for the most part, been overlooked in the immediate debate over
LightSquared's terrestrial base station transmitters. Each of these
user terminals is also a radio transmitter, operating in the frequency
band 1626.5-1660.5 MHz, just above the GPS L1 frequencies. LightSquared
claims it will have 260 million subscribers by 2015. Each of these
subscribers will carry in their hand a potential source of GPS
interference. GPS users in automobiles, aircraft, or on a city sidewalk
could find themselves in close proximity (1 meter or less) to one or
more of these LightSquared user terminals. Preliminary testing by the
high precision sub-team of the FCC Technical Working Group (TWG),
published in the 30 June 2011 TWG Final Report, confirmed that
LightSquared handsets do have the potential to interfere with GPS, and
so the final assessment of LightSquared's total interference to GPS
must include a careful examination of the effects of emissions from
handsets as well as base stations.

Q5.  Will the filters proposed by JAVAD GNSS and LightSquared mitigate
the interference problem to wideband and high precision GPS receivers?
What testing has been done to demonstrate their effectiveness? Who
should pay for this testing?

A5.  It is unknown whether the proposed filters will mitigate
interference due to LightSquared's terrestrial operations. Some
performance charts have been provided to the FCC in an ex parte
presentation claiming improved protection but no filters or prototype
high precision receivers are yet available for independent testing.
Section 25.255 of the FCC's rules makes the obligation of resolving
harmful interference to other services that is caused by MSS ATC
operations the sole responsibility of the ATC operator. \1\ These
regulations, which went into effect on 5 June 2003, clearly state ``If
harmful interference is caused to other services by ancillary MSS ATC
operations, either from ATC base stations or mobile terminals, the MSS
ATC operator must resolve any such interference.'' LightSquared is
still nominally an ATC operator subject to Section 25.255 and thus I
would argue that LightSquared should pay for testing of equipment that
it claims will mitigate interference it proposes to create. If that
equipment proves to be effective at mitigating LightSquared
interference to GPS, then Section 25.255 would also suggest that
LightSquared is responsible for the cost of manufacturing, delivery,
installation, recalibration, recertification, and subsequent
maintenance of that mitigation hardware for the life of any affected
GPS application. This would apply to GPS use by federal agencies,
state, local, and tribal governments and the private sector.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 47 C.F.R. Sec. 25.255.

Q6.  Are there currently any mitigation strategies that make sense for
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
wideband or high precision GPS receivers?

A6.  The only assured mitigation strategy I am aware of would be one in
which the band 1525-1559 MHz remains a satellite services band and
terrestrial mobile services are moved to a frequency band distant from
GPS signals as I describe in my response to Question #4 above. It
should be noted, however, that even if LightSquared were to vacate the
1525-1559 MHz band completely with their terrestrial transmissions,
that LightSquared handset transmissions in the 1626.5-1660.5 MHz band
could still prove to be a major source of interference to GPS.

Q7.  Mr. Carlisle states in his testimony that ``many consumers in
rural America don't even have a wireless broadband option: 28 percent
of people who live in rural America still have no access to
broadband.''

Q7a.  Will LightSquared's new proposal roll out a ground network in
rural areas?

Q7b.  Will its satellite service be able to reach rural areas?

Q7c.  What is the definition of broadband service?

Q7d.  Will LightSquared's satellite component be able to meet that
broadband definition?

Q7e.  So, in summary: Will LightSquared be able to provide broadband to
rural areas under its current proposal?

A7-7e.  LightSquared's proposed rollout plan is still considered
proprietary to the best of my knowledge. That said, business
considerations would likely create an emphasis on serving high-density
urban areas first and thus terrestrial tower deployments should be
expected in key cities before service is extended to rural areas. The
satellite service is certainly capable of reaching rural areas, however
the satellite service does not and will not provide broadband
performance.
The FCC defines broadband as 1 Mbps up and 4 Mbps down (see http://
www.fcc.gov/Daily_Releases/Daily
-
Business/2010/db0720/FCC-
10-129A1.pdf) and the maximum data rates possible from the LightSquared
SkyTerra I satellite are 300-400 Kbps (see http://www.pcworld.com/
businesscenter/article/210570/
lightsquareds
-
mobile
-
hopes
-
to
-

rise
-
with
-
satellite.html). Thus the satellite
coverage looks to be voice, text messages, and similar low data rate
services but not 4G LTE broadband. Given the economic pressure to build
out terrestrial capacity in urban areas first and limitations of the
satellites, it is unlikely that rural areas will benefit from
LightSquared broadband capacity any time soon.
LightSquared Chief Marketing Officer Frank Boulben confirmed this
point in a press statement this past week. To quote: ``But Boulben
cautioned that LightSquared's satellite service will provide only voice
and text coverage and will not provide the kind of high-speed data
services for users who live near its terrestrial LTE network.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  See http://www.dailyfinance.com/2011/10/15/lightsquared-our-
lte-network-will-be-better-than-a/

Q8.  Mr. Carlisle states in his testimony that ``no other company could
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
conceivably offer this broad coverage in the same time frame.''

Q8a.  Are there any other options, or is LightSquared the ``only game
in town''?

A8-8a.  Broadband can be delivered in many ways (e.g., DSL, cable
modem, fiber optics, wireless, satellite, etc.) Certainly, LightSquared
has (or had) expectations of being able to offer broad coverage in
short period of time, but this required a variety of regulatory,
technical, and financial assumptions. I cannot comment on their
business viability, but given expressions of interest by other
companies in using different MSS spectrum for terrestrial 4G LTE
broadband (e.g., DISH Network has applied to use its spectrum for
terrestrial broadband services), alternatives exist to the LightSquared
proposal.

Q9.  Mr. Carlisle states in his testimony that the GPS manufacturers
failed to raise issues at the FCC when it was developing its rules and
could have addressed this issue in the design of their receivers years
ago. But in fact, some high precision GPS receivers actually use the
LightSquared signal.

Q9a.  Did users know about this issue years ago?

Q9b.  Is it disingenuous for LightSquared to blame GPS manufacturers?

A9-9b.  The GPS community did not know years ago, and could not have
predicted, that the FCC would effectively seek to reallocate spectrum
from space services such as the MSS to terrestrial mobile services
without a notice of proposed rule-making and in contradiction to prior
statements that it would maintain the satellite gating requirement that
prohibited stand-alone terrestrial services as LightSquared has
proposed. Speculation that the Commission would do so would have
rightly been dismissed as unfounded speculation by the FCC. In numerous
formal rulemakings, FCC indicated they would not allow stand-alone
terrestrial services and GPS users and manufacturers relied on those
assurances. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  In the original FCC Order dated February 10, 2003, Paragraph
1: ``We do not intend, nor will we permit, the terrestrial component to
become a stand-alone service.'' The gating criteria that maintained
this prohibition was never waived until January of this year.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, some high precision receivers use MSS signals in the
adjacent spectrum as part of contractually agreed on services from
Inmarsat and the Skyterra satellite now owned by LightSquared. It would
seem unusual to expect GPS manufactures to design equipment providing
poorer performance in the expectation that existing satellite services
would be eliminated by a future regulatory action that the Commissions
denied it would ever take.

Q10.  What impact would LightSquared's network have on high precision
GPS receivers?

Q10a.  First, how important are high precision receivers today?

Q10b.  Is the trend for higher precision receivers across the board in
all industries?

Q10c.  How are these receivers affected by LightSquared's most recent
proposal?

Q10d.  Does LightSquared have a viable solution for the high precision
receivers?

Q10e.  What do you see as a solution for these types of receivers?

A10-10e.  High precision GPS receivers are crucial to multiple areas or
the economy and scientific work. The accuracy and precision of high end
GPS receivers are relied upon in surveying, mapping, construction,
machine control, and agriculture to the extent that readily available
substitutes do not exist.
The LightSquared proposal and associated interference does not
represent a single type of threat. Different applications have
different requirements for precision with scientific users perhaps
being the most demanding. While it is possible to expect mobile phones
to be unaffected by LightSquared operations that are restricted to the
lower band, it is not possible to imagine the same for wideband and
high precision receivers. LightSquared interference would most severely
impact scientific work supported by federal agencies and economically
impact those areas of the economy reliant on high precision positioning
and timing.There is only one GPS and one set of GPS signals that are
used in such critical applications. There are multiple means for
providing broadband communications. The highest levels of GPS precision
positioning and timing should not, and need not, be sacrificed for a
capability that can be supplied in other ways. In my opinion, the
solution for high precision receivers is to maintain the 1525-1559 MHz
band as a dedicated space services band as it has been for many
decades.

Questions Submitted by Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson

Q1.  NOAA's prepared statement says that its engineers are concerned
that a filter capable of blocking out the powerful LightSquared signal
at the lower channel may also prevent the receiver from detecting the
GPS signal, rendering it useless.

Q1a.  In your opinion, is it technically feasible to design a filter
that simultaneously allows GPS users to listen to signals in
LightSquared's allocated bandwidth and block LightSquared's signals?

Q1b.  Can you estimate its cost?

Q1c.  What are the challenges associated with certifying such filters
for aviation use?

A1-1c.  I don't believe you can have a commercial filter that can
discriminate between wanted and unwanted emissions that are effectively
identical. Blocking a signal in a certain frequency band means blocking
all signals unless one is using sophisticated anti-jam/anti-spoofing
techniques that would be impractical for non-military users. I could
not estimate the cost of such devices.
Hypothetically assuming a new filter existed, aviation
certification would require incorporating the filter into an existing
aviation receiver or creating a new receiver for certification. It is
the aviation receiver whose performance has to meet Minimum Operational
Performance Specifications (MOPS), not just the filter itself.
Certifying a new type of receiver can take years.

Q2.  What can Congress do to protect the future value of spectrum and
ensure user receivers do not bleed into spectrum not assigned to them?
What are the challenges associated with establishing receiver standards
to preclude devices from picking up unintended spectrum?

A2.  It would be more accurate to say that transmitters pose a risk of
their emissions bleeding over into spectrum not assigned to them. The
type of interference caused by LightSquared to GPS arises from both the
practical design of GPS filters and the power of the LightSquared
terrestrial signal. It is not accurate to characterize the interference
as solely a GPS receiver problem. This is true both technically, and in
terms of the FCC regulations 47 CFR 25.255, which states that the MSS
ATC operator must resolve any interference. The fact is that all GPS
receivers incorporate filters that are carefully designed and
calibrated for the environment in which they are expected to operate.
Receivers incorporate filters to protect against unwanted emissions
and in the case of GPS receivers operating next to the MSS spectrum,
most have filters to prevent interference from the more powerful MSS
signals coming from the satellite. In some cases, the GPS receivers are
even designed to received MSS signals through the same antenna and
front-end as used for the GPS signals. Unfortunately, no filters have
not yet been demonstrated that can protect GPS receivers from the many
billions of times stronger terrestrial LightSquared signal.
The ability of real-world hardware filters to reject interference
is not infinite. Any filter can eventually be overcome by a
sufficiently strong interference source. Incidentally, this is why it
is critically important for the FCC to formally limit the authorized
maximum power of LightSquared ATC transmissions to the lower levels at
which LightSquared has promised to operate. If FCC regulations allow
LightSquared to raise their base station power by a factor of 10 in the
future, any filter mitigation developed and deployed today--even if it
is technically feasible--could be once again overwhelmed and rendered
ineffective if LightSquared increases its terrestrial power in the
future.
Industry already develops and uses standards to serve their
customers and markets. There are normal market forces that drive
receiver performance. The government should not seek to define separate
standards except for compelling purposes of national security (e.g.,
military applications) or public safety (e.g. as with aviation
receivers). The government should certainly not try to establish
standards that would limit the performance of receivers used in
scientific research--whether in space or on the Earth.
On the subject of standards, it is important to clarify claims that
``GPS commercial device manufacturers have ignored government design
standards.'' The standard to which LightSquared refers was published by
the Department of Defense in 2008 and is known as the Standard
Positioning Service Performance Standard (SPS PS). As its name implies,
the SPS PS is a performance standard, not a design standard. The SPS PS
defines the level of accuracy and other performance a representative
GPS receiver can expect from the GPS system of satellites and ground
control elements, but it is not in any way a GPS receiver design
standard. Section 2.0 of the SPS PS clearly states: ``The
representative receiver characteristics are used to provide a framework
for defining the SPS performance standards. They are not intended to
impose any minimum requirements on receiver manufacturers or
integrators, although they are necessary attributes to achieve the SPS
performance described in this document.'' Therefore, claims that the
SPS PS serves as a ``government design standard'' are incorrect.
The most effective oversight action the Congress could take is to
ensure that the FCC follows the Administrative Procedures Act and that
changes in the allocation of spectrum are done through normal notices
of proposed rulemaking based on technical facts openly presented.

Q3.  Your statement provides several ways to move forward, including an
option to help LightSquared find alternative spectrum for its
terrestrial network outside the L-band. Is there any precedent for FCC
doing such a thing?

A3.  The FCC has provided ``bidding credits'' in spectrum auctions to
certain categories of applicants, such as small businesses or those
serving tribal lands. The Commission could seek authorization from the
Congress to provide assistance to LightSquared or other similarly
situated MSS ATC operators to secure non-L-band spectrum already
allocated for terrestrial mobile services if it was determined that
such assistance was warranted. As a practical matter, the Commission
would likely be reluctant to undertake the difficult work necessary to
make this happen, but it is an option if the policy case for broadband
was sufficiently compelling.

Q4.  The European Union and the United Nations' aviation body ICAO have
voiced concern about the potential disruption to aviation use of GPS
caused by the proposed LightSquared network. What agreements do we have
in place that we risk violating were such disruptions occur?

A4.  Article 11 of the 2004 Agreement between the U.S. and European
Union on the use of GPS and Galileo states:
The Parties shall work together to promote adequate frequency
allocations for satellite-based navigation and timing signals, to
ensure radio frequency compatibility in spectrum use between each
other's signals, to make all practicable efforts to protect each
other's signals from interference by the radio frequency emissions of
other systems, and to promote harmonized use of spectrum on a global
basis, notably at the ITU. The Parties shall cooperate with respect to
identifying sources of interference and taking appropriate follow-on
actions.In 2007, the FAA submitted a letter to ICAO that reaffirmed
``the United States Government's commitment to provide the Global
Positioning System (GPS) Standard Positioning Service (SPS) for
aviation throughout the world. Further, the United States commits to
provide the Wide-Area Augmentation System (WAAS) service within its
prescribed service volume.'' The letter goes on to say ``The U.S.
Government plans to take all necessary measures for the foreseeable
future to maintain the integrity, reliability and availability of the
GPS SPS and WAAS service and expects to provide at least six years'
notice prior to any termination of such operations or elimination of
such services.''
While not a formal agreement, the 1998 Joint Statement between the
United States and Japan recognized GPS cooperation between the two
countries along with the commitment that the two countries would ``help
develop effective approaches toward providing adequate radio frequency
allocations for GPS and other radionavigation systems.''
Appendix 2

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Additional Material for the Record

Prepared Statement of Mr. Randy Neugebauer
U.S. House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this full Committee hearing to
review the effects of the proposed LightSquared broadband network on
federal science activities. Multiple studies have indicated that
LightSquared's proposal will cause widespread degradation of virtually
every Global Positioning System (GPS) application in the United States,
and I have significant concerns about its effects in particular on
federal science activities. I also am concerned that the network will
severely damage GPS usage for agricultural production in the U.S.,
which is a major concern for my constituents in the 19th District of
Texas.
LightSquared intends to build 40,000 high-powered ground
transmission units, creating a signal one billion times stronger than
GPS signals. This could lead to major interference issues since the
spectrum to be used is immediately adjacent to GPS spectrum.
The President's national broadband initiative is admirable, but as
with any major proposal it is imperative that we consider the
consequences. The Administration has seemed amicable to LightSquared
because it advertises massive expansion of broadband technology to
millions of Americans if it is allowed to build out its terrestrial
network. However, I am worried that the negative impacts of the
technology will far outweigh the benefits. The scientific problems with
the substantial terrestrial usage of this spectrum--for which FCC
precedent has only allowed ancillary terrestrial usage in the past--
have been well documented. As a result LightSquared has recently
published a modified proposal to use only the lower half of the
spectrum initially. Preliminary studies indicate that even this
proposal would have severe effects on federal science activities. There
is certainly not sufficient evidence to support this alternative
proposal without further study.
I look forward to the verbal testimony of the panel before the
Committee today. Based on current evidence, LightSquared's proposal
could severely inhibit federal science activities. I believe that the
experts testifying here today will provide valuable insight into the
problems this plan could cause.
Thank you.
Letter from Members of Congress to Hon. Julius Genachowski,
Chairman, Federal Communications Commission, Washington, DC

Response to Hon. Randy Neugebauer from
Hon. Julius Genachowski,
Chairman, Federal Communications Commission,
Washington, DC

Written Statement of the Coalition to Save Our GPS
Presented to the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Letter to Hon. Ralph M. Hall, Chairman,
U.S. House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
from Mr. Malcolm D. Jackson, Assistant Administrator and
Chief Information Officer, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

Letter to Hon. Ralph M. Hall, Chairman,
U.S. House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
from Mr. Michael W. Locatis III, Chief Information Officer,
U.S. Department of Energy

Letter to Hon. Ralph M. Hall, Chairman,
U.S. House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
from Mr. Subra Suresh, Director, National Science Foundation

Letter to Mr. Larry Strickling,
Assistant Secretary of Commerce,
U.S. Department of Commerce, from NASA

Federal Aviation Administration:
LightSquared Impact to Aviation: FAA Perspective:
PowerPoint Presentation to U.S. House Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology

Letter to Mr. Karl B. Nebbia, Associate Administrator,
National Telecommunications and Information Administration,
from Mr. Joel Szabat, Deputy Assistant Secretary for
Transportation Policy, U.S. Department of Transportation

Memorandum for Mr. Karl Nebbia, Associate Administrator,
National Telecommunications and Information Administration,
from Deanna Archuleta, Senior Advisor to the Secretary,
Department of the Interior


