- PROTECTING INFORMATION IN THE DIGITAL AGE: FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING INFORMATION IN THE DIGITAL AGE:
FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, MAY 25, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-19

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-560 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DAVID WU, Oregon
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 PAUL D. TONKO, New York
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JERRY McNERNEY, California
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
Tennessee                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation

HON. BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona, Chair
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                DAVID WU, Oregon
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
Tennessee                        BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
------

Subcommittee on Research and Science Education

HON. MO BROOKS, Alabama, Chair
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       PAUL D. TONKO, New York
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, May 25, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Benjamin Quayle, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     8
Written Statement............................................     9

Statement by Representative David Wu, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Mo Brooks, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Research and Science Education, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................    12
Written Statement............................................    13

Statement by Representative Daniel Lipinsky, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Research and Science Education,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15

Witnesses:

Dr. George Strawn, Director, National Coordination Office,
Networking and Information Technology Research and Development
Program
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    18
Biography....................................................    22

Dr. Farnam Jahanian, Assistant Director, Directorate for Computer
and Information Science and Engineering, National Science
Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    22
Written Statement............................................    24
Biography....................................................    34

Ms. Cita Furlani, Director, Information Technology Laboratory,
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    35
Written Statement............................................    36
Biography....................................................    42

Rear Admiral Michael A. Brown, Director, Cybersecurity
Coordination, Department of Homeland Security
Oral Statement...............................................    43
Written Statement............................................    44
Biography....................................................    52

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. George Strawn, Director, National Coordination Office,
Networking and Information Technology Research and Development
Program........................................................    68

Dr. Farnam Jahanian, Assistant Director, Directorate for Computer
and Information Science and Engineering, National Science
Foundation.....................................................    73

Ms. Cita Furlani, Director, Information Technology Laboratory,
National Institute of Standards and Technology.................    76

Rear Admiral Michael A. Brown, Director, Cybersecurity
Coordination, Department of Homeland Security..................    80

PROTECTING INFORMATION IN THE DIGITAL AGE:
FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH
AND DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 25, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation and
Subcommittee on Research and Science Education
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Benjamin
Quayle [Chairman of the Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Protecting Information in the Digital Age:

Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Efforts

wednesday, may 25, 2011
10:00 a.m.--12:00 p.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

I. Purpose

On Wednesday, May 25, 2011, the Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation and the Subcommittee on Research and Science Education will
convene a joint hearing to examine Federal agency efforts to improve
our national cybersecurity and prepare the future cybersecurity talent
needed for national security. An overview of cybersecurity research and
development activities will be provided by the Networking and
Information Technology Research and Development program (NITRD), the
National Science Foundation (NSF), the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST), and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
In reviewing the activities of the agencies' cybersecurity programs,
the hearing will address: how each agency has responded to and
continues to address objectives of the 2009 Cyberspace Policy Review;
efforts to educate and develop the necessary cybersecurity personnel;
and how standards development is coordinated with other relevant
agencies.

II. Witnesses

Dr. George O. Strawn is the Director of the National Coordination
Office for the Networking and Information Technology Research and
Development Program.

Dr. Farnam Jahanian is the Assistant Director of the Directorate for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering at the National
Science Foundation.

Ms. Cita Furlani is the Director of the Information Technology
Laboratory at the National Institute of Standards and Technology.

Rear Admiral Michael Brown is the Director of Cybersecurity
Coordination in the National Protection and Programs Directorate for
the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.

III. Overview

In January 2008, the Bush Administration established, through a
series of classified executive directives, the Comprehensive National
Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI). The Obama Administration has continued
this initiative, with the goal of securing Federal systems and
fostering public-private cooperation. In February 2009, the Obama
Administration called for a 60-day review of the national cybersecurity
strategy. The President's review required the development of a
framework that would ensure that the CNCI was adequately funded,
integrated, and coordinated among Federal agencies, the private sector,
and state and local authorities.
On May 29, 2009, the Administration released its Cyberspace Policy
Review. The Review recommended an increased level of interagency
cooperation among all departments and agencies, highlighted the need
for information sharing concerning attacks and vulnerabilities, and
highlighted the need for an exchange of research and security
strategies essential to the efficient and effective defense of Federal
computer systems. Furthermore, it stressed the importance of advancing
cybersecurity research and development, and the need for the Federal
Government to partner with the private sector to guarantee a secure and
reliable infrastructure. The Review also called for increased public
awareness, improved education and expansion of the number of
information technology professionals.
The House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology held three
Subcommittee hearings in the 111th Congress to explore the state of
federal cybersecurity research and development, to review the findings
and recommendations included in the Administration's Cyberspace Policy
Review, and to review the findings and recommendations of a report from
the Government Accountability Office (GAO) \1\. Both the review and the
report called for an increase in effective public/private partnerships,
and for clarification of roles and responsibilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  National Cybersecurity Strategy: Key Improvements Are Needed
to Strengthen the Nation's Posture, Government Accountability Office,
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09432t.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since the release of the Cyberspace Policy Review and the hearings
held in the 111th Congress, NITRD has continued to provide leadership
in coordinating the Federal unclassified research and development. DHS
has been tasked with monitoring Federal civilian networks for cyber
attacks and coordinating the gathering and dissemination of information
on cyber attacks to Federal agencies and private industry. NIST
currently develops cybersecurity standards for non-national security
Federal information technology systems, and NSF acts as the principal
agency supporting unclassified cybersecurity research and development,
education, and the development of cybersecurity professionals.

IV. Legislation

In June 2009, GAO found that the Federal agencies responsible for
protecting the U.S. Information Technology (IT) infrastructure were not
satisfying their responsibilities, leaving the Nation's IT
infrastructure vulnerable to attack. In an effort to strengthen the
work of those Federal agencies, the U.S. House of Representatives
passed the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2010 (H.R. 4061) in the
111th Congress. H.R. 4061 required increased coordination and
prioritization of Federal cybersecurity research and development
activities, and the development of cybersecurity technical standards.
It also strengthened cybersecurity education and talent development and
industry partnership initiatives. The Senate did not act on the
legislation.
The Obama Administration released a cybersecurity legislative
proposal \2\ on May 12, 2011. The proposed legislation is focused on
simplifying and standardizing data breach reporting and it sets
penalties for computer crimes. The Administration's proposal requires
that DHS work with industry to identify the core critical-
infrastructure operators, and that the agency prioritize the most
important cyber threats and vulnerabilities for those operators. In
addition, specific cybersecurity risks must be addressed by
standardized frameworks, to be developed by private sector
representatives and evaluated by DHS. If DHS determines that the
standardized frameworks developed by industry are insufficient, DHS
will develop alternative frameworks with advice and guidance from the
Director of NIST. The Administration proposal would also update the
Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) and would formalize
DHS's current role in managing cybersecurity for the Federal
Government's civilian computers and networks in order to provide
departments and agencies with a shared source of expertise.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/legislative/
letters/Law-Enforcement-Provisions-Related-to-Computer-Security-Full-
Bill.pdf

V. Issues and Concerns

Research and Development
Cybersecurity research and development efforts include working on
the prevention of cyber attacks, detecting attacks as they are
occurring, responding to attacks effectively, mitigating severity,
recovering quickly, and identifying responsible parties. In December
2010, the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
(PCAST) reported on Federally funded research and development in
networking and information technology. The report made several
recommendations, including investing in long-term, multi-agency
research initiatives in security and cyber infrastructure and enhancing
the effectiveness of government coordination of networking and
information research and development.
Research and development provides a greater understanding of
weaknesses in systems and networks and of how to protect those systems
and networks. The Subcommittees will examine the integration of
research and development activities within the Federal Government's
cybersecurity efforts given its importance in increasing security over
the long term. The hearing will explore current government research and
development investments to ensure they are properly focused to provide
effective and lasting cybersecurity, and will assess the challenges to
establishing a prioritized national research and development agenda
that strategically includes near-term, mid-term, and long-term goals.

Education and the Development of Cybersecurity Professionals
Well trained professionals are essential to the implementation of
security techniques in critical computer and network systems.
Institutions of higher education are working to create and improve
cyber education and training programs focused on ensuring an adequate
number of relevant cyber professionals. Furthermore, public awareness
about protecting personal information is another area of identified
need within cybersecurity education. Federal agencies engaged in
cybersecurity activities currently support a number of cybersecurity
education, training, and development programs. The Subcommittees will
consider the coordination and implementation of these activities across
Federal agencies.

Standards Development
The Subcommittees will examine NIST's current and future role in
the development of benchmarks, guidelines, and standards for
cybersecurity, in conjunction with other government agencies and the
private sector. The Subcommittees will also examine the appropriate
role for NIST in facilitating the voluntary critical infrastructure
cybersecurity standards as envisioned in the Administration's
legislative package.

Agency Coordination
Since 1991, Federal agencies have been required to set goals,
prioritize investments, and coordinate activities in networking and
information technology research and development. The Subcommittees will
explore what measures have been taken to improve the coordination of
Federal cybersecurity research and development efforts and the best
approach to improve the coordination of private sector critical
infrastructure and network cybersecurity. This hearing will also
examine how agencies are coordinating cybersecurity standards
development.

VI. Background

In the current system, Federal Government responsibilities for
cybersecurity research and development, coordination, and education
fall on many different agencies. The National Security Agency (NSA) is
responsible for all classified network systems. The Department of
Defense (DOD) is responsible for military network systems, and DHS is
the lead agency for all Federal civilian network systems. Additionally,
DHS is responsible for communicating information on cyber attacks to
other Federal agencies. The NITRD program coordinates unclassified
cybersecurity research and development across 14 Federal agencies and
is currently chaired by the Director of National Coordinating Office
and the NSF Assistant Director of the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering. NSF funds a majority of Federal
basic cybersecurity research and development and education efforts.
Three other key agencies, NIST, DHS and DOD also fund significant
cybersecurity research and development. NIST develops and promulgates
standards to help secure Federal civilian network systems and the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) implements and enforces the
standards set by NIST.

Networking and Information Technology Research and Development
Program
The Networking and Information Technology Research and Development
(NITRD) program coordinates unclassified cybersecurity research and
development across 14 Federal agencies (additional agencies informally
participate in NITRD).
The High-Performance Computing Act of 1991 (PL 102-194) established
NITRD. The Act has since been amended through the Next Generation
Internet Research Act of 1998 and the America COMPETES Act of 2007. In
the 111th Congress, the U.S. House of Representatives passed the
National Information and Technology Research and Development
Reauthorization Act (H.R. 2020). The bill sought to prioritize and
strengthen Federal information technology activities across the Federal
government. The Senate did not act on this legislation.
In December 2010, the President's Council of Advisors on Science
and Technology (PCAST) completed a legislatively required report on
NITRD. The report, entitled Designing a Digital Future: Federally
Funded Research and Development in Networking and Information
Technology, found that ``NITRD is well coordinated and that the U.S.
computing research community, coupled with a vibrant Networking and
Information Technology (NIT) industry, has made seminal discoveries and
advanced new technologies that are helping meet many societal
challenges.'' \3\ The PCAST report included several recommendations,
including increasing investments in long-term, multi-agency research
initiatives in security and cyberinfrastructure, and enhancing the
effectiveness of government coordination of NIT research and
development.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology,
Report to the President and Congress December 2010, Designing a Digital
Future: Federally Funded Research and Development in Networking and
Information Technology, p. v
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In February 2011, NITRD released its Supplement to the President's
Budget request. The Supplement is a summary of the NITRD research
activities planned and coordinated for Fiscal Year (FY) 2012. The NITRD
request totals $3.9 billion for FY 2012, a 1.9 percent increase from FY
2010 expenditures. The NITRD Supplement also breaks down budget
requests for the fourteen Federal agencies involved in NITRD according
to Program Component Areas, including Cyber Security and Information
Assurance and Social, Economic, and Workforce Implications of IT \4\:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\  Subcommittee on Networking and Information Technology Research
and Development, Supplement to the President's Budget for Fiscal Year
2010, p. 28

National Science Foundation
NSF is the principal agency supporting unclassified cybersecurity
research and development and education. NSF provides the largest
Federal investment in cyber-related research and development
activities. The February 2011 NITRD Supplement to the President's FY
2012.
Budget totals NSF's budget request for advanced technologies (which
combines eight Program Component Areas) at nearly $1.3 billion, with
$94.7 million dedicated for cybersecurity and information assurance and
$98 million dedicated to the social, economic, and workforce
implications of IT.
At NSF, the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE) is the principal directorate promoting the progress
of computer and information science. CISE works across its three
Divisions and across a number of NSF Directorates, focusing on theory,
people and systems. Programs like Trustworthy Computing and
Cybsersecurity Research, Computing Education for the 21st Century,
Science and Engineering Beyond Moore's Law, and Cyber Infrastructure
Framework for the 21st Century are only a handful of CISE cross-cutting
programs. CISE's FY 2012 budget request includes a 17.7 percent
increase over FY 2010 funding, totaling $728.4 million.
NSF has also made significant investments in cybersecurity
education and workforce through the Directorate on Education and Human
Resources (EHR). EHR's Scholarship for Service program provides awards
to increase the number of students entering the computer security and
information assurance fields, and to increase the capacity of
institutions of higher education to produce professionals in these
fields. EHR also offers Advanced Technological Education grants
educating technicians for high-technology fields with a focus on two-
year colleges.

National Institute of Standards and Technology
The NIST Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) promotes
innovation and competitiveness through research and development in
information technology, mathematics, and statistics. ITL, which is made
up of six divisions, manages the majority of NIST cybersecurity
activities, primarily through the Computer Security Division (CSD). CSD
provides standards and technology to protect information systems
against threats to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of
information and services.
NIST has extensive experience in developing cybersecurity standards
and guidelines. NIST's core cybersecurity focus areas include:
research, development, and specification; secure system and component
configuration; and assessment and assurance of security properties of
products and systems.
NIST develops and issues cybersecurity standards through Federal
Information Processing Standards (FIPS). NIST also develops standards
in conjunction with national and international consensus standards
bodies. NIST publishes cybersecurity guidelines through Special
Publications (NIST SP) and Interagency Reports (NISTIR).
The Computer Security Act of 1987 (PL 100-235), later replaced by
the Information Technology Management Reform Act of 1996 (P.L. 104-
106), gave NIST the authority to develop standards and guidelines to
secure non-classified Federal information systems. Title III of the E-
Government Act (PL 107-347), entitled the Federal Information Security
Management Act of 2002 (FISMA), tasked NIST with developing
cybersecurity standards, guidelines, and associated methods and
techniques for use by the Federal Government.
The Administration's 2009 Cyberspace Policy Review listed trusted
identities as a key issue in improving cybersecurity. On April 15,
2011, the Administration released its National Strategy for Trusted
Identities in Cyberspace (NSTIC), with a focus on establishing identity
solutions and privacy-enhancing technologies to improve the security
and convenience of sensitive online transactions. As part of the
strategy, the Administration plans to establish a National Program
Office (NPO), which will be led by NIST within the Department of
Commerce, to manage the Federal Government's role in implementing
NSTIC. NIST included $24.5 million in its FY 2012 budget request to
fund the NPO and to provide grants and other funding programs to
conduct pilot projects of trusted authentication systems.

Department of Homeland Security
DHS is responsible for coordinating the overall national effort to
enhance the protection of the critical infrastructure and key resources
of the United States \5\. DHS works to prevent or minimize disruptions
to our critical information infrastructure in order to protect the
public, economy, government services, and the overall security of the
United States by supporting a series of continuous efforts designed to
further safeguard Federal Government systems by reducing potential
vulnerabilities, protecting against cyber intrusions, and anticipating
future threats.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  Homeland Security Presidential Directive-7: Critical
Infrastructure Identification, Prioritization, and Protection. December
17, 2003. http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/laws/gc_1214597989952.shtm#1
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The DHS Science and Technology Directorate (S&T) conducts and
supports research, development, testing, evaluation, and transition for
advanced cybersecurity and information assurance technologies to secure
the Nation's current and future cyber and critical infrastructures. The
President's National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace \6\ and the
Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative \7\ detail DHS S&T's
research and development roles and responsibilities. Cybersecurity
research within DHS S&T is planned, managed, and coordinated through
the Cyber Security Research and Development Center. This center
supports the research efforts of the Homeland Security Advanced
Research Projects Agency (HSARPA), coordinates the testing and
evaluation of technologies, and manages technology transfer efforts.
The FY 2012 budget request for the DHS S&T Cybersecurity Division is
$64.1 million.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, February 2003.
http://www.us-cert.gov/reading_room/cyberspace_strategy.pdf
\7\  Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative. May 2009.
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/cybersecurity.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Housed within the National Protection and Programs Directorate
(NPPD) the National Cyber Security Division (NCSD) is the operational
arm of DHS's Office of Cybersecurity and Communications (CS&C). NCSD
works collaboratively with public, private, and international entities
to secure cyberspace and America's cyber assets, and protect cyber
infrastructure through two overarching objectives: building and
maintaining an effective national cyberspace response system, and
implementing a cyber-risk management program for the protection of
critical infrastructure. Numerous programs housed within NPPD work on
cybersecurity related issues. The total FY 2012 budget request, as
related to cyber programs, totals more than $500 million.
NCSD programs include the United States Computer Emergency
Readiness Team (US-CERT), which is responsible for analyzing and
reducing cyber threats and vulnerabilities, disseminating cyber threat
warning information through the National Cyber Alert System, and
coordinating incident response activities. The National Cyber Response
Coordination Group (NCRCG) is the principle Federal agency mechanism
for cyber incident response. In the event of a nationally significant
cyber-related incident, the NCRCG, which is made up of 13 Federal
agencies, helps to coordinate the Federal response, including that of
US-CERT, and the cybersecurity groups of DOD, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, the NSA, and the intelligence community.
The coordinated efforts of DHS to reduce risk and improve the
resilience of the nation's critical infrastructure are facilitated with
many departments and agencies. DHS works with OMB to reduce and
consolidate the number of external connections that Federal agencies
have to the internet through the Trusted Internet Connection
initiative. This initiative allows DHS to focus monitoring efforts, and
block against cyber attacks on government computers. The EINSTEIN
system, which is designed to provide intrusion protection and early
warning of intrusions, shares information with DOD for enhanced
situational awareness. DHS, OMB, and NIST coordinate the protection of
agency information systems through compliance with FISMA, and DHS also
coordinates with the Department of Justice to enable real-time
assessments of baseline security postures across individual agencies
and the Federal enterprise as a whole.

Chairman Quayle. The Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation and the Subcommittee on Research and Science
Education will come to order.
Good morning, everybody. Welcome to today's hearing
entitled ``Protecting Information in the Digital Age: Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development.'' In front of you are
packets containing the written testimony, biographies and truth
in testimony disclosures for today's witness panel.
Before we get started, since this is a joint hearing
involving two Subcommittees, I want to explain how we will
operate procedurally so all Members understand how the
question-and-answer period will be handled. As always, we will
alternate between the majority and the minority Members, and
allow all Members an opportunity for questioning before
recognizing a Member for a second round of questions. We will
recognize those Members of either Subcommittee present at the
gavel in order of seniority on the Full Committee, and those
coming in after the gavel will be recognized in order of
arrival. I now recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement.
It is next to impossible to ignore the relevance of
cybersecurity these days. News coverage has increasingly
focused on cyber vulnerabilities covering stories such as
companies losing personnel information or customers' financial
data, or a government database being compromised by a malicious
hacker. Perhaps most unsettling is that most stakeholders agree
that our national cybersecurity response has not kept pace with
the threats.
In early 2008, the need to increase network security was
brought to the forefront when President Bush formally
established the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative
(CNCI) to deal with widespread cyberattacks on federal
networks. Early in his administration, President Obama
committed to continue this effort, and expanded it through the
2009 Cyberspace Policy Review, which identified a number of
problems to be addressed through both near-term and mid-term
actions. At that time, the Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology held a series of hearings evaluating the state of
cybersecurity research and development and the recommendations
contained within the review.
Security efforts are often focused on the past and designed
to respond to the most recently faced attack. However, the
technology sector is exceptionally dynamic, and where possible,
we need to attempt to anticipate vulnerabilities and future
threats. This is where research and development and proper
coordination can make a contribution.
It has now been a number of years since the review
identified vulnerabilities across federal agencies. We are here
today in part to evaluate what progress has been made.
Additionally, as new threats emerge, we must assess whether we
are staying ahead with research and development. Finally, we
must make sure that we are appropriately tracking federally
funded research and development initiatives. Since multiple
agencies have cybersecurity responsibilities, and federal
efforts in this area are growing, I am concerned that agencies
may compete with each other for cyber ownership.
Congress must ensure that agencies are working
collaboratively to prevent work from being duplicated at the
cost of precious taxpayer funds.
Several agencies before us today have an important role in
the development of cybersecurity standards. We should not
underestimate the value of standards, whether they are minimum
security measures for use by federal government agencies to
protect information, or a framework to address cybersecurity
risks for critical infrastructure. The lead responsibility for
working closely with industry to develop successful standards
has historically fallen to NIST. We would like to ensure that
any comprehensive cybersecurity legislation effectively
leverages the expertise of all federal assets.
I should also note that today's hearing is focused on
federal cybersecurity stakeholders. Notably absent are those
who design, build, own and operate the majority of the digital
infrastructure in our nation. To that end, I intend to hold
further discussions related to cybersecurity issues through
future hearings of the Technology and Innovation Subcommittee
that will include voices from the private sector.
I would like to thank my co-Chairman, Congressman Brooks,
for sharing leadership on this important hearing. I also thank
the witnesses for being here today and I look forward to a
productive discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Quayle follows:].
Prepared Statement of Chairman Benjamin Quayle
It is next to impossible to ignore the relevance of cybersecurity
these days. News coverage has increasingly focused on cyber
vulnerabilities covering stories such as a company losing personnel
information or customers' financial data, or a government database
being compromised by a malicious hacker. Perhaps most unsettling, is
that most stakeholders agree that our national cybersecurity response
has not kept pace with the threats.
In early 2008, the need to increase network security was brought to
the forefront when President Bush formally established the
Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI) to deal with
widespread cyberattacks on Federal networks.
Early in his administration, President Obama committed to continue
this effort, and expanded it through the 2009 Cyberspace Policy Review,
which identified a number of problems to be addressed through both
near-term and mid-term actions. At that time, the Committee on Science,
Space and Technology held a series of hearings evaluating the state of
cybersecurity research and development and the recommendations
contained within the Review.
Security efforts are often focused on the past, and designed to
respond to the most recently faced attack. However, the technology
sector is exceptionally dynamic, and where possible, we need to attempt
to anticipate vulnerabilities and future threats. This is where
research and development and proper coordination can make a
contribution.
It has now been a number of years since the Review identified
vulnerabilities across federal agencies. We are here today in part to
evaluate what progress has been made.
Additionally, as new threats emerge, we must assess whether we are
staying ahead with research and development. Finally, we must make sure
that we are appropriately tracking federally funded research and
development initiatives. Since multiple agencies have cybersecurity
responsibilities, and federal efforts in this area are growing, I am
concerned that agencies may compete with each other for cyber
ownership. Congress must ensure that agencies are working
collaboratively to prevent work from being duplicated at the cost of
precious taxpayer funds.
Several agencies before us today have an important role in the
development of cybersecurity standards. We should not underestimate the
value of standards - whether they are minimum security measures for use
by federal government agencies to protect information, or a framework
to address cybersecurity risks for critical infrastructure. The lead
responsibility for working closely with industry to develop successful
standards has historically fallen to NIST.
We would like to ensure that any comprehensive cybersecurity
legislation effectively leverages the expertise of all federal assets.
I should also note that today's hearing is focused on federal
cybersecurity stakeholders. Notably absent are those who design, build,
own, and operate the majority of the digital infrastructure in our
nation. To that end, I intend to further the discussion of related
cybersecurity issues through future hearings of the Technology and
Innovation Subcommittee that will include voices from the private
sector.
I would like to thank my co-Chairman, Congressman Brooks, for
sharing leadership on this important hearing. I also thank the
witnesses for being here today and I look forward to a productive
discussion.

Chairman Quayle. I would now like to recognize the
gentleman from Oregon, Mr. Wu, for his opening statement.
Mr. Wu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this very,
very important hearing, and thanks to all the witnesses for
being with us today.
More and more of our personal information is making its way
online and our Nation's entire infrastructure from traffic
systems to the electricity grid to manufacturing to our health
information is becoming increasingly dependent on secure and
reliable access to the Internet, and I can think of few topics
more important to this Committee to address than cybersecurity,
and in the last Administration it was referred to as the
greatest threat to our national security standing today, and I
agree with that assessment.
Anyone following the headlines recently knows that
cybercrimes are becoming more frequent. Sony's PlayStation
network has been repeatedly targeted, exposing the personal
information of over 100 million users. A server at NASA was
recently targeted, revealing satellite data, and social media
sites like Facebook are constantly targeted by phishing scams
and other cyberattacks.
I am pleased that this Administration has provided Congress
with the legislative framework to consider ways to address
various vulnerabilities. The proposal focuses primarily on the
role and authority of the Department of Homeland Security in
securing non-defense systems. I look forward to working with
Chairman Quayle and the other Members of the Subcommittee and
the Full Committee to ensure that NIST's expertise in
information security is maintained, especially in the
development of technical standards and as a facilitator of
private sector collaboration.
I am also interested in ensuring that any comprehensive
House bill advances cybersecurity research and development and
lays out a clear strategy for building a highly skilled federal
cyber workforce.
According to OMB, last year federal agencies spent $12
billion on cybersecurity to protect the $80 billion federal
information technology infrastructure. Additionally, the
Federal Government funds about $400 million in cybersecurity
research each year.
Despite this considerable funding and many federal employee
hours spent on this issue, the assessment remains the same: Our
cybersecurity is insufficient. We need to use existing
resources more efficiently and with specific achievable goals
in mind.
Previously, federal efforts have been output-oriented,
focusing on metrics such as the number of programs, funds spent
and the number of interagency working groups rather than
outcome-driven. I am pleased that the current Administration is
focusing its efforts on achieving outcomes such as reducing
breaches of federal systems and cases of identity theft as well
as ensuring the security of smart grid and health IT systems.
It is true that the Administration's Cyberspace Policy
Review reemphasized recommendations from previous reports
including improving information sharing, bolstering cross-
sector coordination, modernizing the research agenda, and
enhancing public cybersecurity awareness. But the review was
also successful in outlining a concrete vision and set of
objectives that have been steadily addressed by the
Administration over the last two years. For example, the
creation of a national initiative for cybersecurity education
to educate consumers about online risks and to provide training
to build a skilled cybersecurity workforce--I am fond of saying
that some aspects of cybersecurity are rocket science but
others are relatively simple like wearing your seat belt or
washing your hands--the development of the National Strategy
for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace to combat online fraud and
strengthen privacy, and the recent release of an international
strategy for cyberspace that calls for the development of
international standards aimed at preventing barriers to trade,
commerce, and an open environment that fosters free expression
and innovation around the world. By addressing these
recommendations, we are laying the building blocks for a new
outcome-based approach to federal cybersecurity.
The agencies appearing before the Committee today have a
significant role to play in creating that foundation. During
today's hearing, I hope to learn how each agency has progressed
toward meeting the goals and objectives outlined in the
Administration's review, the agency's plans going forward, and
the impact of the Administration's legislative proposal on
their current roles and authorities. This information will help
guide the Committee's ongoing efforts to protect our Nation
from cyberattacks.
Again, I would like to thank the witnesses for being here
today and I look forward to your testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wu follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member David Wu
Thank you, Chairman Quayle, for calling this hearing. And thank you
to our witnesses for being here today.
More and more of our personal information is making its way online,
and our nation's entire infrastructure-from traffic systems and the
electricity grid to manufacturing-is becoming increasingly dependent on
secure and reliable access to the internet. I can think of few topics
more important for this Committee to address than cybersecurity.
Anyone following the headlines recently knows that cybercrimes are
becoming more frequent- Sony's PlayStation network has been repeatedly
targeted by hackers, exposing the personal information of over 100
million users; a server at NASA was recently targeted revealing
satellite data; and social media sites like Facebook are consistently
targeted by phishing scams and other cyber attacks.
I'm pleased that the Administration has provided Congress with a
legislative framework to consider ways to address various
vulnerabilities. The proposal focuses primarily on the role and
authority of the Department of Homeland Security in securing non-
defense systems.
I look forward to working with Chairman Quayle and the other
members of this Subcommittee to ensure that NIST's expertise in
information security is maintained-especially in the development of
technical standards and as a facilitator of private-sector
collaboration. I am also interested in ensuring that any comprehensive
House bill advances cybersecurity research and development and lays out
a clear strategy for building a highly-skilled federal cyberworkforce.
According to OMB, last year Federal agencies spent $12 billion on
cybersecurity to protect the $80 billion dollar federal information
technology infrastructure. Additionally, the Federal government funds
about $400 million in cybersecurity research each year.
Despite this considerable funding and many federal employee hours
spent on this issue, the assessment remains the same: our cybersecurity
is insufficient. We need to use existing resources more efficiently and
with specific achievable goals in mind.
Previously, federal efforts have been output oriented-focusing on
metrics such as the number of programs, funds spent, and the number of
inter-agency working groups-rather than outcome driven. I am pleased
that the current Administration is focusing its efforts on achieving
outcomes--such as reducing breaches of federal systems and cases of
identity theft, as well as ensuring the security of smart grid and
health IT systems.
It's true that the Administration's Cyberspace Policy Review re-
emphasized recommendations from previous reports--including improving
information sharing, bolstering cross-sector coordination, modernizing
the research agenda, and enhancing public cybersecurity awareness. But
the review was also successful in outlining a concrete vision and set
of objectives that have been steadily addressed by the Administration
over the last two years. For example:

the creation of a National Initiative for
Cybersecurity Education to educate consumers about online risks
and provide training to build a skilled cybersecurity
workforce;

the development of the National Strategy for Trusted
Identities in Cyberspace to combat online fraud and strengthen
privacy;

and the recent release of an International Strategy
for Cyberspace that calls for the development of international
standards aimed at preventing barriers to trade, commerce, and
an open environment that fosters free expression and innovation
around the world.
By addressing these recommendations, we are laying the building
blocks for a new, outcome-based approach to federal cybersecurity. The
agencies appearing before the Committee today have a significant role
to play in creating that foundation.
During today's hearing, I hope to learn how each agency has
progressed toward meeting the goals and objectives outlined in the
Administration's review, the agencies' plans going forward, and the
impact of the Administration's legislative proposal on their current
roles and authorities. This information will help guide the Committee's
ongoing efforts to protect our nation from cyber attacks.
I'd like to again thank the witnesses for being here today and I
look forward to your testimony. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back
the balance of my time.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Wu.
I now recognize the Chairman of the Subcommittee on
Research and Science Education, Mr. Brooks, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Chairman Quayle.
Good morning and welcome to each of our witnesses. As my
fellow Chairman already pointed out, our hearing topic today,
cybersecurity, is a dynamic issue that plays a role in a myriad
of fields from our Nation's infrastructure to our private
lives. It is an issue that is not only of interest to the
government and industry, but also affects each of us
personally.
The Research and Science Education Subcommittee, of which I
am the Chairman, shares jurisdiction of this issue with the
Technology and Innovation Subcommittee for a number of reasons.
In large part, this is due to the essential basic research
taking place on cyber-related issues, conducted in large part
through the National Science Foundation's Directorate for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE).
Likewise, NSF has an important role to fill regarding the
cybersecurity workforce pipeline and education.
In addition, the Subcommittee also authorizes and has
oversight over the cyber-related work of the interagency
Networking and Information Technology Research and Development
program, also known as NITRD, which coordinates the Nation's
unclassified federal research development efforts in
cybersecurity.
Today our witnesses include a number of federal agency
representatives who will be able to discuss specific agency
priorities related to cybersecurity research and development,
as well as the larger issue of collaboration and coordination
across the Federal Government.
While I recognize and understand the essential functions of
cybersecurity research and development, I am looking forward to
an earnest discussion on the recent fiscal year 2012 budget
requests. NSF's CISE Directorate requested over $728 million
for fiscal year 2012, a 17.7 percent increase over fiscal year
2010. The fiscal year 2012 budget request for the NITRD program
is $3.866 billion, a $73 million increase over fiscal year 2010
expenditures. Our role in Congress is to ensure that federal
investments are made wisely, and once made, investments must
produce significant value for the Nation.
I look forward to our discussion today. Thank you for
joining us.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brooks follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Mo Brooks
Thank you Chairman Quayle. Good morning, and welcome to each of our
witnesses. As my fellow Chairman already pointed out, our hearing topic
today, cybersecurity, is a dynamic issue area that plays a role in a
myriad of fields from our Nation's infrastructure to our private lives.
It is an issue that is not only of interest to the government and
industry, but also affects each of us personally.
The Research and Science Education Subcommittee, of which I am the
Chairman, shares jurisdiction of this issue with the Technology and
Innovation Subcommittee for a number of reasons. In large part, this is
due to the essential basic research taking place on cyber-related
issues, conducted in large part through the National Science
Foundation's Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE). Likewise, NSF has an important role to fill
regarding the cybersecurity workforce pipeline and education.
In addition, the Subcommittee also authorizes and has oversight
over the cyber-related work of the interagency Networking and
Information Technology Research and Development program (NITRD). NITRD
(Niter-dee) coordinates the Nation's unclassified federal research
development efforts in cybersecurity.
Today our witnesses include a number of Federal agency
representatives who will be able to discuss specific agency priorities
related to cybersecurity research and development, as well as the
larger issue of collaboration and coordination across the Federal
government.
While I recognize and understand the essential functions of
cybersecurity research and development, I am looking forward to an
earnest discussion on the recent FY12 budget requests. NSF's CISE
Directorate requested over $728 million for FY12, a 17.7 percent
increase from FY10. The FY12 budget request for the NITRD Program is
$3.866 billion, a $73 million dollar increase over FY10 expenditures.
Our role in Congress is to ensure that Federal investments are made
wisely, and once made, investments must produce significant value for
the Nation. I look forward to our discussion today.
Thank you for joining us.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Brooks.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Lipinski for an opening
statement.
Mr. Lipinski. Good morning. I want to thank you, Chairman
Quayle, and also Chairman Brooks for holding this hearing.
I agree with my colleagues' remarks on the nature and
severity of the challenges we face in cybersecurity in both the
public and private sectors. Cybercrime is a problem for our
national security, for businesses large and small, and for
every single American. Like Mr. Wu, I can think of no more
important topic for this Committee to address.
While there are several other agencies not here today who
also play a significant role in cybersecurity, the three
agencies that are represented here are all central to these
efforts. I know some of my colleagues will address the cyber
efforts of NIST and DHS, so I would like to highlight those of
the National Science Foundation.
NSF is the agency overseen by the Research and Science
Education Subcommittee and is second only to the Department of
Defense in its support for cybersecurity research. In addition,
NSF uniquely funds research across the entire range of science
and engineering disciplines that are relevant to cybersecurity,
and joins only DARPA in supporting truly game-changing
research. It is also significant that the Director of the
interagency NITRD program is here today since all of the
civilian agencies coordinate their cybersecurity R&D activities
through NITRD.
I want to highlight one particular area that is often left
out of discussions on cybersecurity research needs, and that is
the human element of cybersecurity. People are perhaps the most
important part of our IT infrastructure, and according to
experts, they are also the weakest link in many systems. Better
cybersecurity education for both the general public and for
current and future IT professionals is vital. However, there is
still a lot we don't understand about how humans interact with
technology. Therefore, more research into the social and
behavioral sciences has the potential to significantly improve
the security of our IT systems. I am happy to see that the
social, behavioral, and economic sciences directorate at NSF
now has a more explicit role in the agency's Trustworthy
Computing initiative. In the end, our cybersecurity efforts can
only be as strong as our weakest link. I look forward to
hearing more from Dr. Jahanian about that.
We last held a series of hearings on cybersecurity in 2009,
when I was Chair of the Research and Science Education
Subcommittee. We learned at that time about the respective
roles of different agencies and we received extensive outside
expert testimony. We also learned that a lot had changed since
Congress, led by this Committee, enacted the 2002 Cybersecurity
R&D Act. That is why last Congress I introduced the
Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2010, building on the 2002
Act. That bill, like today's hearing, was a joint effort
between my Subcommittee and T&I, then chaired by my friend Mr.
Wu. Mr. McCaul, who has been a strong leader on cybersecurity
issues, joined me as the lead Republican cosponsor, and the
bill passed the House by a margin of 422 to 5. Since our bill,
like so many others, never made it through the Senate in the
last Congress, I am now joining Mr. McCaul in introducing an
updated version. We are still making some small modifications,
but I am hoping we can introduce the bill soon, perhaps as
early as this week. I know the witnesses were asked about this
legislation, and I look forward to hearing your thoughts and
feedback today.
We are anticipating that our R&D bill will be part of a
bigger, bipartisan cybersecurity bill in both the House and
Senate. The efforts to move a larger bill have stalled for some
time over disagreements about how to assign leadership and
coordination responsibilities across the government. I am glad
that the President is taking an active role in this discussion,
and I hope that the proposal the White House sent up to
Congress two weeks ago will help to move efforts along in both
chambers. I look forward to working with both my colleagues and
the Administration to ensure the development of a strong cyber
security strategy.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here this
morning and I look forward to hearing your testimonies, and I
yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lipinski follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Research & Science Education
Good morning. I want to thank both Chairman Quayle and Chairman
Brooks for holding this hearing. I agree with my colleagues' remarks on
the nature and severity of the challenges we face in cybersecurity in
both the public and private sectors. Cybercrime is a problem for our
national security, for businesses large and small, and for every single
American. Like Mr. Wu, I can think of no more important topic for this
committee to address.
While there are several other agencies not here today who also play
a significant role in cybersecurity, the three agencies that are
represented here are all central to these efforts. I know some of my
colleagues will address the cyber efforts of NIST and DHS, so I'd like
to highlight those of the National Science Foundation. NSF is the
agency overseen by the Research and Science Education Subcommittee and
is second only to the Department of Defense in its support for
cybersecurity research. In addition, NSF uniquely funds research across
the entire range of science and engineering disciplines that are
relevant to cybersecurity, and joins only DARPA in supporting truly
game-changing research. It is also significant that the Director of the
interagency NITRD program is here today since all of the civilian
agencies coordinate their cybersecurity R&D activities through NITRD.
I want to highlight one particular area that is often left out of
discussions on cybersecurity research needs, and that is the human
element of cybersecurity. People are perhaps the most important part of
our IT infrastructure, and according to experts, they are also the
`weakest link' in many systems. Better cyber security education for
both the general public and for current and future IT professionals is
vital. However, there's still a lot we don't understand about how
humans interact with technology; therefore, more research into the
social and behavioral sciences has the potential to significantly
improve the security of our IT systems. I am happy to see that the
social, behavioral, and economic sciences directorate at NSF now has a
more explicit role in the agency's trustworthy computing initiative. In
the end, our cybersecurity efforts can only be as strong as our
`weakest link'. I look forward to hearing more from Dr. Jahanian about
that.
We last held a series of hearings on cybersecurity in 2009, when I
was chair of the Research and Science Education Subcommittee. We
learned at that time about the respective roles of different agencies
and we received extensive outside expert testimony. We also learned
that a lot had changed since Congress, led by this committee, enacted
the 2002 Cybersecurity R&D Act. That is why last Congress I introduced
the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2010, building on the 2002 Act.
That bill, like today's hearing, was a joint effort between my
subcommittee and T&I, then chaired by my friend Mr. Wu. Mr. McCaul, who
has been a strong leader on cybersecurity issues, joined me as the lead
Republican cosponsor, and the bill passed the House by a margin of 422-
5. Since our bill, like so many others, never made it through the
Senate in the last Congress, I am now joining Mr. McCaul in introducing
an updated version. We are still making some small modifications, but
I'm hoping we can introduce the bill soon, perhaps as early as this
week. I know the witnesses were asked about this legislation, and I
look forward to hearing your thoughts and feedback today.
We are anticipating that our R&D bill will be part of a bigger,
bipartisan cybersecurity bill in both the House and Senate. The efforts
to move a larger bill have stalled for some time over disagreements
about how to assign leadership and coordination responsibilities across
the government. I am glad that the President is taking an active role
in this discussion, and I hope that the proposal the White House sent
up to Congress two weeks ago will help to move efforts along in both
chambers. I look forward to working with both my colleagues and the
Administration to ensure the development of a strong cyber security
strategy.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here this morning,
and I look forward to hearing your testimonies.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time I would like to introduce our witness panel.
Our first witness is Dr. George Strawn, the Director of the
National Coordination Office for the Networking and Information
Technology Research and Development program. Prior to his
appointment as Director at NITRD, Dr. Strawn served as the
Chief Information Officer at the National Science Foundation.
Next is Dr. Farnam Jahanian, Assistant Director of the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering at the National Science Foundation. Prior to
joining NSF, Dr. Jahanian served as Chair of Computer Science
and Engineering at the University of Michigan.
Next is Ms. Cita Furlani, the Director of the Information
Technology Laboratory at the National Institute of Standards
and Technology. Previously, Ms. Furlani has served as Director
of the National Coordination Office for Information Technology,
Research and Development.
Finally, we will hear from Rear Admiral Michael A. Brown,
Director of Cybersecurity Coordination at the Department of
Homeland Security. Rear Admiral Brown is also assigned as the
DHS Senior Cybersecurity Representative to the United States
Cyber Command.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each after which the Members of the Committee
will have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. George Strawn, the
Director of the National Coordination Office for the Networking
and Information Technology Research and Development program.

STATEMENT OF DR. GEORGE STRAWN, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL COORDINATION
OFFICE, NETWORKING AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

Dr. Strawn. Thank you, and good morning. As you say, I am
George Strawn, Director of what we call the NCO, National
Coordinating Office, of Networking and Information Technology
Research and Development, called both NITRD or NITRD, as the
case may be. I will use those shorthands, NCO and NITRD, in the
rest of my comments in the interest of brevity.
With Dr. Farnam Jahanian of NSF, I also co-Chair the NITRD
Subcommittee of the National Science and Technology Council. I
would like to thank Chairman Brooks, Chairman Quayle, Ranking
Members Lipinski and Wu, and the Members of the Subcommittee
for this opportunity to come before you today to discuss
protecting information in the digital age and NITRD's role in
federal efforts to improve cybersecurity.
The NITRD program provides for the coordination of research
and development in networking and information technology across
14 federal agencies and many other partners. Their combined
efforts represent America's primary investment in research and
development for IT-related technologies in general and
cybersecurity in particular. The NCO supports the coordination
of the activities of the NITRD program.
My written testimony responds to each of the five questions
posed by the Subcommittees. In my oral comments today, I just
want to highlight three points.
First, the NITRD community strongly believes that this
Nation's cybersecurity infrastructure must be made more secure
and trustworthy than it is today if we are to sustain our
technological and economic leadership role in the global
information age. Indeed, the agency developed NITRD's strategic
plan. One of the most significant tests of technological
leadership will be the ability to engineer and build IT systems
that inspire high levels of confidence because they function as
intended: safely, securely, reliably and cost-effectively. The
agencies added that fundamental research to ensure that digital
networks, systems, devices, applications and communication
processes earn and deserve the trust and confidence of society,
thus constitutes an essential foundation for the Nation's
future. Advancing our IT capabilities with radically improving
cybersecurity technologies directly supports such U.S.
priorities as national and homeland security, economic
innovation, global competitiveness, health care reform and job
creation.
My second point is that because cyberspace interconnects us
all, both the problems and solutions of cybersecurity transcend
any one federal agency, any one sector or even any one nation.
They involve not just a small number of discrete technologies
but global scale interdependencies among a vast array of
technologies. The scope and complexity of these cybersecurity
challenges absolutely requires effective coordination of
research and development between the federal agencies
themselves as well as collaboration with our private sector
partners, and this is the central role of the NITRD program.
This coordination process is exemplified by NITRD's two
cybersecurity and information assurance groups, one called a
Senior Steering Group, the other called an interagency working
group, which have responded to the Cyberspace Policy Review
with innovative conceptual framework for R&D intended to
radically change the game of cybersecurity in favor of the
defendants.
NITRD's recently developed strategic plan for federal R&D
and cybersecurity brings me to my third point. Visionary
federal R&D in cybersecurity is necessary but not sufficient.
Much of cybersecurity infrastructure is in the private sector
and much of it is overseas. Federal strategic plan for R&D in
cybersecurity expressly calls for new forms of federal outreach
and partnerships with the private sector and international
stakeholders to accelerate the deployment of promising research
into commercial applications and adoption. This transition to
practice is currently exemplified in a variety of interagency
projects of NITRD members and within several of the NITRD
working groups.
Thank you for your interest in cybersecurity and the
opportunity to appear before you today. The NITRD community
looks forward to working with you to realize the goal of a
cyberspace in which we can all have trust and confidence.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Strawn follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. George O. Strawn, Director, National
Coordination Office for Networking and Information Technology Research
and Development
Good morning. I am George Strawn, Director of the National
Coordination Office (NCO) for Networking and Information Technology
Research and Development (NITRD). With my colleague, Dr. Farnam
Jahanian of the National Science Foundation (NSF), I co-chair the NITRD
Subcommittee of the National Science and Technology Council's (NSTC)
Committee on Technology. I want to thank Chairman Brooks and Chairman
Quayle, Ranking Members Lipinski and Wu, and members of the
Subcommittees for the opportunity to come before you today to discuss
protecting information in the digital age and NITRD's role in Federal
efforts to improve cybersecurity.
The NITRD Program--now in its 20th year--provides a coordinated
view of the Government's portfolio of unclassified investments in
fundamental, long-term research and development (R&D) in advanced
networking and information technology (IT), including cybersecurity and
information assurance. All of the research reported in this portfolio
is managed, selected, and funded by one or more of the 14 member
agencies under their own individual appropriations. In addition to
cybersecurity, the Program's current research areas are high-end
computing, large-scale networking, human-computer interaction and
information management, high-confidence software and systems, software
design and productivity, and socioeconomic, education, and workforce
implications of IT. Advances in these areas further our nation's goals
for national defense and national security, economic competitiveness,
energy and the environment, health care, and science and engineering
leadership.

Response to the Committee Request

Your invitation to testify here today asked me to address five
specific questions. But I would like to preface my comments with the
general statement that the NITRD agencies strongly concur that
improving the overall security of our cyber infrastructure--including
computing systems, mobile devices, networks, digitally controlled
critical infrastructures, and the vast quantities of information that
now flow through cyberspace--is a critical national challenge. It is
imperative that we successfully address this challenge, not only to
strengthen our national security but also to sustain the technological
leadership that drives our economic innovation, global competitiveness,
and science and engineering preeminence, and supports our quality of
life as Americans.
The 2010 strategic plan for NITRD developed by the Program's 14
member agencies (and now awaiting White House sign-off) describes
``trust and confidence'' in our systems, networks, and information as
one of three fundamental prerequisites for a bright U.S. future. The
NITRD Plan states:
``The perspective of the NITRD agencies is that one of the most
significant tests of technological leadership in the years ahead will
be the ability to engineer and build IT systems that inspire high
levels of confidence because they function as intended--safely,
securely, reliably, and cost-effectively. Fundamental research to
ensure that digital networks, systems, devices, applications, and
communications processes earn and deserve the trust and confidence of
society thus constitutes an essential foundation for the Nation's
future.''
The 14 NITRD member agencies and some two dozen other participating
agencies represent the broad spectrum of Federal interests in
networking and information technology R&D related to cybersecurity--
such as national defense and intelligence capabilities; health records
privacy and confidentiality; the security of the national power grid;
the reliability and functionality of the air-traffic-control system;
the integrity and persistence of scientific research data; and the
maintenance of secure real-time communications systems in emergency
response, weather forecasting, and the financial markets; and many
other key national purposes. The role of the NITRD Program in advancing
the Government's cybersecurity efforts is to identify the
technologically hard but critical problems and coordinate effective
research and development to address them.
The Program's framework of regular and ongoing interagency
coordination enables the varied agencies to identify significant
leverage, target common critical needs, avoid duplication of effort,
maximize resource sharing, and partner in investments to pursue higher-
level goals. Moreover, because NITRD research is performed in
universities, Federal research centers and laboratories, Federally
funded R&D centers, and in partnerships with private companies and
nonprofit organizations across the country, continuous interaction,
information exchange, and feedback takes place, providing new
perspectives and insights to both Federal and private-sector
stakeholders.
Initiatives #4 and 9 of the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity
Initiative (CNCI) called for coordinating R&D efforts and developing
enduring ``leap-ahead'' technology, strategies, and programs. The
President's Cyberspace Policy Review builds on these goals to include
developing a framework for research and development strategies that
focus on game-changing technologies. The NITRD program has a key role
in pursuing these goals. Research coordination has been strengthened
through the establishment of a Cybersecurity and Information Assurance
(CSIA) Senior Steering Group (SSG; made up of budget-level officials).
The SSG, in close cooperation with the Special Cyber Operations
Research and Engineering group (SCORE: convened by the Office of
Science and Technology Policy and the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence) enables effective coordination between the
classified and unclassified Federal IT security R&D portfolios. This
strong framework for coordination and the partnerships it has
engendered enabled a comprehensive response to the near- and mid-term
action items of the Cyberspace Policy Review as described in my answer
to question #2 below.
While individual members of the NITRD community are likely to be
involved in multiple elements of the near- and mid-term action plans, I
would like to focus on three of these in which NITRD, supported by the
NCO, has a prominent role:
Near-term Action Plan #9: Develop a framework for research and
development strategies that focus on game-changing technologies that
have the potential to enhance the security, reliability, resilience,
and trustworthiness of digital infrastructure; provide the research
community with access to event data to facilitate developing tools,
testing theories, and identifying workable solutions.
Over the last two years, NITRD's CSIA IWG and SSG have engaged in
an intensive round of public discussions, brainstorming, and thorough
technical examinations of cybersecurity issues in order to develop just
such a game-changing R&D framework. The result is the soon-to-be-
released Federal cybersecurity R&D strategic plan, ``Trustworthy
Cyberspace: Strategic Plan for the Federal Cybersecurity Research and
Development Program.'' The strategic plan provides game-changing themes
to direct R&D efforts towards understanding the underlying root causes
of known current threats with the goal of disrupting the status quo
with radically different approaches. The four themes serve as a
framework to unify cybersecurity R&D activities. The themes are:
Designed-In Security (DIS), Tailored Trustworthy Spaces (TTS), Moving
Target (MT), and Cyber Economic Incentives (CEI), with focus areas on
wireless mobile networks in the TTS theme and nature-inspired solutions
and a deep understanding of cyberspace in the MT theme.
The process of building the R&D strategic plan began with a Leap-
Ahead Initiative, developed by the White House Office of Science and
Technology Policy (OSTP) and the CSIA SSG. The initiative solicited
public inputs and received more than 200 responses on ideas for how to
change the cybersecurity landscape. These ideas were distilled into
five fundamentally game-changing concepts in cybersecurity and provided
as inputs to the National Cyber Leap Year Summit held August 17-19,
2009, in Arlington, Virginia. The summit gathered innovators from the
academic and commercial sectors to explore these concepts. The outcomes
of the summit were distilled into the three game-changing R&D themes.
In FY 2010, the themes were provided as inputs to the Administration's
cybersecurity R&D agenda and introduced to the research community as
strategies for public-private actions to secure the Nation's digital
future. Since the Summit, as the understanding of cyberspace has
evolved, a new theme--Designed-In Security (DIS)--has been added to the
Federal cybersecurity R&D plan. The next phase in this effort will be
to develop, with private-sector input, a roadmap to implement the
strategic plan.
An important new strategic thrust introduced in the Federal
cybersecurity R&D plan is to develop a science of security. A science
of security is needed to ground research efforts and would have the
potential of producing hypotheses subject to experimental validation
and universal concepts that are predictive and transcend specific
systems, attacks, and defenses. Within 10 years, the aim is to develop
a scientific framework that applies to real-world settings and provides
explanatory value. The CSIA agencies are working with private-sector
stakeholders to identify real-world data sets that can be used for
research experimentation and testing without compromising privacy or
proprietary and sensitive information.
Mid-term Action Plan #3: Expand support for key education programs
and research and development to ensure the Nation's continued ability
to compete in the information age economy.
The portfolio of research and development activities sponsored by
the NITRD agencies constitutes this country's only full-spectrum IT R&D
enterprise, and thus these activities represent a unique resource for
seeding U.S. innovation of all kinds. In addition, NITRD funding
represents the single largest source of support for the education and
training of new generations not only of U.S. IT research leaders but of
IT entrepreneurs and technical experts in many fields of endeavor. Our
Nation's investments in this NITRD portfolio in general, and in its
cybersecurity-related components in particular, have increased along
with the critical roles that these technologies play in our information
age economy. NITRD agencies now support multiple NCO-coordinated
activities impacting research and development, education, and workforce
readiness for cybersecurity and the protection of our Nation's critical
infrastructure and its entire economy. Nevertheless, all recognize that
the challenge remains large and growing.
Mid-term Action Plan #11: Encourage collaboration between academic
and industrial laboratories to develop migration paths and incentives
for the rapid adoption of research and technology development
innovations.
The forthcoming Federal cybersecurity R&D plan specifically
addresses the need to accelerate the transition of R&D to practice. It
states that an explicit, coordinated process that transitions the
fruits of research into practice is essential if Federal cybersecurity
R&D investments are to have significant, long-lasting impact. As part
of the transition to practice activities, the Federal cybersecurity
research community plans to participate in activities related to
technology discovery; test and evaluation; and transition, adoption,
and commercialization. Planned activities in technology discovery
include, for example, participation in the Information Technology
Security Entrepreneurs' Forum (ITSEF) and Defense Venture Catalyst
Initiative (DeVenCI). In test and evaluation, NITRD agencies plan to
leverage available operational and next-generation networked
environments to support experimental deployment, test, and evaluation
of novel security technologies in realistic settings in both public-
and private-sector environments. For transition, adoption, and
commercialization, NITRD agencies plan to participate in the System
Integrator Forum (SIF) and Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR)
Conferences.
As part of their activities to engage with the cybersecurity
research community, senior Federal agency cybersecurity officials are
presenting the framework for R&D strategies and themes articulated in
the strategic plan to researchers attending the annual IEEE Security
and Privacy Symposium, May 22-25, 2011 in Oakland, California.
I would like to note here that the transition to practice is also
being addressed by NITRD's Large Scale Networking (LSN) agencies. They
have developed an innovative network-performance monitoring technology
called perfSONAR, which provides network managers with unprecedented
capabilities to evaluate how well their networks are functioning, to
find problems, and to recognize anomalies in network security. The LSN
agencies are now working with private-sector networks and international
research network partners to implement deployment of this powerful new
tool. The LSN teams, JET (Joint Engineering Team) and MAGIC (Middleware
and Grid Infrastructure Coordination), are also closely involved in
transition to practice through their testing and implementation in
advanced research networks of security-enhancing technologies such as
federated identity management, IPv6, and DNSSec.
NITRD activities are supported by the NCO, which provides logistics
as well as expert technical coordinators to support the operations of
the Subcommittee and an evolving collection of working groups (such as
the CSIA IWG) in which the agencies participate to coordinate their own
research and development activities and to plan and oversee joint
activities when appropriate. They regularly share plans and
developments, host workshops, author papers, and interact with the
academic and private sectors as a means of defining and operating the
most effective programs of research and development attainable in their
subject areas.
The following snapshot examples illustrate how such interagency
collaboration can lead to substantially better results in research and
development as well as education:

Partnership for Cyberspace Innovation--a partnership
of NIST, the Science and Technology Directorate of DHS, and the
Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council (FSSCC), with
the goal of speeding the commercialization of cybersecurity
research innovations that support our Nation's critical
infrastructures. This agreement will accelerate the deployment
of network testbeds for specific use cases that strengthen the
resiliency, security, integrity, and usability of financial
services and other critical infrastructures such as online
health services, the Smart Grid, water, and transportation.

Middleware And Grid Infrastructure Coordination
(MAGIC) Team--a partnership of agencies and Federal
laboratories including ANL, DHS, DOE/SC, FNAL, LANL, LBL, NASA,
NIH, NIST, NOAA, NSF, PNNL, and UCAR, and their industry
partners, which improves the Nation's cybersecurity and privacy
environment through research, development, and promotion of
Identity Management best practices, standards, and community
outreach.

Joint Engineering Team (JET)--a partnership of agency
and research networks including DoD, DOE, NASA, NSF, Internet2,
and National Lambda Rail that seeks to improve performance as
well as security by coordinating networking testbeds (for
optical, cloud, architecture, and networking research) and
promoting the deployment in advanced networks of more secure
technologies such as IPv6 and DNSSec.

National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education
(NICE)--a partnership led by NIST and including DHS, DoD, NSF,
ED, OPM, NSA, DOJ, NSA, ODNI, and others, with the goal of
establishing an operational, sustainable, and continually
improving cybersecurity education program to foster sound cyber
practices that will enhance the Nation's security.

The SEW-Education subgroup of the NITRD SEW
Coordinating Group, with a focus on raising the national
profile of computing-related knowledge through fundamental
changes in K-12 computer science education. This new group, one
of whose co-chairs leads the NIST cybersecurity education
initiative, is a participant in the NICE program and is now
developing its plan of action.
As Director of the NCO for NITRD, it is always a pleasure for me to
describe how, by facilitating the collaborative efforts of
representatives from many agencies--by arranging meetings and
teleconferences, hosting/supporting workshops and conferences,
preparing ``zero-th'' drafts of brainstorming documents, communicating
regularly with NITRD participants, and the like--the NCO helps empower
the collective intelligence of the NITRD community to accomplish
together far more than any single agency could on its own. I believe
the NITRD model of cooperation among very disparate agencies truly
works, and has led to significant improvements in research and
development as well as strategic planning and for cybersecurity.
As is described above, the NITRD Program currently supports an
extensive process of coordination and planning across the Federal
agencies involved in research and development. This process has led to
the development of the Federal cybersecurity R&D strategic plan,
Trustworthy Cyberspace: Strategic Plan for the Federal Cybersecurity
Research and Development Program, which defines a set of interrelated
priorities for the agencies of the U.S. government that conduct or
sponsor R&D in cybersecurity. This plan aligns well with the planning
objectives noted in H.R. 4061, and is to be followed by coordinated
development of a roadmap of steps guiding its implementation. In this
process, NITRD and its agency members have hosted workshops for the
exchange of information with academia and the private sector and have
requested comments from a wide range of stakeholders including the
public. NITRD member agencies are beginning to use language and
direction from this coordinated plan in agency research and development
activities. We greatly appreciate the interest of the Committee and the
Subcommittees represented here today and share your commitment to
research and development for better cybersecurity. We look forward to
continuing to work closely with you on this shared goal with or without
any additional legislation.
The proposed legislation directly promotes greater cybersecurity
research and development, education, and workforce needs as one of five
parts of its basic approach as outlined in SEC 243 (b). The same
section promotes the development and implementation of technical
capabilities in support of national cybersecurity goals. Many such
technical capabilities of the future will represent the practical
implementations of the results of ongoing Federal research and
development coordinated in the NITRD Program.
The legislation also calls for research and development in
cybersecurity in SEC 243 (c) as an important component of a
multifaceted program to foster the development, in conjunction with
other governmental entities and the private sector, of essential
information security technologies and capabilities for protecting
Federal systems and critical information infrastructure, including
comprehensive protective capabilities and other technological
solutions. Such research and development will be essential not only to
better meet existing threats, but to provide the technical and
scientific foundation for capabilities to meet emerging threats and
developments. The coordination of such research and development, and
the transition to practice of its successful results, are key
components of the NITRD contributions to improving cybersecurity. The
proposed legislation for cybersecurity research and development, as
outlined in Sections 243 (c) and (d), thus is consistent and aligns
with the R&D coordination in which the NITRD Program engages.

Biography for Dr. George O. Strawn, Director, National Coordination
Office, Networking and Information Technology Research and Development
Program
Dr. George O. Strawn is the Director of the National Coordination
Office (NCO) for the Networking and Information Technology Research and
Development (NITRD) interagency program. He also serves as the Co-Chair
of the Subcommittee on NITRD. The NCO reports to the Office of Science
and Technology Policy (OSTP) within the Executive Office of the
President.
Dr. Strawn is on assignment to the NCO from the National Science
Foundation (NSF), where he most recently served as Chief Information
Officer (CIO). As the CIO for NSF, he guided the agency in the
development and design of innovative information technology, working to
enable the NSF staff and the international community of scientists,
engineers, and educators to improve business practices and pursue new
methods of scientific communication, collaboration, and decision-
making.
Prior to his appointment as NSF CIO, Dr. Strawn served as the
executive officer of the NSF Directorate for Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE) and as Acting Assistant Director for
CISE. Previously, Dr. Strawn had served as the Director of the CISE
Division of Advanced Networking Infrastructure and Research, where he
led NSF's efforts in the Presidential Next Generation Internet
Initiative.
Prior to coming to NSF, Dr. Strawn was a Computer Science faculty
member at Iowa State University (ISU) for a number of years. He also
served there as Director of the ISU Computation Center and Chair of the
ISU Computer Science Department. Under his leadership, ISU became a
charter member of MIDNET, a regional NSFNET network; he also lead the
creation of a thousand-workstation academic system based on an
extension of the MIT Athena system; and under his leadership, the ISU
Computer Science department was accredited by the then-new Computer
Science Accreditation Board.
Dr. Strawn received his Ph.D. in Mathematics from Iowa State
University and his BA Magna Cum Laude in Mathematics and Physics from
Cornell College.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you very much.
I now recognize our second witness, Dr. Farnam Jahanian,
for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. FARNAM JAHANIAN, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR,
DIRECTORATE FOR COMPUTER AND INFORMATION SCIENCE AND
ENGINEERING, NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION

Mr. Jahanian. Good morning. Chairmen Quayle and Brooks,
Ranking Members Wu and Lipinski, and Members of the
Subcommittees, I am Farnam Jahanian, Assistant Director for the
Computer and Information Science and Engineering Directorate at
the National Science Foundation.
As you know, NSF is dedicated to the support of fundamental
research in all disciplines to the advancement of science and
engineering and to educating a new generation of innovative
leaders. I welcome this opportunity to present NSF's
investments in cybersecurity research and education this
morning.
Investments in unclassified long-term research are critical
to an effective national strategy of achieving trustworthy
cyberspace. It is important to note that many powerful
information technologies deployed today capitalize on
fundamental research outcomes generated decades ago. NSF brings
the problem-solving capabilities of the Nation's best minds to
bear on these challenges. It also promotes connections between
academia and industry which help to protect the cyberspace,
secure the Nation's critical infrastructure and fuel job
growth.
In fiscal year 2011, NSF will invest up to $130 million in
cybersecurity research including $55 million in the cross-
cutting Trustworthy Computing program at NSF. Its projects
range from security at the microscopic level, detecting whether
a silicon chip contains a malicious circuit, to the macroscopic
level, determining strategies for securing the next generation
electrical power grid.
Fundamental research in cryptography, formal specification,
verification techniques and security testing all contribute to
improved methods for building systems that perform as intended,
even in the face of threats. Research in secure programming
languages and methodologies, secure operating systems and
specialty virtualization mechanisms on which many of the
security of cloud computing depends are also prominent in NSF's
portfolio. Cybersecurity investments are also made in the
subdisciplines of computing and information sciences, for
example, in the physical cybersystems, algorithmic foundations
and networking programs in my directorate.
Center-scale activities play an important role in NSF's
portfolio. The Trust Center, a multidisciplinary collaborative
research effort, is focused on science and technology for
developing and using secure information systems with almost 30
industrial partners. Four cybertrust centers and two industry-
university cooperative centers also focus on a number of
foundational challenges. Research outcomes and innovations
developed with the funding from NSF and other federal partners
are now being used by the private sector and government
agencies to protect the Nation's cyber infrastructure. In
recent years, research outcomes have led to the formation of
numerous startup companies in the IT sector that bring
innovative solutions to the marketplace.
Education is embedded in all these projects through the
training of graduate students, many of whom will join the
cybersecurity workforce. CAREER NSF, most prestigious program
for junior faculty, carries specific requirements for the
integration of research and education. Research experiences for
undergraduates, another NSF program, gives students
opportunities to do cybersecurity research. Scholarship for
Service program provides tuition at academic institutions in
exchange for government service following graduation. To date,
this program has provided 1,400 scholarships at 34 institutions
and has placed graduates in 30 federal agencies. Advanced
technology innovation education program educates technicians
and has three regional centers: Cyber Watch in Maryland with 35
community colleges, 15 universities from 20 States and an
enrollment of 1,800 students; the CSSIA Center in Illinois,
eight institutions from five States with more than 1,400
enrolled; and a third regional center, the CSEC Center in
Oklahoma with 45 institutions from eight states and almost
2,000 students enrolled.
NSF has been actively responding to the near-term and
midterm action plans outlined in the Cyberspace Review Policy.
NSF also participates in the interagency NITRD program, which
ensures the coordination of cybersecurity investment across 14
government agencies.
To conclude, the Internet plays a critical role in tightly
integrating the economic, political and social fabric of our
global society. These interdependencies leave the Nation
vulnerable to a wide range of threats that challenge the
security, reliability, availability and overall trustworthiness
of all IT resources. In my testimony today, I have emphasized
that NSF's investment in cybersecurity research and education
allows our society to benefit from a robust, secure, dependable
infrastructure that supports all application sectors including
those on which our lives depend.
This concludes my testimony. I would be happy to answer any
questions at this time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jahanian follows:]
Prepared Statement of Farnam Jahanian, Ph.D., Assistant Director,
Computer and Information Science and Engineering Directorate
Good afternoon, Chairman Quayle and Chairman Brooks, Ranking
Members Wu and Lipinski, and members of the Subcommittees. My name is
Farnam Jahanian and I am the Assistant Director of the Computer and
Information Science and Engineering Directorate at the National Science
Foundation.
I welcome this opportunity to highlight NSF's investments in cyber
security research and education. NSF aims to fund cyber security
research at the frontiers of knowledge, to capitalize on the
intellectual capacity of both young and experienced investigators in
our Nation's academic and research institutions, and to partner with
other U.S. government agencies and private sector and international
organizations to meet the challenges of securing cyberspace. It is
important to note that the many powerful information technologies (IT)
deployed today around the world capitalize on fundamental research
outcomes generated decades ago. An effective national strategy for
achieving a cyberspace that is deemed ``trustworthy'' must include
investments in fundamental, unclassified, long-term research. These
investments will allow our society to continue to benefit from a
robust, secure, dependable cyber infrastructure that supports all
application sectors, including those on which our lives depend.
Allow me to share with you some examples of the important
contributions made to date by the research community with both NSF and
other Federal support. They include:

Cryptographic schemes and cryptographic-based
authentication, enabling today's Internet commerce, supporting
secure digital signatures and online credit card transactions;

Program analyses and verification techniques,
enabling the early detection of software vulnerabilities and
flaws, which can prevent cyber attacks, such as phishing, worms
and botnets;

New approaches to prevent and mitigate distributed
denial of service attacks have helped secure Internet's
underlying infrastructure;

Approaches to identify exploitable flaws in cyber-
enabled systems, including automotive control software and
medical device software, that have alerted industry to the need
for secure software and system development practices;

Technology to detect and defeat ``drive-by
downloads'' from malicious websites makes web browsing safer
for the public;

Innovative machine learning and data mining
approaches used in spam filtering, and methods for detecting
attacks, such as those involving credit card fraud;

CAPTCHAs, the distorted text that only humans--not
machines or bots--can decipher, to ensure that it is indeed a
human, and not a bot, who is buying a ticket on-line or setting
up an email account;

Open source tools that enable rapid analysis of
malware allow for quick detection and mitigation and new
methods to study botnets reveal the structure of the
underground economy, allowing investigators to make attribution
and prevent future attacks from the same sources;

Better understanding of how humans respond to
software security warnings gives designers new models for
designing usable and secure systems; and

The underpinnings for fully homomorphic encryption,
which means that we may eventually be able to perform encrypted
computations on untrusted platforms (such as on a distributed
``cloud'' platform), just as today we can send encrypted
communications over untrusted networks.
The research contributions listed above and other research outcomes
and innovations developed with funding from NSF and other Federal
partners are now being used by the private sector and government
agencies to protect the nation's cyber infrastructure. Moreover, in
recent years, NSF-funded research activities have led to the formation
of start-up companies in the IT sector that bring innovative solutions
and technologies to the marketplace, fueling job growth, and helping to
protect cyber space. By promoting a healthy connection between academia
and companies, NSF further enhances its research portfolio in
trustworthy computing with foundational concepts and new ideas that are
directly relevant to the commercial sector.
While the advances in cyber security research and development (R&D)
are many, including those mentioned above, the Nation needs to continue
its investments in long-term, game-changing research if our cyber
systems are to be trustworthy. As you know, every day, we learn about
more sophisticated and dangerous attacks. Why is the cyber security
challenge so hard? The general answer is that attacks and defenses co-
evolve: a system that was secure yesterday might no longer be secure
tomorrow. More specific responses to this question include:

The technology base of our systems is frequently
updated to improve functionality, availability, and/or
performance. New systems introduce new vulnerabilities that
need new defenses.

The settings in which our computing systems are
deployed and the functionality they provide are not static.
With new computing models/platforms, like cloud computing and
smart phones, come new content and function, which in turn
creates new incentives for attack and disruption.

The sophistication of attackers is increasing as well
as their sheer number and the specificity of their targets.

Achieving system trustworthiness is not purely a
technology problem. System developers, purchasers, operators
and users all have a role to play in system security, and ways
to incentivize them are required. Security mechanisms that are
not convenient will be ignored or circumvented; security
mechanisms that are difficult to understand will be ignored.

Humans can be tricked into performing insecure
actions or divulging confidential information through various
ruses of clever adversaries.

Emerging Threats

The Internet plays a critical role in tightly integrating the
economic, political, and social fabric of global society. These
interdependencies leave the Nation vulnerable to a wide range of
threats that challenge the security, reliability, availability, and
overall trustworthiness of all information technology resources.
An evolution of means and motives. In retrospect, early threats,
such as first-generation viruses and worms, while costly and dangerous,
did not seriously challenge the availability or security of the
Internet. In practice, many attackers simply engaged in acts of
vandalism. Quickly, however, global Internet threats underwent a
profound transformation--from attacks designed solely to disable all or
part of the Internet to those that specifically targeted people and
organizations. Driven in large part by financial incentives, attackers
learned that these systems offered a valuable resource, both in terms
of the personal data they contained and as a resource that could be
used for future attacks. Networks of these compromised machines, or
botnets, have become the delivery platform of choice and fuel a variety
of threats, such as SPAM, identity theft, phishing, and Distributed
Denial of Service Attacks (DDoS).
These threats continue to evolve both in the motives of the
attackers and the means they employ to achieve their goals. Today,
exclusively economic motivations have given way to a wide range of
goals, including the desire to project political will into cyber-space,
such as the denial of service attacks that shadowed the clashes between
Russia and Georgia over the region of South Ossetia in 2008, and the
Ghostnet cyber spying operation that infiltrated the computers of
embassies, foreign ministries, and the offices of the Dalai Lama in
2009. Both instances serve to highlight the scope of this problem and
the difficulty in discovering the persons or nations that launched the
attacks. With these changing motivations, attackers continue to
innovate with new methods. Attacks continue to increase in size. They
are more targeted, sophisticated, and stealthy. Furthermore, these
attacks are more effective, propagating through high-level applications
and through social engineering.
Future security challenges will follow Internet adoption patterns.
While Internet threats are likely to continue along the trajectory
outlined above, I believe new security challenges will emerge as
attackers shadow Internet adoption patterns.
Mobile Internet use is growing quickly: it will become the
predominant global Internet access method by 2014. Tens of thousands of
applications available today support banking, ecommerce, highway
navigation, health and wellbeing, and social networking, for example;
the future will only bring more varied applications used in all facets
of daily life. The current culture that encourages application
downloading makes mobile devices especially vulnerable to malware. For
example, in 2010, a smart phone weather application downloaded by
mobile phone users demonstrated how a malicious attack could quickly
co-opt a cohort of smart phones around the globe. Today, we lack the
understanding and technology to enforce security policies in these
situations.
Machine rooms and data centers have long been a mainstay of
commercial information technology support. But new technology now
enables the unprecedented aggregation of hardware and software, which
is then provided in a comprehensive, highly-elastic service that we
call ``cloud computing.'' Cloud providers are adding infrastructure at
a rapid rate to support this new model. These opportunities bring new
risks. A new trust model is required. Users of cloud computing must
place their trust in a third party that could well be sharing its
resources with competitors and adversaries. Moreover, the cloud--
because it concentrates value--is especially attractive to attackers.
The ramifications of these changes require continued research and
development; new approaches for protecting cloud infrastructure will be
key to its long-term success. For more information on the strengths and
weaknesses of cloud computing, see the NIST draft recommendations for
information technology policy makers: http://csrc.nist.gov/
publications/drafts/800-146/Draft-NIST-SP800-146.pdf.
The trend toward increasingly cyber-enabled systems, i.e., the
integration of computation, communication, and control into physical
systems, offers new challenges. Healthcare, education, and finance have
been at risk of attack for a long time, and physical infrastructure--
manufacturing, energy production, and transportation--are now at risk.
Recent attacks demonstrate that even facilities not directly connected
to the Internet can be targeted.
The Nation's researchers must start building systems whose
trustworthiness derives from first principles, i.e., proven
assumptions. To do that, NSF is formulating and developing a
comprehensive research portfolio around a view of systems that are
deemed trustworthy, i.e., systems that people can depend on day after
day and year after year to operate correctly and safely--from our
avionics, mass transit and automobile systems to medical devices
operated remotely to save lives on battlefields. Included in this
notion of trustworthiness are a number of critical concepts:
reliability (does it work as intended?); security (how vulnerable is it
to attack?); privacy (does it protect a person's information?); and
usability (can a human easily use it?). Research needs to be game-
changing and forward-looking; new policies and continued focus on cyber
security education, public awareness and workforce development are
critical to our success.
Given this summary of the emerging threats in cybersecurity and
NSF's contributions to these challenges, let me now turn to the issues
that were raised by the Subcommittees in the invitation to this
hearing.
(1) Please provide a brief overview of the National Science
Foundation's (NSF) cybersecurity activities and how research and
development is integrated into your agency's mission.
The National Science Foundation funds a broad range of activities
to advance cybersecurity research, develop a well-educated and capable
workforce, and to keep all citizens informed and aware. Investments in
these activities include the Trustworthy Computing program in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering, the
Scholarships for Service program in the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, the TRUST Science and Technology Center, and many
related research projects across Engineering, Mathematical and Physical
Sciences, and Office of Cyberinfrastructure programs. As stated in its
organic act, NSF's mission is ``to promote the progress of science; to
advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare; to secure the
national defense.'' Support for basic and applied research is integral
to NSF's mission. NSF also supports development activities beyond the
stage of research prototypes through its Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) programs
and in its support of science and engineering computing infrastructure
through its Office of Cyberinfrastructure.

Cybersecurity Research

NSF has been investing in cyber security research for many years.
In FY 2011, NSF will invest almost $117 million in fundamental research
in the science of trustworthiness and related trustworthy systems and
technologies. Approximately one half of this $117 million is allocated
to the cross-cutting Trustworthy Computing program, which in FY 2011 is
funded at a level of $55 million dollars. Currently, there are about
500 projects that are active. About a third of these projects includes
more than one faculty researcher and all include graduate students.
Active awards in the Trustworthy Computing program include $1.2M for
support of 19 post-doctoral students as well. In addition to the
Trustworthy Computing program, NSF continues to make cyber security
investments in the core scientific sub-disciplines of the computing and
information sciences, including the foundations of algorithms and
information and communications, cyber physical systems, smart health
and wellbeing, future internet architectures, networking technology and
systems, information integration and informatics, and in the social and
economic implications of developing secure, trustworthy systems.
NSF continues to cast a wide net and let the best ideas surface,
rather than pursuing a prescriptive research agenda. It engages the
cyber security research community in developing new fundamental ideas,
which are then evaluated by the best researchers through the peer
review process. This process, which supports the vast majority of
unclassified cyber security research in the United States, has led to
innovative and transformative results. Today, NSF's cyber security
research portfolio includes projects addressing security from the
microscopic level, detecting whether a silicon chip may contain a
malicious circuit, to the macroscopic level, determining strategies for
securing the next generation electrical power grid, as well as at the
human level, studying online privacy and security behaviors of both
adolescents and senior citizens. Fundamental research in cryptography,
cryptographic protocol analysis, formal specification and verification
techniques, static and dynamic program analysis, security testing
methods, all contribute to improved methods for building systems that
perform as intended, even in the face of threats. Research in secure
programming languages and methodologies, in securing operating systems
and especially the virtualization mechanisms and hypervisors on which
much of the security of cloud computing architectures depends is also
prominent in NSF's portfolio. NSF's researchers are investigating novel
methods for detecting when security measures have failed, when
intrusions have occurred, and when information may have been altered or
stolen. NSF's portfolio includes projects studying security in human-
centric systems and in a variety of web application contexts as well as
in smart phones, medical devices, and automotive systems.
Aside from single investigator and team awards, NSF also invests in
center-scale activities. In FY 2012, NSF will provide the eighth year
of funding for the Team for Research in Ubiquitous Secure Technology
(TRUST) Science and Technology Center (STC). This center, which
includes University of California (UC), Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon
University, Cornell University, San Jose State University, Stanford
University, and Vanderbilt University and many industrial partners, is
focused on the development of cybersecurity science and technology that
will radically transform the ability of organizations to design, build,
and operate trustworthy information systems for the Nation's critical
infrastructure by addressing the technical, operational, legal, policy,
and economic issues affecting security, privacy, and data protection as
well as the challenges of developing, deploying, and using trustworthy
systems.
Since 2004, the Trustworthy Computing program has funded four
centers. All of these centers are coming to an end this year or next:

Trustworthy Cyber Infrastructure for the Power Grid
led by University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, now
transitioned to Department of Energy (DoE) and Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) for continued funding
This research creates infrastructure technology that will convey
critical information to grid system operators despite partially
successful cyber attacks and accidental failures. Security and trust
validation techniques are developed that can quantify the
trustworthiness of a proposed design with respect to critical
properties. An interactive simulator created by the project will allow
users to experiment with new power grid cyber-infrastructure design
approaches.

Cybertrust Center for Internet Epidemiology and
Defenses led by UC San Diego and UC Berkeley
Understanding the scope and emergent behavior of Internet-scale
worms seen in the wild constitutes a new science termed Internet
epidemiology. To gain visibility into pathogens propagating across the
global Internet, the Center has developed and operated an Internet
pathogen detection service of unprecedented scale. With this service,
the Center has demonstrated the speed and coverage over which such
pathogens can spread, and has developed mechanisms for deriving
``signatures'' of a worm's activity and disseminating these to worm
suppression devices deployed throughout the global network.

Situational Awareness for Everyone led by Carnegie
Mellon University and University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
This center focuses on how to make both users and organizations
more aware of their cybersecurity situation--the risks they face and
how they can deal with them in practice. For organizations, the center
has developed tools and techniques focused on network security
awareness and management. Some of these tools are now operating in
California's inter-campus network as well as Berkeley's and Carnegie
Mellon's internal campus networks; industry is also showing concrete
interest. The center has also focused on educating children and adults,
reaching children through a novel game that educates users about
security issues and tailors its behavior for the age and background of
the player. It has been tested in Pittsburgh regional school districts
and is now available on the Internet.

ACCURATE led by Johns Hopkins University
The voting system integrity problem is a paradigmatic hard cyber
trust problem, requiring trustworthy system architectures, security,
integrity, privacy, anonymity, high assurance, and human-machine
interfaces. Voting systems must preserve a voter's privacy and
anonymity, while also being auditable and transparent. This center has
generated new understanding of voting systems and has participated in
the California Secretary of State's ``Top to Bottom Review'' of voting
systems.
NSF has also invested in two active industry/university cooperative
research centers:

CITeR: Center for Identification Technology Research
(Biometrics) at West Virginia University and the University of
Arizona
CITeR focuses on identification of people that includes iris,
fingerprint and face recognition and will significantly enhance the
research database available for the disciplines involved with security
biometrics technologies. Research is needed in large-scale, fully-
automated, distributed systems in several applications, ranging from
drivers license to passports and visas, for example.

S2ERC: Security and Software Engineering at Ball
State and other universities
S2ERC investigates integrated methods of engineering practical
software systems that are able to meet emerging security requirements.
This goal is of great importance to both industry and government in
order for them to confidently deploy real-world software systems that
meet their mission goals in the face of a broad range of security
attacks. Participants in S2ERC include Ball State University, DePaul
University, Indiana University- Purdue University Fort Wayne, Indiana
University--Purdue University Indianapolis, Iowa State University,
James Madison University, Pennsylvania State University, Purdue
University, University of Illinois at Chicago, University of West
Florida, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, and West
Virginia University.

Cybersecurity Education

Investments in cybersecurity research are accompanied by
investments in cyber-security education and workforce development.
Research undertaken in academia not only engages some of our nation's
best and brightest researchers, but because these researchers are also
teachers, new generations of students are exposed to the latest
thinking from the people who understand it best. And when these
students graduate and move into the workplace, they will bring this
knowledge and understanding with them. Moreover, faculty members in
this dual role of researchers and teachers have incentives to write
textbooks and prepare other teaching materials that allow dissemination
of their work to a wide audience, including teachers and students
nationwide.
Over the years, the Trustworthy Computing program has supplemented
its awards by giving small amounts of additional funding to researchers
who were willing to bring undergraduates into their labs through the
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program. This program
gives many undergraduate students their first hands-on experiences with
real science and engineering research projects. In addition, the
Trustworthy Computing program has funded up and coming young
investigators through the CAREER program that offers NSF's most
prestigious awards in support of junior faculty who exemplify the role
of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent education
and the integration of education and research within the context of the
mission of their organizations.

The NSF Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR) has
focused on increasing the number of professionals with degrees in
cybersecurity. An overwhelming majority of these EHR developed
professionals were supported by the Federal Cyber Service: Scholarship
for Service (SFS) and Advanced Technological Education (ATE) programs.
The SFS program seeks to increase the number of qualified students
entering the field of cybersecurity and to increase the capacity of
United States higher education enterprise to produce cybersecurity
professionals. The SFS program is an interagency program administered
by NSF in collaboration with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM),
the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), and the National Security
Agency (NSA), among other agencies. SFS was established as a result of
a January 2000 Presidential Executive Order that defined the National
Plan for Information Systems Protection. The SFS program supports two
tracks.
The first track, the SFS Scholarship Track, provides funding to
colleges and universities to award scholarships to students in the
information assurance and computer security fields. A recipient must be
a U.S. citizen, a full-time student within two years of graduation,
demonstrate academic talent, meet selection criteria for Federal
employment, be willing to undergo a background investigation for
security clearance and must agree to work for at least two years in the
Federal government. To date, the SFS program has provided scholarships
to 1400 students with 1100 of them successfully placed in the Federal
government. The SFS graduates were employed by more than 30 Federal
agencies, including National Security Agency, Department of Homeland
Security, Central Intelligence Agency, and Department of Justice.
From 2007 to 2010, twenty-eight awards were made totaling $46.75
million dollars. Currently, SFS Scholarships are offered at 34
institutions, with the largest enrollments at the University of Tulsa,
Carnegie Mellon University, Mississippi State, and University of North
Carolina.

The second track, the SFS Capacity Building Track, provides funds
to colleges and universities to improve the quality and increase the
production of information assurance and computer security
professionals. Examples of projects include: developing faculty
expertise in information cybersecurity, creating learning materials and
strategies, outreach activities, or other innovative and creative
projects, which lead to an increase in the national cyber security
workforce. Proposing organizations must demonstrate expertise in
cybersecurity education or research. From 2007 to 2010, twenty-four
awards were made totaling $5.73 million dollars and covering every
region of the country.
With an emphasis on two-year colleges, the Advanced Technological
Education (ATE) program focuses on the education of technicians for the
high-technology fields, including cybersecurity. Activities may have
either a national or a regional focus, but not a purely local one. The
ATE program supports projects, centers, and targeted research in
technician education. Currently, there are 14 active ATE awards in
cybersecurity for a total of $17.1M, including $3M awarded in FY10.
Three of these projects have been funded under the Regional ATE Center
track, providing $3M for four years for each of the centers.

CyberWatch (Maryland)--The CyberWatch Center is
headquartered at Prince George's Community College. The mission
of the center is to ``increase the quantity and quality of the
cybersecurity workforce.'' It sponsors a K-12 program, college-
level model programs and courses, lab resources, articulation
agreements, and resources for faculty development. CyberWatch
has 50 institutional members, including 35 community colleges
and 15 universities from 20 states. More than 1800 students
were enrolled in cybersecurity courses at partnering community
colleges in 2009.

Center for Systems Security and Information Assurance
(CSSIA) (Illinois)--The CSSIA center has developed an
associate's degree program in information technology security,
and is providing professional development opportunities and
curricular materials. CSSIA has 8 institutional members,
including 6 community colleges and 2 universities from 5
states--Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin.
Their community college partner institutions enrolled more than
1400 students in cybersecurity courses in 2009.

Cyber Security Education Consortium (CSEC)
(Oklahoma)--The CSEC center is ``dedicated to building a
cybersecurity workforce who will play a critical role in
implementing the national strategy to secure cyberspace.'' The
center provides regional training workshops as well as
internships in SCADA security and digital forensics. CSEC has
45 institutional members, including 42 community colleges and 3
universities from 8 states--Arkansas, Colorado, Kansas,
Louisiana, Missouri, Oklahoma, Tennessee, and Texas. Almost
2000 students enrolled in cybersecurity courses at partnering
community colleges in 2009.
(2) Describe NSF's role in meeting the objectives outlined in the
near-term and mid-term action plans included in the Cyberspace Policy
Review, and detail past progress and future plans for meeting the
objectives outlined in the Review.
NSF supported the development of the Cyberspace Policy Review,
providing the task force that prepared the review with direct access to
an extensive group of academic cyber security researchers. The
Cyberspace Policy Review Near-Term Action Plan lists ten items and the
Mid-Term Action Plan lists fourteen. The actions most concerned with
NSF's mission are discussed below.
Near-term Action Plan #9 calls for (a) developing a framework for
research and development strategies that focus on game-changing
technologies that can enhance the trustworthiness of the digital
infrastructure and (b) providing the research community with access to
event data to facilitate developing tools, testing theories, and
identifying workable solutions.
(a)Specifically, over the past two years, NSF has participated in a
set of activities designed to develop research themes related to game-
changing technologies, including the announcement of three such themes
last year: Moving Target, intended to raise the costs for attackers;
Tailored Trustworthy Spaces, intended to support the creation of
trustworthy computing environments that can respond to a range of trust
requirements; and Cyber Economic Incentives, intended to help
understand how to motivate adoption of trustworthy technologies. NSF
has collaborated with its partner agencies in publicizing these themes
to the research community and has incorporated them into related
research solicitations. In the succeeding year, NSF has participated
actively in a working group organized under the Networking Information
Technology R&D (NITRD) program's Cyber security and Information
Insurance (CSIA) Interagency Working Group (IWG) to develop a strategic
plan for the Federal cyber security research and development program.
This plan is expected to be released officially before the end of May.
(b)NSF has also actively promoted research access to event data.
Although NSF itself does not possess any datasets appropriate for this
purpose, it convened a workshop on cyber security data for
experimentation in August 2010 that brought companies and organizations
that possess such data together with members of the research community
who would like to study the data. Several companies have agreed to make
data available on their premises, and NSF has invited its researchers
to request supplementary funds to support visits to data repositories
that are not available for remote access.
Mid-Term Action Plan #3: Expand support for key education programs
and research and development to ensure the Nation's continued ability
to compete in the information age economy.
As already described above, NSF supports a broad range of cyber
security research; in FY2011 NSF will invest almost $117 million in
this area; approximately half of this is in the Trustworthy Computing
program. The balance of NSF's cyber security investments are made in
the many core scientific sub-disciplines of the computing and
information sciences. In addition to single and multiple-investigator
research grants, NSF has funded a Science and Technology Center, four
Center-Scale Activities, and Industry/University Cooperative Research
Centers. Education is embedded in virtually all of these research
grants through the training of graduate students, many of whom will
join the industry or university workforce in cyber security research.
NSF CAREER awards, among NSF's most prestigious grants, carry specific
requirements for integration of research and education. Cyber security
research funds also support the Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program to grow student interest in cyber security research. The
Scholarships for Service (SFS) program ($52.5 million from 2007-2010)
provides tuition scholarships for students enrolled in cyber security
programs at a wide range of institutions across the nation in exchange
for a commitment to a period of service in a government post following
graduation. A component of the SFS program is also devoted to building
additional teaching capacity through curriculum and faculty
development. The Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program
supports cyber security education in fourteen projects.
Mid-Term Action Plan #4: Develop a strategy to expand and train the
workforce, including attracting and retaining cyber security expertise
in the Federal government.
As described earlier, NSF's Scholarships for Service program,
including capacity building grants to support expansion of the
educational resources available to train students in cyber security, is
a fundamental part of the national strategy to train and expand the
workforce in this key area; scholarships under this program carry a
commitment for service in the Federal government. Last fall, NSF
sponsored a Summit on Education in Secure Software to help identify how
to teach students to write programs that cannot easily be subverted.
NSF is also participating in the National Initiative for Cyber security
Education (NICE) as co-lead with the Department of Education for Formal
Cyber security Education. This activity encompasses development of
education programs for K-12, higher education, vocational and other
discipline-related programs in order to help provide a pipeline of
skilled workers for private sector and government.
Mid-Term Action Plan #11: Encourage collaboration between academic
and industrial laboratories to develop migration paths and incentives
for rapid adoption of research and technology development innovations.
NSF's Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) programs aim to support the transition of
successful research projects into the marketplace. These programs have
funded several projects related to cyber security in recent years. Of
the current active projects, eight have direct linkage to cyber
security; these have been awarded about $4.5M to date.
CISE also participates in the Grant Opportunities for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) program, which aims to promote academic-
industry partnerships on high risk, transformational research projects.
CISE plans to supplement its regular Advisory Committee with a new
panel of industry leaders to further promote the adoption of research
results by industry.
CISE also encourages academic industry partnerships. For example,
as mentioned above, the NSF Team for Research in Ubiquitous Security
Technology (TRUST) Science and Technology Center works with a number of
industry partners who 1) help define the Center's strategic intent and
research and education priorities through the Center's External
Advisory Board, and 2) interact directly with faculty and students on
individual research projects. Industry partners include Broadcom,
Cisco, eBay, Google, HP, IBM, Intel, Juniper, Microsoft, Oracle/Sun,
Qualcom, Raytheon, Symantec, United Technologies, and Yahoo. CISE has
similar active engagement with industry across its portfolio, including
in four Trustworthy Computing Centers and two Industry & University
Cooperative Research Centers.
The following areas--as stated in the Cyberspace Policy Review--are
not directly addressable by NSF; however, the Trustworthy Computing
Program has invested in foundational research that can facilitate
progress.
Mid-Term Action Plan #8: Develop mechanisms for cyber security-
related information sharing that address concerns about privacy and
proprietary information and make information sharing mutually
beneficial.
Example research areas include methods for specifying and enforcing
privacy policies, applying new cryptographic schemes to support access
control, developing techniques for anonymizing sensitive data, and
secure multiparty computation techniques.
Mid-Term Action Plan #9: Develop solutions for emergency
communications capabilities during a time of natural disaster, crisis,
or conflict while ensuring network neutrality.
Example research areas include communication patterns during
emergencies; efficient, robust mesh networks that can operate through
disasters; and network architectures for first-responder
communications.
Mid-Term Action Plan #13: Implement, for high-value activities
(e.g., the Smart Grid), an opt-in array of interoperable identity
management systems to build trust for online transactions and to
enhance privacy.
Example research areas include biometrics, cryptographic means for
securing identities, and access management based on identity and
experience.
(3) Please discuss how cybersecurity research and development,
education and workforce training, and standards development are
coordinated with other relevant agencies;
NSF coordinates its cyber security research and planning activities
with other Federal agencies, including the Departments of Defense (DoD)
and Homeland Security (DHS) and the agencies of the Intelligence
Community, through the following ``mission-bridging'' activities:

NSF plays a leadership role in the interagency
Networking and Information Technology Research and Development
(NITRD) Program. The National Science and Technology Council's
NITRD Sub-Committee, of which I am co-chair, has played a
prominent role in the coordination of the Federal government's
cyber security research investments.

In January 2008, President Bush initiated the
Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI). The
current Administration supports and has continued efforts on
this initiative. One of the goals of the CNCI is to develop
``leap-ahead'' technologies that would achieve orders-of-
magnitude improvements in cybersecurity. Based on this
directive, a NITRD Senior Steering Group (SSG) for
Cybersecurity R&D was established to provide a responsive and
robust conduit for cybersecurity R&D information across the
policy, fiscal, and research levels of the Government. The SSG
is composed of senior representatives of agencies with national
cybersecurity leadership positions, including: DoD, ODNI, DHS,
NSA, NSF, NIST, OSTP, and OMB. A principal responsibility of
the SSG is to define, coordinate, and recommend strategic
Federal R&D objectives in cybersecurity, and to communicate
research needs and proposed budget priorities to policy makers
and budget officials, including recommendations to OSTP, OMB,
and the Joint Inter-Agency Cyber Task Force (JIACTF). One of
CISE's Division Directors is the co-chair of this group.

The NITRD CyberSecurity and Information Assurance
Interagency Working Group (CSIA IWG) coordinates cyber security
and information assurance research and development across the
thirteen member agencies, including DoD, the Department of
Energy (DOE) and the National Security Agency (NSA).

To facilitate cross conversation between classified
and unclassified programs in the Federal government, a
coordinating group called Special Cyber Operations Research and
Engineering (SCORE) was established, which includes members
from the SSG. NSF research is reported in this forum. In the
past year, SCORE has organized a series of workshops
questioning some commonly held assumptions about technical
approaches to cybersecurity; NSF investigators have been active
participants.

Under the auspices of the NITRD program and the CSIA
SSG and IWG, NSF and the other member agencies have co-funded
and co-sponsored a number of workshops:

  Science of Security Workshop, co-funded by NSF, NSA, and
IARPA (November 16-18, 2008): To discuss the foundations of
making security into a science.

  Usability, Security, Privacy Workshop, hosted by the
National Academies' Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board (July 21-22, 2009): To advance the study of usability and
ways to embed usability considerations into the research,
design and development of secure systems.

  Workshop on Clean-Slate Security Architectures, co-funded by
NSF and DARPA (July 28, 2009): To frame a new security
architecture that could be the basis of clean-slate networks.

  Workshop on Security Research for the Financial
Infrastructure, co-supported by Treasury, DHS and NSF (October
28-29, 2009): To gain a better understanding of the security
problems faced by the financial sector and how the research
community might help solve those problems.

  Workshop on Cyber Security Data for Experimentation (August
26-27, 2010): To explore options for research access to event
data.

  Summit on Education in Secure Software (October 18-19,
2010): To develop a comprehensive agenda focused on the
challenges of secure software education.

  NSF Workshop on the Future of Trustworthy Computing (October
27-29, 2010): To provide context and direction for researchers
interested in Trustworthy Computing.

  NSF/Microsoft Research Workshop on Usable Verification
(November 15-16, 2010): To stimulate advances in the usability
of tools for formal verification.

  Workshop on Fundamental Research Challenges for Trustworthy
Biometrics (November 8-9, 2010): To identify underlying
biometrics research challenges.

A number of projects have received their seed or
beginning funding at NSF and then have been picked up by other
agencies as they see the value of applying basic research to
their mission challenges. NSF has also encouraged its
researchers to take advantage of research assets created by its
partner agencies. For example,

  NSF funded the Trustworthy Cyber Infrastructure for the
Power Grid Center at UIUC; it has now transitioned to DoE/DHS
for continued funding.

  NSF funded the DETER testbed in its early years; it is now
wholly funded by DHS.

  NSF encourages its Principal Investigator (PI) community to
use the data available from the DHS-funded PREDICT repository
to validate and test their ideas.
(4) Please provide feedback on H.R. 4061, the Cybersecurity
Enhancement Act of 2009, from the 111th Congress, by commenting on the
merits of that bill and any areas that you see room for improvement or
changes.
The Cyber Security Research and Development Act of 2002 has been an
important asset in stimulating innovative research and development.
NSF's activities are well-aligned with the provisions of the existing
Act and its proposed enhancement. NSF has been working with the
National Coordinating Office (NCO) on a national strategy for research
and development, which is one of the key points in the new draft
legislation. The addition of usability and social and behavioral
factors as areas of research interest is consistent with the path that
NSF is currently pursuing, as is the focus on fostering curriculum
development on principles and techniques of designing secure software.
Calling out investments in center-scale activities is also consistent
with the importance that NSF places on funding centers to create
visibility and activity around important national challenges. As
mentioned above, NSF actively encourages interaction across government,
academic, and commercial sectors. CISE plans to supplement its regular
Advisory Committee with a new panel of industry leaders to further
promote the adoption of research results by industry. In summary, NSF's
investments in cybersecurity research, education and workforce
development are consistent with the provisions of H.R. 4061.
(5) How would the Administration's proposed cybersecurity
legislation impact NSF's cyber security activities?
The National Science Foundation is the Nation's premier agency for
advancing fundamental research and education in science and
engineering. NSF's mission is to ``to promote the progress of science;
to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare; to secure the
national defense.''
The Administration's proposal is offering a carefully tailored and
measured approach that relies on private sector innovation. This
proposal will enable cyber infrastructure owners and operators to adopt
new strategies and techniques to deal with cyber threats. NSF's R&D
investments enable scientific discovery and engineering advances that
continuously fuel that innovation.

Conclusions

In my testimony today, I've tried to show that the pace and scope
of today's cyber threats pose grand challenges to our national critical
infrastructure. I have outlined the investments in NSF's cyber security
research and education portfolio, which show progress and significant
advances over the years. Nonetheless, the Nation needs to invest in
long-term, fundamental and game-changing research if our cybersystems
are to remain secure in the future. I have indicated NSF's role in
addressing the Near- and Mid-Term Action Plans included in the
Cyberspace Policy Review and have detailed our progress in meeting
those objectives. I have also discussed how NSF partners with other
agencies and have given examples of many cross-agency activities.
Finally, I have provided feedback on H.R. 4061, The Cybersecurity
Enhancement Act of 2009, as well as on the Administration's proposed
cybersecurity legislation. I appreciate the opportunity to have this
dialogue with members of your Subcommittees on these very important
topics. With robust sustained support for cyber security research and
development in both the executive and legislative branches, there is a
unique opportunity to protect our national security and enhance our
economic prosperity for decades to come. This concludes my remarks. I
would be happy to answer any questions at this time.

Biography for Dr. Farnam Jahanian, Assistant Director, Directorate for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering, National Science
Foundation
Farnam Jahanian is the Assistant Director of the Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Directorate at the National
Science Foundation. Prior to joining NSF, he held the Edward S.
Davidson Collegiate Professorship in Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science at the University of Michigan, where he served as
Chair for Computer Science and Engineering from 2007--2011 and as
Director of Software Systems Laboratory from 1997--2000. Dr. Jahanian
also serves as co-chair of the Networking and Information Technology
Research and Development (NITRD) Subcommittee of the NSTC Committee on
Technology, providing overall coordination for activities of 14
government agencies.
At CISE, Dr. Jahanian guides the directorate in its mission to
uphold the nation's leadership in computer and information science and
engineering through its support for fundamental and transformative
advances that are a key driver of economic competitiveness and crucial
to achieving our major national priorities. With a budget of
approximately $618 million, CISE supports ambitious long-term research
and innovation, the creation of cutting-edge facilities and tools,
broad interdisciplinary collaborations, and education and training of
the next generation of computer scientists and information technology
professionals with skills essential to success in the increasingly
competitive, global market.
Over the last two decades at the University of Michigan, Dr.
Jahanian led several large-scale research projects that studied the
growth and scalability of the Internet infrastructure and which
ultimately transformed how cyber threats are addressed by Internet
Service Providers. His work on Internet routing stability and
convergence has been highly influential within both the network
research and the Internet operational communities. This work was
recently recognized with an ACM SIGCOMM Test of Time Award in 2008. His
research on Internet infrastructure security formed the basis for the
successful Internet security services company Arbor Networks, which he
co-founded in 2001. He served as Chairman of Arbor Networks until its
acquisition by Tektronix Communications, a division of Danaher
Corporation, in 2010.
The author of over 100 published research papers, Dr. Jahanian has
served on dozens of national advisory boards and government panels. He
has received numerous awards for his research, teaching, and technology
commercialization activities. He has been an active advocate for
economic development efforts over the last decade, working with
entrepreneurs, and frequently lecturing on how basic research can be
uniquely central to an innovation ecosystem that drives economic growth
and global competitiveness. In 2009, he was named Distinguished
University Innovator at the University of Michigan.
Dr. Jahanian holds a master's degree and a Ph.D. in Computer
Science from the University of Texas at Austin. He is a Fellow of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the Institute of
Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE).

Chairman Quayle. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes our next witness, Ms. Furlani, for
five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MS. CITA FURLANI, DIRECTOR, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
LABORATORY, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY

Ms. Furlani. Thank you very much, Chairmen Quayle and
Brooks, Ranking Members Wu and Lipinski, and Members of the
Subcommittee. I am Cita Furlani, the Director of the
Information Technology Laboratory at the Department of
Commerce's National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss NIST's role in protecting information in the digital
age.
Since the early 1970s, NIST has developed standards to
support federal agencies' information assurance requirements.
Through FISMA, Congress reaffirmed NIST's leadership role in
developing standards for cybersecurity. FISMA provides for the
development and promulgation of Federal Information Processing
Standards, or FIPS, that are compulsory and binding for federal
computer systems. The responsibility for the development of
FIPS rests with NIST.
NIST works with federal agencies, industry and academic to
research, develop and deploy information security standards and
the technology that is necessary to protect information systems
against threats to the confidentiality, integrity and
availability of information and services. Consistent with its
mission and with the recommendations of the President's
Cyberspace Policy Review, NIST is actively engaged with private
sector, academia, non-national security federal departments and
agencies, the intelligence community and other elements of the
law enforcement and national security communities to coordinate
and prioritize cybersecurity research, standards development,
standards conformance demonstration, and cybersecurity
education and outreach.
Our research activities range from innovations in identity
management and verification, to metrics for complex systems, to
development of practical and secure cryptography and quantum
computing environments, to automation of discovery and
maintenance of system security configurations and status, to
techniques for specification and automation of access
authorization in line with many different kinds of access
policies. NIST is actively contributing to the objectives of
several of the near- and midterm action plan activities from
the Cyberspace Policy review.
The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education
represents the evolution of the comprehensive National
Cybersecurity Initiative, the work on cybersecurity education,
moving it from a federal focus to a broader national focus.
NIST has assumed the overall coordination role for this effort
and is finalizing a strategic framework and a tactical plan of
operation.
NIST and the National Security Agency lead an interagency
activity to establish strategic objectives in pursuing the
development of timely, technically sound, international
voluntary consensus cybersecurity standards including a
commitment to the development of an international standards
framework. NIST is an active member in each of the groups
coordinating cybersecurity R&D among federal agencies including
the NITRD CSIA, the SCORE and the Senior Steering Group, all
designed to actively share cybersecurity R&D information across
the policy, fiscal and research levels of the government.
NIST participated in the creation of the National Strategy
for Trusted Identifies in Cyberspace, which calls for a
national program office to coordinate needed federal
activities. This office will be led by NIST and will have full
access to NIST technical expertise as NIST has been actively
involved in the development and interoperability of secure
identity management for many years.
NIST believes that effective cybersecurity legislation
requires an appropriate balance between short- and long-term
goals as well as providing motivation for strong collaborations
between federal agencies, industry, academia, state and local
governments, and other interested stakeholders. Indeed, the
legislation proposed by the Administration is focused on
improving cybersecurity for the American people and our
Nation's critical infrastructure. NIST looks forward to
leveraging its legacy of research, development and standards in
this area with other federal and private sector partners.
Thank you for the opportunity today, and I will answer any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Furlani follows:]
Prepared Statement of Cita M. Furlani, Director, Information Technology
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, United
States Department of Commerce
Chairmen Quayle and Brooks, Ranking Members Wu and Lipinski and
Members of the Subcommittees, I am Cita M. Furlani, Director of the
Information Technology Laboratory at the Department of Commerce's
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Thank you for
the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss our role in
protecting information in the digital age.
As Secretary of Commerce Gary Locke said at the White House during
the launch of the U.S. International Strategy for Cyberspace: ``To
preserve and even improve on people's confidence in cyberspace, we need
an environment that not only rewards innovation and empowers
entrepreneurs, but one that also is constantly improving upon the
integrity of the interactions that take place online.'' NIST's mission
to promote U.S. innovation and industrial competitiveness by advancing
measurement science, standards, and technology in ways that enhance
economic security and improve our quality of life is well positioned to
support that goal.
As one of the major research components of NIST, the Information
Technology Laboratory (ITL) accelerates, through standards, tests and
metrics, the development, deployment and use of secure, usable,
interoperable and reliable information systems that enable American
businesses to be more innovative competitive. ITL enables world-class
measurement and testing through research innovations in the areas of
computer science and systems engineering, mathematics, and statistics.
We balance our research portfolio to be responsive to pressing national
priorities while pursuing research necessary to meet future challenges
in measurement science and technology. Our R&D agenda focuses on the
following broad program areas: cloud computing, complex systems,
cybersecurity, biometrics, health information technology, National
Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE), National Strategy for
Trusted Identities in Cyberspace (NSTIC), quantum information,
pervasive information technology, security automation, smart grid,
virtual measurement systems, and voting standards.
ITL addresses technical challenges through an integrated,
multidisciplinary and systems approach that emphasizes collaboration
with other NIST organizations, the Department of Commerce, other
government agencies, the U.S. private sector, standards development
organizations, and other national and international stakeholders. Our
rich programmatic diversity derives from our mission and mandates like
the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA), which charges
ITL to develop cybersecurity standards, guidelines, and associated
methods and techniques. Charged under other legislation, such as the
USA PATRIOT Act, the HITECH Act and the Help America Vote Act, we are
addressing major challenges faced by the nation in the areas of
homeland security, health IT and electronic voting.

Overview of NIST Cybersecurity Activities

As you are aware, beginning in the early 1970s with enactment of
the Brooks Act, NIST has developed standards to support federal
agencies' information assurance requirements. Through FISMA, Congress
again reaffirmed NIST's leadership role in developing standards for
cybersecurity. FISMA provides for the development and promulgation of
Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) that are ``compulsory
and binding'' for Federal computer systems. The responsibility for the
development of FIPS rests with NIST, and the authority to promulgate
mandatory FIPS is given to the Secretary of Commerce. Section 303 of
FISMA states that NIST shall:

have the mission of developing standards, guidelines,
and associated methods and techniques for information systems;

develop standards and guidelines, including minimum
requirements, for information systems used or operated by an
agency or by a contractor of an agency or other organization on
behalf of an agency, other than national security systems; and

develop standards and guidelines, including minimum
requirements, for providing adequate information security for
all agency operations and assets, but such standards and
guidelines shall not apply to national security systems.

NIST's mission in cybersecurity is to work with federal agencies,
industry, and academia to research, develop and deploy information
security standards and technology to protect information systems
against threats to the confidentiality, integrity and availability of
information and services. Consistent with this mission and with the
recommendations of the President's Cyberspace Policy Review, NIST is
actively engaged with private industry, academia, non-national security
federal departments and agencies, the intelligence community, and other
elements of the law enforcement and national security communities in
coordination and prioritization of cybersecurity research, standards
development, standards conformance demonstration and cybersecurity
education and outreach activities. Research activities range from
innovations in identity management and verification, to metrics for
complex systems, to development of practical and secure cryptography in
a quantum computing environment, to automation of discovery and
maintenance of system security configurations and status, to techniques
for specification and automation of access authorization in line with
many different kinds of access policies.
NIST addresses cybersecurity challenges throughout the information
and communications infrastructure through its cross-community
engagements. Enabled by Congressional funding increases in 2002 and in
response to FISMA, NIST is responsible for establishing and updating,
on a recurring basis, the federal government risk management framework
and cybersecurity controls. The national security community, a number
of state governments and major private sector organizations are also
adopting the risk management framework and cybersecurity controls
designed by NIST. NIST is engaging industry to harmonize standards
conformance requirements to align with industry business models and
system development practices. NIST is also playing a leading security
role in supply chain risk management, Health Information Technology,
the Smart Grid, biometrics/face authentication, cybersecurity education
and training beyond the federal government, next generation voting
systems, and cloud computing. NIST is working with the intelligence and
counterterrorism communities to facilitate cross sector information
sharing among federal, state and local government organizations.
Recognizing the importance of security-related standards beyond the
federal government, NIST leads national and international consensus
standards activities in cryptography, identity management, biometrics,
electronic credentialing, secure network protocols, software and
systems reliability, and security conformance testing.
Included in the scope of NIST cybersecurity activities are the
usability of systems such as voting machines, electronic health records
and software interfaces; network security, including standards and
tests for Internet Protocol version 6, Domain Network Security
(DNSSec), and wireless network protocols; research in mathematical
foundations to determine the security of information systems; the
National Software Reference Library, computer forensics tool testing,
and mobile device forensics; software assurance metrics, tools, and
evaluation; approaches to balancing safety, security, reliability, and
performance in SCADA and other Industrial Control Systems used in
manufacturing and other critical infrastructure industries;
technologies for detection of anomalous behavior, quarantines;
standards, modeling, and measurements to achieve end-to-end security
over heterogeneous, multi-domain networks; biometrics evaluation,
usability, and standards (fingerprint, face, iris, voice/speaker,
multimodal biometrics) and an international competition for a next
generation Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA-3).

NIST Role in Cyberspace Policy Review Activities

NIST is actively participating in meeting the objectives of several
of the near- and mid-term action plan activities from the Cyberspace
Policy review.
National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education
Cyberspace Policy Review Near-Term Action Item 6: Initiate a
national public awareness and education campaign to promote
cybersecurity
Cyberspace Policy Review Mid-Term Action Item 3: Expand support for
key education programs and research and development to ensure the
Nation's continued ability to compete in the information age economy
Cyberspace Policy Review Mid-Term Action Item 4: Develop a strategy
to expand and train the workforce, including attracting and retaining
cybersecurity expertise in the Federal government.
The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)
represents the evolution of the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity
Initiative (CNCI) work on cybersecurity education. The scope of the
initiative has been expanded from a federal focus to a broader national
focus. NIST has assumed the overall coordination role for the effort,
and is finalizing a strategic framework and a tactical plan of
operation to support that framework. This expansion and the overall
coordination role by NIST are in response to the President's priorities
as expressed in Chapter II, Building Capacity for a Digital Nation, of
the President's Cyberspace Policy Review.
NIST is currently readying the NICE strategic plan for public
review, which should be available this summer. The strategic plan
describes the goals and objectives that support the NICE Vision: a
secure digital nation capable of advancing America's economic
prosperity and national security in the 21st century through innovative
cybersecurity education, training, and awareness on a grand scale.
NIST's NICE Team is working to unify and coordinate federal
resources to enable the larger national effort to improve cybersecurity
awareness, education, and training for the entire country. This effort
is targeted to all U.S. citizens of all ages, and all types of
professions whether it be academia, federal/state/local government,
business partners (small-medium to large size businesses/companies),
and local community groups. NICE is comprised of four components.

Component 1: National Cybersecurity Awareness
Campaign, encouraging a national culture of security in
cyberspace; lead agency Department of Homeland Security (DHS),
supported by Department of Education (ED), National Science
Foundation (NSF),

Department of Defense (DoD), Office of the Director
of National Intelligence (ODNI) and others as identified.

Component 2: Formal Cybersecurity Education, enabling
a broader pool of skilled workers for a cyber-secure nation;
lead agencies DoED and NSF, supported by Office of Personnel
Management (OPM), DHS, National Security Agency (NSA) and
others as identified (e.g., Department of Labor)

Component 3: Cybersecurity Workforce Structure,
defining cybersecurity jobs, attraction, recruitment,
retention, and career path strategies; lead agency DHS and
supported by OPM.

Component 4: Cybersecurity Workforce Training and
Development, enabling the development and maintenance of an
unrivaled cyber workforce; lead agencies DHS, DoD and ODNI,
supported by OPM, DoED, NSF, and others as identified.

In addition, NIST co-chairs the Networking and Information
Technology Research and Development (NITRD) Social, Economic, and
Workforce Implications of IT and IT Workforce Development (SEW)
Coordinating Group Education Team. The NITRD SEW Education Team was
recently established to focus on workforce development, training, and
education needs arising from the growing demand for productive
information technology-skilled workers and the role of innovative IT
applications in education and training. The group is currently
developing a draft set of priority federal research areas in education
and IT.
International Cybersecurity Policy Framework
Cyberspace Policy Review Near-Term Action Item 7: Develop U.S.
Government positions for an international cybersecurity policy
framework and strengthen our international partnerships to create
initiatives that address the full range of activities, policies, and
opportunities associated with cybersecurity.
Cyberspace Policy Review Mid-Term Action Item 12: Use the
infrastructure objectives and the research and development framework to
define goals for national and international standards bodies
To support the U.S. Government's international cybersecurity policy
framework and strengthen our international partnerships, NIST and the
National Security Agency lead an interagency activity to establish
strategic objectives in pursuing the development of timely, technically
sound international voluntary consensus cybersecurity standards. This
includes commitment to the development of an international standards
framework that:

Ensures the availability of standards that promote
security and resiliency for all U.S. information systems;

Specifies performance criteria rather than detailed
design criteria;

Is open to innovation; and

Discourages barriers to international trade.

Game Changing Technologies
Cyberspace Policy Review Near-Term Action Item 9: In collaboration
with other EOP entities, develop a framework for research and
development strategies that focus on game-changing technologies that
have the potential to enhance the security, reliability, resilience,
and trustworthiness of digital infrastructure; provide the research
community access to event data to facilitate developing tools, testing
theories, and identifying workable solutions.
NIST is an active member in the groups that coordinate the
cybersecurity research and development agenda for federal agencies. The
NITRD Cyber Security and Information Assurance Interagency Working
Group (CSIA IWG), co-chaired by NIST, coordinates research and
development to prevent, resist, detect, respond to, and/or recover from
actions that compromise or threaten to compromise the availability,
integrity, or confidentiality of computer- and network-based systems.
The Special Cyber Operations Research and Engineering (SCORE)
Interagency Working Group works in parallel to the CSIA IWG to
coordinate classified cybersecurity R&D. Representatives from both of
these groups participate together in the Senior Steering Group (SSG)
for CSIA R&D, to actively share cybersecurity R&D information across
the policy, fiscal, and research levels of the Government.
In May 2010, the CSIA IWG released its ``Cybersecurity Game-Change
Research & Development Recommendations,'' \1\ identifying three primary
R&D themes to motivate future Federal cybersecurity research
activities: (a) Moving Target, (b) Tailored Trustworthy Spaces, and (c)
Cyber Economic Incentives. These themes are designed to inspire Federal
and private cybersecurity researchers to discover novel solutions to
increase the nation's cybersecurity protections. The NITRD CSIA IWG is
currently developing a ``Trustworthy Cyberspace: Strategic Plan for the
Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Program.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  The full document is available at http:1//nitrd.gov/PUBS/
CSIA_IWG_%20Cybersecurity_%20GameChange_RD_%20Recommendations_20100513.p
df 6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many of NIST's research activities include standards and
technologies that will address the three R&D themes recommended by the
CSIA IWG, including, but not limited to,

Multi-Factor Authentication methods

NIST has successfully initiated an international
standards project on anti-spoofing/liveness detection within
ISO/IEC JTC 1 SC 37 (Biometrics). This is the first standards
projects in this field, with the goal of strengthening the
security of biometrics as an authentication factor for
unattended applications. NIST is leading an international
``team'' of co-editors and has completed the first official
working draft.

On March 31, NIST released results from the latest in
its series of tests of fingerprint minutiae match-on-card (MOC)
implementations. The report, NIST Interagency Report 7477,
Revision II, details results for 17 MOC implementations
submitted by 12 fingerprint-provider card-provider teams. The
study shows that there are now five implementation providers
that can meet the error rate requirements for Homeland Security
Presidential Directive/HSPD-12 Personal Identify Verification
(for biometric matching off card) while being able to process
the comparison on a smartcard. This is a great example of
successful standards and testing work to provide multi-factor
authentication that is a privacy-enhancing solution.

NIST is collaborating with OASIS, ANSI/INCITS M1 and
ISO JTC 1 SC 37 in developing web services protocols to enable
the use of biometrics as a second factor for remote
authentication of users for applications requiring higher
levels of assurance. Biometrics and Web services may be
combined to enhance mobile identification and remote
authentication capabilities.

Foundations of Measurement Science for Information Systems

Developing measurement and modeling techniques needed
to enable the characterization, prediction, and control of the
security of dynamic, large-scale interconnected information
systems

Emerging Virtual Technologies

Implementing a cloud computing and virtualization
test environment to evaluate the security of virtualization
techniques and the cloud computing systems and to develop ideas
to mitigate security vulnerabilities in virtualized and cloud
systems.

Leverage the test environment to support some of the
Standards Acceleration to Jumpstart Adoption of Cloud Computing
(SAJACC) use cases by implementing a proof of concept for
supporting the NIST 800-53 security control requirements for
low and moderate impact baseline to a cloud computing service
model such as infrastructure as a service reference
implementation, which includes typical virtual workloads
running on commercial hypervisors.

Define some typical use cases involving migrating
virtual workloads from a private cloud to a public or community
cloud while demonstrating compliance with the security and
audit requirements.

Usability of Security

Developed an in-depth interview instrument to explore
users' perception of online risk, trust, privacy, and their
knowledge of computer security terms and mechanisms. The goal
of this effort is to understand user's mental models in order
to assist in computer security education and training.

Completed the analysis of the password survey that
was performed at NIST. Now analyzing the survey results from
all of the Bureaus with the Department of Commerce; the survey
closed at the end of April 2011.

Preparing to implement a second usability pilot based
on the lessons learned with the Homeland Security Presidential
Directive/HSPD-12 Personal Identify Verification (PIV) pilot at
NIST.

Planning studies to evaluate the tradeoff of error
rates in the human limitation between memory and typing and the
complexity of the password.

Quantum Computing

Researching cryptographic algorithms for public key-
based key agreement and digital signatures that are not
susceptible to cryptanalysis by quantum algorithms. Results are
expected to be submitted to relevant standards development
organizations.

Mobile Handheld Device Security and Forensics

Developing tests and methodologies that will improve
the security of mobile devices and enable the advancement of
the state of the art in mobile device forensics.

Security for Pervasive Systems and Grid Computing

Investigating trust management frameworks, protocols,
and application programming interfaces for generalized
pervasive systems security functions.

National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace

Cyberspace Policy Review Near-Term Action Item 10: Build a
cybersecurity-based identity management vision and strategy that
addresses privacy and civil liberties interests, leveraging privacy-
enhancing technologies for the Nation.

Cyberspace Policy Review Mid-Term Action Item 13: Implement, for
high-value activities (e.g., the Smart Grid), an opt-in array of
interoperable identity management systems to build trust for online
transactions and to enhance privacy.

Under the leadership of the National Cybersecurity Coordinator, a
multi-agency team, of which NIST was a substantial partner, created
``The National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace,'' which
laid out the vision for individuals and organizations to be able to
utilize secure, efficient, easy-to-use, and interoperable identity
solutions to access online services in a manner that promotes
confidence, privacy, choice, and innovation. The Strategy calls for a
National Program Office to facilitate the carrying out of the Strategy
and the development of interoperable technology standards and
policies--an ``Identity Ecosystem''--where individuals, organizations,
and underlying infrastructure--such as routers and servers--can be
authoritatively authenticated. The goals of the Strategy are to promote
private sector capabilities for protecting individuals, businesses, and
public agencies from the high costs of cyber crimes like identity theft
and fraud, while simultaneously helping to ensure that the Internet
continues to support innovation and a thriving marketplace of products
and ideas in a privacy enhancing manner.
The National Program Office (NPO), to be established within the
Department of Commerce, will coordinate the federal activities--
including coordination of cooperative public/private efforts--needed to
implement NSTIC. The office will be led by NIST with activities
involving public policy development and privacy protections to be led
by the National Telecommunications and Information Administration. The
NPO will have full access to NIST technical expertise, both in the
development and acceptance of broad consensus-based standards. NIST has
been actively involved in the development and interoperability of
secure identity management for many years and recently initiated
research into how to make such identity schemes easy to use and hard to
misuse.
NIST has hired an internationally recognized expert in identity
management to manage the establishment of the NSTIC NPO. NIST has also
announced the first in a series of workshops to collect public comments
on possible private-sector led governance structures for the Identity
Ecosystem. This first workshop will be held June 9-10, 2011 in
Washington, D.C. Finally, NIST is working with others in the Department
of Commerce to develop and release a Notice of Inquiry to achieve even
greater public comment on the issue of governance.

Risk Management Framework

Cyberspace Policy Review Mid-Term Action Item 6: Develop a set of
threat scenarios and metrics that can be used for risk management
decisions, recovery planning, and prioritization of R&D.
NIST has produced Special Publication 800-34 ``Contingency Planning
Guide for Federal Information Systems'' to assist with planning for
system recovery and is currently working on
Special Publication 800-30 revision 1, ``Risk Management Guide,''
which will provide guidance to agencies in threat identification,
threat modeling, and threat metrics for use in risk management
decisions. The current set of NIST Security Automation specifications
includes the Common Vulnerability Scoring System which is a metric-
based score for known vulnerabilities in the National Vulnerability
Database. This information is used by federal agencies, industry, and
internationally as an input to threat metrics for risk based decision
making. NIST plans to extend these specifications into additional
information areas to further facilitate threat discovery,
identification, and measurement.

NIST Cybersecurity Coordination with Other Government Agencies

As mentioned above, NIST is actively engaged with private industry,
academia, and other Federal agencies, including those in the NITRD
community, in coordination of cybersecurity research and development.
In addition, under the provisions of the National Technology
Transfer and Advancement Act (PL 104-113) and OMB Circular A-119, NIST
is tasked with the key role of encouraging and coordinating federal
agency use of voluntary consensus standards and participation in the
development of relevant standards, as well as promoting coordination
between the public and private sectors in the development of standards
and in conformity assessment activities. NIST works with other agencies
to coordinate standards issues and priorities with the private sector
through consensus standards organizations such as the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI), the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO), the Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers (IEEE), the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), the
Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards
(OASIS), and the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). Key
contributions NIST has made include:

Development of the current Federal cryptographic and
cybersecurity assurance standards that have been adopted by
many state governments, national governments, and much of
industry;

Development of the identity credentialing and
management standard for Federal employees and contractors (also
becoming the de facto national standard);

Development of the standard and conformance test
capability for interoperable multi-vendor fingerprint minutia
capture and verification;

Development and demonstration of quantum key
distribution;

Establishment of a national cyber vulnerability
database;

Establishment of U.S. Government IPv6 Test Program;

Assisting the General Services Administration in
deploying DNSSec on the .gov Top Level Domain; and
Establishment and oversight of an international cryptographic
algorithm and module validation program. (Over 1,440
cryptographic module validation certificates have been issued,
representing over 3,100 modules. These modules have been
developed by more than 335 domestic and international vendors.)

Cybersecurity Legislation

The President made cybersecurity an Administration priority upon
taking office. During the release of his Cyberspace Policy Review in
2009, the President declared that the ``cyber threat is one of the most
serious economic and national security challenges we face as a
nation.''
Over the past two years, the Administration has taken significant
steps to ensure that Americans, our businesses, and our government are
building better protections against cyber threats. Departments and
agencies have implemented programs to enhance their risk management
with regard to federal systems.
NIST believes that effective cybersecurity legislation requires an
appropriate balance between short and long term goals, as well as
providing motivation for strong collaborations between federal
agencies, industry, academia, state and local governments and other
interested stakeholders. The proposed legislation is focused on
improving cybersecurity for the American people, our Nation's critical
infrastructure, and the Federal Government's own networks and
computers. NIST looks forward to playing its part, leveraging its
legacy of research, development, and standards in this area with other
federal and private sector partners.

Conclusion

NIST is actively involved with other federal agencies, industry and
academia to address the highest priority cybersecurity research and
development needs. NIST's expertise and mission provide the best
environment for performing the research necessary to enable the
innovative cybersecurity specifications, standards, assurance
processes, and training needed for securing U.S. Government and
critical infrastructure information systems as well as many other
elements of the Nation's digital infrastructure to mitigate the growing
threat. Finally, consistent with the NIST 3-Year Planning Report, NIST
plans to expand its focus on cybersecurity challenges associated with
healthcare IT, the Smart Grid, automation of federal systems security
conformance, and cybersecurity game-changing research.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on NIST's Federal
cybersecurity research and development efforts. I would be happy to
answer any questions that you may have.

Biography for Ms. Cita Furlani, Director, Information Technology
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology
Cita M. Furlani is Director of the Information Technology
Laboratory (ITL). ITL is one of six research Laboratories within the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) with an annual
budget of $120 million, 367 employees, and about 160 guest researchers
from industry, universities, and foreign laboratories.
Furlani oversees a research program designed to promote U.S.
innovation and industrial competitiveness by developing and
disseminating standards, measurements, and testing for
interoperability, security, usability, and reliability of information
systems, including cybersecurity standards and guidelines for Federal
agencies and U.S. industry, supporting these and measurement science at
NIST through fundamental and applied research in computer science,
mathematics, and statistics. Through its efforts, ITL seeks to enhance
productivity and public safety, facilitate trade, and improve the
quality of life.
Within NIST's traditional role as the overseer of the National
Measurement System, ITL is addressing the hard problems in IT
Measurement Research. ITL's research results in metrics, tests, and
tools for a wide range of subjects such as complex systems, pervasive
information technologies, and virtual measurements, as well as issues
of information and software quality, integrity, and usability.
ITL has been charged with leading the nation in utilizing existing
and emerging IT to meet national priorities that reflect the broad-
based social, economic, and political values and goals of the country.
Under the Federal Information Security Management Act, ITL is charged
with developing cybersecurity standards, guidelines, and associated
methods and techniques. Under other legislation, such as the USA
PATRIOT Act, the Help America Vote Act, and the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act, ITL is addressing the major
challenges faced by the nation in the areas of homeland security,
electronic voting, and health information technology.
Furlani has served as the Acting Director of the NIST Advanced
Technology Program and as Chief Information Officer for NIST. She
previously served as director of the National Coordination Office for
Networking and Information Technology Research and Development.
This office, reporting to the White House through the Office of
Science and Technology Policy and the National Science and Technology
Council, coordinates the planning, budget, and assessment activities
for the Networking and Information Technology Research and Development
Program.
She has been awarded the Department of Commerce Silver and Bronze
Medal Awards.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Ms. Furlani.
The Chair now recognizes our final witness, Rear Admiral
Brown, for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF REAR ADMIRAL MICHAEL A. BROWN, DIRECTOR,
CYBERSECURITY COORDINATION, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Admiral Brown. Good morning, Chairmen Quayle and Brooks,
Ranking Members Wu and Lipinski, and distinguished Members of
the Committee. It is a pleasure for me to be here today to
discuss the important issue of cybersecurity.
My testimony will provide an overview of the current
cybersecurity environment, the cybersecurity mission carried
out by the National Protection and Programs Directorate, and
the coordination of this mission with our public and private
sector partners.
As you well know, these operational missions benefit from
and drive many of the requirements for the research and
development work of the DHS Science and Technology Directorate.
We also coordinate closely with our interagency partners such
as the National Institute of Standards and Technology in the
development and application of cybersecurity standards that are
relevant across our mission set. Of note, the legislative
proposal recently introduced by the Administration would, if
enacted, provide a single statutory authorization which would
enable DHS to better fulfill our critical infrastructure and
civilian government cybersecurity responsibilities.
As you stated, we are very dependent in digital networks as
part of our day-to-day lives. Without a secure cyberspace, many
aspects of modern life, our economies, our health care systems
and our transportation and communications networks would grind
to a halt. DHS's roles and missions reflect a bipartisan
agreement as established under the previous Administration and
expanded upon under the current Administration. We have several
specific roles in cybersecurity.
The first is protecting the federal Executive Branch
civilian agencies, in other words, the dot-gov world. The
second is leading the protection of critical infrastructure
such as power plants, financial markets, communication systems
and major transportation hubs. Thirdly, DHS must lead the
national response to major cyber incidents. Finally, we lead
the educational efforts to raise public awareness about the
need for cyber hygiene and responsible use of computers. These
missions require a full range of partners including other
government agencies, the private sector and individual users of
the Internet.
At the Department, we believe cyberspace is fundamentally a
vibrant civilian space similar to a neighborhood, a library, a
marketplace or a workshop. We also know that it can facilitate
conflict, exploitation and criminal activity. Just last year, a
leading cybersecurity firm reported a 93 percent increase in
cyberattacks compared with the year before. DHS's role within
that space which constitutes both the dot-gov and the dot-com
environments results in unique technical, legal and policy
challenges. Our responsibilities cover distributed networks
with vastly different ownership, configuration and legal
considerations as compared to DOD networks that are relatively
closed and owned by DOD.
We have accomplishments. We are moving on several fronts.
The Department is deploying an intrusion detection system known
as EINSTEIN to protect the dot-gov world and we are providing
the latest tools and information to our infrastructure partners
to support the financial services, transportation, energy and
defense industries, to name a few. We have also deployed fly-
away teams to assist private companies as they seek to prevent
and combat cyber attacks against their networks. In addition,
the Department has spearheaded the development and testing of
the first-ever National Cyber Incident Response Plan, which
enables us to coordinate the response at all levels. This is
not a standalone document. It has been used to respond to
significant real-world events this year. We are focused on
building a world-class cybersecurity team of professionals,
computer engineers, scientists, analysts to secure the Nation's
digital assets and critical infrastructure.
From the National Cyber Security Division, we have
coordinated with the Science and Technology Directorate for
many years on research and development requirements for
cybersecurity. Our NCSD's Research and Standards Integration
Team communicates regularly our R&D requirements for inclusion
in S&T's broad area announcements and Small Business Innovation
Research information. The NCSD research is currently working
with the S&T to identify and pursue specialized technologies
that could be integrated into our operational posture. In the
past, while some adopted technologies did not work well, we
have worked to prevent this problem in the future, and NCSD is
finalizing a technology transition process to ensure these new
technologies will deliver the desired functionalities and be
compatible. In addition, we have regular, ongoing efforts with
NIST in developing standards related to software assurance,
smart grid technologies and supply chain risk management.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Brown follows:]
Prepared Statement of RADM Michael Brown, Director, Cybersecurity
Coordination, National Protection and Programs Directorate, Department
of Homeland Security
Chairmen Quayle and Brooks, Ranking Members Wu and Lipinski, and
distinguished Members of the Committee, it is a pleasure to appear
before you today to discuss the important issue of cybersecurity. My
testimony will provide an overview of the current cybersecurity
environment, the cybersecurity mission carried out by the National
Protection and Programs Directorate (NPPD), and the coordination of
this mission with our public and private sector partners. As you well
know, these operational missions benefit from, and drive the
requirements for, the research and development work of the DHS Science
and Technology directorate. We also coordinate closely with our
interagency partners, such as the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, in the development and application of cybersecurity
standards that are relevant across our mission set.
I look forward to exploring how we might work collaboratively with
the Committee, and I applaud the Committee for holding this hearing as
a step toward such important cooperation.
Moving forward, we would like to work more closely with you to
convey the relevance of cybersecurity to average Americans.
Increasingly, the services we rely on for daily life, such as water
distribution and treatment, electricity generation and transmission,
healthcare, transportation, and financial transactions depend on an
underlying information technology and communications infrastructure.
Cyber threats put the availability and security of these and other
services at risk.

The Current Cybersecurity Environment

The United States confronts a combination of known and unknown
vulnerabilities, strong and rapidly expanding adversary capabilities,
and a lack of comprehensive threat and vulnerability awareness. Within
this dynamic environment, we are confronted with threats that are more
targeted, more sophisticated, and more serious.
Sensitive information is routinely stolen from both government and
private sector networks, undermining confidence in our information
systems, the information collection and sharing process and, as bad as
the loss of precious national intellectual capital is, we increasingly
face threats that are even greater. We currently cannot be certain that
our information infrastructure will remain accessible and reliable
during a time of crisis.
We face persistent, unauthorized, and often unattributed intrusions
into Federal Executive Branch civilian networks. These intruders span a
spectrum of malicious actors, including nation states, terrorist
networks, organized criminal groups, or individuals located here in the
United States. They have varying levels of access and technical
sophistication, but all have nefarious intent. Several are capable of
targeting elements of the U.S. information infrastructure to disrupt,
dismantle, or destroy systems upon which we depend. Motives include
intelligence collection, intellectual property or monetary theft, or
disruption of commercial activities, among others. Criminal elements
continue to show increasing levels of sophistication in their technical
and targeting capabilities and have shown a willingness to sell these
capabilities on the underground market. In addition, terrorist groups
and their sympathizers have expressed interest in using cyberspace to
target and harm the United States and its citizens. While some have
commented on terrorists' own lack of technical abilities, the
availability of technical tools for purchase and use remains a
potential threat.
In the virtual world of cyberspace, malicious cyber activity can
instantaneously result in virtual or physical consequences that
threaten national and economic security, critical infrastructure,
public health and welfare, and confidence in government. Similarly,
stealthy intruders can lay a hidden foundation for future exploitation
or attack, which they can then execute at their leisure- and at their
time of greatest advantage. Securing cyberspace requires a layered
security approach. Moreover, securing cyberspace is also critical to
accomplishing nearly all of DHS's other missions successfully.
In cyberspace, we need to ensure that the federal environments are
secure and that legitimate traffic is allowed to flow freely while
malicious traffic is prevented from penetrating our defenses.
Similarly, we need to support our state and local government and
private sector partners as they secure themselves against malicious
activity. Collaboratively, public and private sector partners must use
our knowledge of these systems and their interdependencies to prepare
to respond should our defensive efforts fail. This is a serious
challenge, and DHS is continually making strides to improve the
nation's overall operational posture and policy efforts.

The DHS Cybersecurity Mission

The Department of Homeland Security is responsible for helping
Federal Executive Branch civilian agencies secure their unclassified
networks. DHS also works with owners and operators of critical
infrastructure and key resources (CIKR) sectors-whether private sector,
state, or municipality-owned-to bolster their cybersecurity
preparedness, risk assessment and mitigation, and incident response
capabilities. The Department has a number of foundational and
forwardlooking efforts under way, many of which stem from the 2008
Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI). We are reducing
and consolidating the number of external connections federal agencies
have to the Internet through the Trusted Internet Connections (TIC)
initiative. Further, DHS continues to deploy its intrusion detection
capability, known as EINSTEIN 2, to improve the security of
communications entering or leaving the federal government through those
TICs. In addition, through the United States Computer Emergency
Readiness Team (US-CERT), we are working more closely than ever with
our public and private sector partners to share what we learn from
EINSTEIN 2 and to deepen our collective understanding, identify threats
collaboratively, and develop effective security responses.
In a reflection of the bipartisan nature with which the federal
government continues to approach cybersecurity, President Obama
determined that the CNCI and its associated activities should evolve to
become key elements of the broader national cybersecurity efforts.
These CNCI initiatives play a central role in achieving many of the key
recommendations of the President's Cyberspace Policy Review: Assuring a
Trusted and Resilient Information and Communications Infrastructure.
Following the publication of those recommendations in May 2009, DHS and
its components developed a long-range vision of cybersecurity for the
Department and the nation's homeland security enterprise, which is
encapsulated in the Quadrennial Homeland Security Review (QHSR). The
QHSR provides an overarching framework for the Department and defines
our key priorities and goals. One of the five priority areas detailed
in the QHSR is safeguarding and securing cyberspace. Within the
cybersecurity mission area, the QHSR identifies two overarching goals:
to help create a safe, secure and resilient cyber environment; and to
promote cybersecurity knowledge and innovation.
In alignment with the QHSR, Secretary Napolitano consolidated many
of the Department's cybersecurity efforts under the National Protection
and Programs Directorate (NPPD). The Office of Cybersecurity and
Communications (CS&C), a component of NPPD, focuses on reducing risk to
the nation's communications and information technology infrastructures
and the sectors that depend upon them, as well as enabling timely
response and recovery of these infrastructures under all circumstances.
The functions and mission of the National Cybersecurity Center (NCSC)
are now supported by CS&C. These functions include coordinating
operations among the six largest federal cyber centers. CS&C also
coordinates national security and emergency preparedness communications
planning and provisioning for the federal government and other
stakeholders. CS&C comprises three divisions: the National Cyber
Security Division (NCSD), the Office of Emergency Communications, and
the National Communications System.
Teamwork-ranging from intra-agency to international collaboration-
is essential to securing cyberspace. Simply put, the cybersecurity
mission cannot be accomplished by any one agency; it requires teamwork
and coordination. Together, we can leverage resources, personnel, and
skill/sets that are needed to accomplish the cybersecurity mission.
NCSD collaborates with federal government stakeholders, including
civilian agencies, law enforcement, the military, the intelligence
community, state and local partners, and private sector stakeholders,
to conduct risk assessments and mitigate vulnerabilities and threats to
information technology assets and activities affecting the operation of
civilian government and private sector critical infrastructures. NCSD
also provides cyber threat and vulnerability analysis, early warning,
and incident response assistance for public and private sector
constituents. To that end, NCSD carries out the majority of DHS' non-
law enforcement cybersecurity responsibilities.

National Cyber Incident Response

The President's Cyberspace Policy Review called for ``a
comprehensive framework to facilitate coordinated responses by
government, the private sector, and allies to a significant cyber
incident.'' DHS coordinated the interagency, state and local
government, and private sector working group that developed the
National Cyber Incident Response Plan. The plan provides a framework
for effective incident response capabilities and coordination among
federal agencies, state and local governments, the private sector, and
international partners during significant cyber incidents. It is
designed to be flexible and adaptable to allow synchronization of
response activities across jurisdictional lines. In September 2010, DHS
hosted Cyber Storm III, a response exercise in which members of the
domestic and international cyber incident response community addressed
the scenario of a coordinated cyber event. During the event, the
National Cyber Incident Response Plan was activated and its incident
response framework was tested. Based on observations from the exercise,
the plan is in its final stages of revision prior to publication.
Cyber Storm III also tested the National Cybersecurity and
Communications Integration Center (NCCIC)-DHS' 24-hour cyber watch and
warning center-and the federal government's full suite of cybersecurity
response capabilities. The NCCIC works closely with government at all
levels and with the private sector to coordinate the integrated and
unified response to cyber and communications incidents impacting
homeland security.
Numerous DHS components, including US-CERT, the Industrial Control
Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT), and the National
Coordinating Center for Telecommunications (NCC), are collocated into
the NCCIC. Also present in the NCCIC are other federal partners, such
as the Department of Defense (DoD) and members of the law enforcement
and intelligence communities. The NCCIC also physically collocates
federal staff with private sector and non-governmental partners.
By leveraging the integrated operational capabilities of its member
organizations, the NCCIC serves as an ``always on'' cyber incident
response and management center, providing indications and warning of
imminent incidents, and maintaining a national cyber ``common operating
picture.'' This facilitates situational awareness among all partner
organizations, and also creates a repository of all vulnerability,
intrusion, incident, and mitigation activities. The NCCIC also serves
as a national point of integration for cyber expertise and
collaboration, particularly when developing guidance to mitigate risks
and resolve incidents. Finally, the unique and integrated nature of the
NCCIC allows for a scalable and flexible coordination with all
interagency and private sector staff during steady-state operations, in
order to strengthen relationships and solidify procedures as well as
effectively incorporate partners as needed during incidents.

Providing Technical Expertise to the Private Sector and Critical
Infrastructure

US-CERT provides remote and onsite response support and defense
against malicious cyber activity for the Federal Executive Branch
civilian networks. US-CERT also collaborates and shares information
with state and local government, industry, critical infrastructure
owners and operators, and international partners to address cyber
threats and develop effective security responses.
In addition to specific mitigation work we conduct with individual
companies and sectors, DHS looks at the interdependencies across
critical infrastructure sectors for a holistic approach to providing
our cyber expertise. For example, the electric, nuclear, water,
transportation, and communications sectors support functions across all
levels of government including federal, state, local, and tribal
governments. Government bodies and organizations do not inherently
produce these services and must rely on private sector organizations,
just as other businesses and private citizens do. Therefore, an event
impacting control systems has potential implications at all these
levels, and could also have cascading effects upon all 18 sectors. For
example, water and wastewater treatment, chemical, and transportation
depend on the energy sector, and failure in one of these sectors could
subsequently affect the operations of state, local, or even federal
government.
NCCIC's operations are complemented in the arena of industrial
control systems by ICS-CERT. The term ``control system'' encompasses
several types of systems, including Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition (SCADA), process control, and other automated systems that
are found in the industrial sectors and critical infrastructure. These
systems are used to operate physical processes that produce the goods
and services that we rely upon, such as energy, drinking water,
emergency services, transportation, postal and shipping, and public
health. Control systems security is particularly important because of
the inherent interconnectedness of the CIKR sectors and their
dependence on one another.
As such, assessing risk and effectively securing industrial control
systems are vital to maintaining our nation's strategic interests,
public safety, and economic well-being. A successful cyber attack on a
control system could result in physical damage, loss of life, and
cascading effects that could disrupt services. DHS recognizes that the
protection and security of control systems is essential to the nation's
overarching security and economy. In this context, as an example of the
many related initiatives/activities, DHS-in coordination with the
Department of Commerce's National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), the Department of Energy, and DoD-has provided a forum for
researchers, subject matter experts and practitioners dealing with
cyber-physical systems security to assess the current state of the art,
identify challenges, and provide input to developing strategies for
addressing these challenges. Specific infrastructure sectors considered
include energy, chemical, transportation, water and wastewater
treatment, healthcare and public health, and commercial facilities. A
2010 published report of findings and recommendations is available upon
request.
ICS-CERT provides onsite support to owners and operators of
critical infrastructure for protection against and response to cyber
threats, including incident response, forensic analysis, and site
assessments. ICS-CERT also provides tools and training to increase
stakeholder awareness of evolving threats to industrial control
systems.
A real-world threat emerged last year that significantly changed
the landscape of targeted cyber attacks on industrial control systems.
Malicious code, dubbed Stuxnet, was detected in July 2010. DHS analysis
concluded that this highly complex computer worm was the first of its
kind, written to specifically target mission-critical control systems
running a specific combination of software and hardware.
ICS-CERT analyzed the code and coordinated actions with critical
infrastructure asset owners and operators, federal partners, and
Information Sharing and Analysis Centers. Our analysis quickly
uncovered that this sophisticated malware has the ability to gain
access to, steal detailed proprietary information from, and manipulate
the systems that operate mission-critical processes within the nation's
infrastructure. In other words, this code can automatically enter a
system, steal the formula for the product being manufactured, alter the
ingredients being mixed in the product, and indicate to the operator
and the operator's anti-virus software that everything is functioning
normally.
To combat this threat, ICS-CERT has been actively analyzing and
reporting on Stuxnet since it was first detected in July 2010. To date,
ICS-CERT has briefed dozens of government and industry organizations
and released multiple advisories and updates to the industrial control
systems community describing steps for detecting an infection and
mitigating the threat. As always, we attempt to balance the need for
public information sharing while limiting the information that
malicious actors may exploit.
Looking ahead, the Department is concerned that attackers could use
the increasingly public information about the code to develop variants
targeted at broader installations of programmable equipment in control
systems. Copies of the Stuxnet code, in various different iterations,
have been publicly available for some time now. ICS-CERT and the NCCIC
remain vigilant and continue analysis and mitigation efforts of any
derivative malware.
ICS-CERT will continue to work with the industrial control systems
community to investigate these and other threats through malicious code
and digital media analysis, onsite incident response activities, and
information sharing and partnerships.

Protecting Federal Civilian Government Networks

In addition to its support of private sector owners and operators
of infrastructure, DHS also collaborates with its partners to increase
the security of Federal Executive Branch civilian agency networks. As
part of the CNCI, DHS works with the Office of Management and Budget
(OMB) to reduce and consolidate the number of external connections that
federal agencies have to the Internet through the TIC initiative. This
initiative reduces the number of potential vulnerabilities to
government networks and allows DHS to focus monitoring efforts on
limited and known avenues through which Internet traffic must travel.
DHS conducts onsite evaluations of agencies' progress toward
implementing TIC goals.
In conjunction with the TIC initiative, the EINSTEIN system is
designed to provide the U.S. government with an early warning system
for intrusions to Federal Executive Branch civilian networks, near
real-time identification of malicious activity, and automated
disruption of that malicious activity. The first iteration of EINSTEIN
was developed in 2003 and automates the collection and analysis of
computer network security information from participating agency and
government networks to help analysts identify and combat malicious
cyber activity that may threaten government network systems, data
protection and federal communications infrastructure. The second phase
of EINSTEIN, developed in 2008 as part of the CNCI, incorporates
intrusion detection capabilities into the original EINSTEIN system. DHS
is currently deploying EINSTEIN 2 to Federal Executive Branch civilian
agency TIC locations and Networx Managed Trusted Internet Protocol
Services (MTIPS) providers, which are private internet service
providers that serve federal agencies, to assist them with protecting
their computers, networks and information. EINSTEIN 2 has now been
deployed at 15 of the 19 large departments and agencies who maintain
their own TIC locations. Also, the four MTIPS providers currently
provide service to seven additional federal agencies. In 2010, EINSTEIN
2 sensors registered 5.4 million ``hits,'' an average of more than
450,000 hits per month or nearly 15,000 hits per day. A hit is an alert
triggered by a predetermined intrusion detection signature that
corresponds to a known threat. Each hit represents potential malicious
activity for further assessment by US-CERT.
DHS is currently developing the third phase of the EINSTEIN system-
an intrusion prevention capability which will provide DHS with the
ability to automatically detect and disrupt malicious activity before
harm is done to critical networks and systems. In advance of this
development, DHS, in coordination with the National Security Agency
(NSA), conducted the CNCI Initiative 3 Exercise. US-CERT successfully
met the objectives of the CNCI Initiative 3 Exercise, including the
successful deployment of one signature, scenario and countermeasure,
and the demonstrated ability to share alert data with DoD. As a result
of the countermeasures deployed during the exercise, US-CERT was
successful in denying the entry of more than 36,473 potentially
malicious threats into the federal agency customer's network
infrastructure. The CNCI Initiative 3 Exercise advanced the potential
capabilities of the EINSTEIN system by demonstrating defensive
technology, sharing near real-time threat information with DoD for
enhanced situational awareness, and providing a platform upon which an
oversight and compliance process can be implemented for the evolving
set of EINSTEIN capabilities. The Department's Privacy Office and its
Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties carefully reviewed the
exercise concept of operations, and the Privacy Office worked with US-
CERT to publicly release a detailed Privacy Impact Assessment
evaluating the exercise. US-CERT also briefed the exercise to the cyber
subcommittee of the independent DHS Data Privacy and Integrity
Committee.
Beyond the TIC initiative and the EINSTEIN system, DHS, OMB, and
the National Institute for Standards and Technology work cooperatively
with agencies across the federal government to coordinate the
protection of the nation's federal information systems through
compliance with the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002
(FISMA). US-CERT monitors EINSTEIN 2 sensors for intrusion activity and
receives self-reported incident information from federal agencies. This
information is reported to OMB for use in its FISMA oversight capacity.
In 2010, DHS also began to administer oversight of the CyberScope
system, which was developed by the Department of Justice. This system
collects agency information regarding FISMA compliance and, as DHS, OMB
and their agency partners move toward automated reporting, the system
will enable real-time assessments of baseline security postures across
individual agencies and the federal enterprise as a whole. This
activity complements the development of reference architectures that
DHS designs for federal agency stakeholders that are interested in
implementing security solutions based on standards and best practices.
DHS also works with the General Services Administration to create
Blanket Purchase Agreements that address various security solutions for
federal agencies.

The DHS Cybersecurity Workforce

As DHS continues to make progress on initiatives such as TIC and
EINSTEIN, the Department is also mindful that the cybersecurity
challenge will not be solved by a single technology solution. Multiple
innovative technical tools are necessary and indeed, technology alone
is insufficient. The mission requires a larger cybersecurity
professional workforce, governance structures for enhanced
partnerships, more robust information sharing and identity protection,
and increased cybersecurity awareness among the general public.
Responsibility for these solutions is, and will remain, distributed
across public and private sector partners.
DHS is focused on building a world-class cybersecurity team by
hiring a diverse group of cybersecurity professionals-computer
engineers, scientists, and analysts-to secure the nation's digital
assets and protect against cyber threats to our critical infrastructure
and key resources. NCSD continues to hire cybersecurity and information
technology professionals, nearly tripling its cybersecurity workforce
in FY 2009 and nearly doubling that number again in FY 2010. NCSD
currently has more than 230 cybersecurity professionals on board, with
dozens more in the hiring pipeline.
Several initiatives are designed to increase the nation's number of
highly qualified cybersecurity professionals. DHS and NSA co-sponsor
the Centers of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Education
and Research programs, the goal of which is to produce a growing number
of professionals with information assurance expertise in various
disciplines. DHS and the Department of State co-hosted Operation Cyber
Threat (OCT1.0), the first in a series of government-wide experiential
and interactive cybersecurity training pilots designed to apply
learning concepts and share best practices in a secure, simulated
environment to build capacity within the federal workforce. In December
2010, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Computer
Society, the world's leading organization of computing professionals,
formally recognized the Master of Software Assurance (MSwA) Reference
Curriculum, which DHS sponsored through its Software Assurance (SwA)
Curriculum Project. The MSwA program is the first curriculum of its
kind to focus on assuring the functionality, dependability, and
security of software and systems. Finally, DHS co-sponsored the annual
Colloquium for Information Systems Security Education and the
Scholarship for Services (SFS) Job Fair/Symposium, which brought
together 55 federal agencies and more than 200 SFS students.
The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) has the
dual goals of a cyber-savvy citizenry and a cyber-capable workforce.
Working with NIST, which is the overall interagency lead, DHS heads the
NICE awareness elements and co-leads the training and professional
development components with DoD and the Office of the Director of
National Intelligence.

Interagency and Public-Private Coordination

Overcoming new cybersecurity challenges requires a coordinated and
focused approach to better secure the nation's information and
communications infrastructures. President Obama's Cyberspace Policy
Review reaffirms cybersecurity's significance to the nation's economy
and security. Establishment of a White House Cybersecurity Coordinator
position solidifies the priority the Administration places on improving
cybersecurity.
No single agency controls cyberspace and the success of our
cybersecurity mission relies on effective communication and critical
partnerships. Many government players have complementary roles-
including DHS, the Intelligence Community, DoD, the Department of
Justice, the Department of State, and other federal agencies-and they
require coordination and leadership to ensure effective and efficient
execution of our collective cyber missions. The creation of a senior-
level cyber position within the White House ensures coordination and
collaboration across government agencies.
DHS works closely with its federal, state and local partners to
protect government cyber networks. In September 2010, DHS and DoD
signed a memorandum of agreement that aligns and enhances America's
capabilities to protect against threats to our critical civilian and
military computer systems and networks, including deploying a National
Security Agency support team to the NCCIC to enhance the National Cyber
Incident Response Plan and sending a full-time senior DHS leader and
support team to the National Security Agency.
This initiative builds upon pre-existing liaison exchanges DHS has
with the National Security Agency/Central Security Service Threat
Operation Center (NTOC), United States Cyber Command and United States
Northern Command. Liaisons to DHS operate out of US-CERT and the NCCIC.
The initiative also further supports DHS' already active partnership
with DoD. The partnerships ensure that agile coordination and technical
capabilities support any cyber contingency.
In November 2010, the Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis
Center (MS-ISAC) opened its Cyber Security Operations Center, a 24-hour
watch and warning facility, which will both enhance situational
awareness at the state and local level for the NCCIC and allow the
federal government to quickly and efficiently provide critical cyber
risk, vulnerability, and mitigation data to state and local
governments. An MS-ISAC analyst/liaison is collocated in the NCCIC.
Private industry owns and operates the vast majority of the
nation's critical infrastructure and cyber networks. Consequently, the
private sector plays an important role in cybersecurity, andDHS has
initiated several pilot programs to promote public-private sector
collaboration. In its engagement with the private sector, DHS
recognizes the need to avoid technology prescription and to support
innovation that enhances critical infrastructure cybersecurity.
In February 2010, DHS, DoD, and the Financial Services Information
Sharing and Analysis Center (FS-ISAC) launched a pilot designed to help
protect key critical networks and infrastructure within the financial
services sector by sharing actionable, sensitive information. In June
2010, DHS implemented the Cybersecurity Partner Local Access Plan,
which allows security-cleared owners and operators of CIKR, as well as
state technology officials and law enforcement officials, to access
secret-level cybersecurity information and video teleconference calls
via state and local fusion centers. In November 2010, DHS signed an
agreement with the Information Technology Information Sharing and
Analysis Center (IT-ISAC) to embed a fulltime IT-ISAC analyst and
liaison to DHS at the NCCIC, part of an ongoing effort to collocate
private sector representatives alongside federal and state government
counterparts. The IT-ISAC consists of information technology
stakeholders from the private sector and facilitates cooperation among
members to identify sector-specific vulnerabilities and risk mitigation
strategies.
In December 2010, DHS and NIST signed a Memorandum of Understanding
with the Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council. The goal of
the agreement is to speed the commercialization of cybersecurity
research innovations that support our nation's critical
infrastructures. This agreement will accelerate the deployment of
network testbeds for specific use cases that strengthen the resiliency,
security, integrity, and usability of financial services and other
critical infrastructures.
In July 2010, DHS worked extensively with the White House on the
publication of a draft National Strategy for Trusted Identities in
Cyberspace, which seeks to secure the digital identities of
individuals, organizations, services and devices during online
transactions, as well as the infrastructure supporting the transaction.
This fulfills one of the near-term action items of the President's
Cyberspace Policy Review. The strategy is based on public-private
partnerships and supports the protection of privacy and civil liberties
by enabling only the minimum necessary amount of personal information
to be transferred in any particular transaction. Its implementation
will be led by the Department of Commerce.

Public Education and Outreach

While considerable activity is focused on public and private sector
critical infrastructure protection, DHS is committed to developing
innovative ways to enhance the general public's awareness about the
importance of safeguarding America's computer systems and networks from
attacks. Every October, DHS and its public and private sector partners
promote efforts to educate citizens about guarding against cyber
threats as part of National Cybersecurity Awareness Month. In March
2010, Secretary Napolitano launched the National Cybersecurity
Awareness Challenge, which called on the general public and private
sector companies to develop creative and innovative ways to enhance
cybersecurity awareness. In July 2010, seven of the more than 80
proposals were selected and recognized at a White House ceremony. The
winning proposals helped inform the development of the National
Cybersecurity Awareness Campaign, Stop. Think. Connect., which DHS
launched in conjunction with private sector partners during the October
2010 National Cybersecurity Awareness Month. Stop. Think.Connect, a
message developed with the private sector, has evolved into an ongoing
national public education campaign designed to increase public
understanding of cyber threats and how individual citizens can develop
safer cyber habits that will help make networks more secure. The
campaign fulfills a key element of President Obama's Cyberspace Policy
Review, which tasked DHS with developing a public awareness campaign to
inform Americans about ways to use technology safely. The campaign is a
component of the NIST National Initiative for Cyber Education (NICE).
Throughout its public and private sector activities, DHS is
committed to supporting the public's privacy, civil rights and civil
liberties. Accordingly, the Department has implemented strong privacy
and civil rights and civil liberties standards into all of its
cybersecurity programs and initiatives from the outset. To support
this, DHS established an Oversight and Compliance Officer within NPPD,
and key cybersecurity personnel receive specific training on the
protection of privacy and other civil liberties as they relate to
computer network security activities. In an effort to increase
transparency, DHS also publishes privacy impact assessments on its
website, www.dhs.gov, for all of its cybersecurity systems.

Conclusion

Set within an environment characterized by a combination of known
and unknown vulnerabilities, strong and rapidly expanding adversary
capabilities, and a lack of comprehensive threat and vulnerability
awareness, the cybersecurity mission is truly a national one requiring
collaboration across the homeland security enterprise. The Department
of Homeland Security is committed to creating a safe, secure and
resilient cyber environment while promoting cybersecurity knowledge and
innovation. We must continue to secure today's infrastructure as we
prepare for tomorrow's challenges and opportunities. It is important to
recognize that we do not undertake cybersecurity for the sake of
security itself, but rather to ensure that government, business and
critical societal functions can continue to use the information
technology and communications infrastructure on which they depend. We
are confident that the cyber legislative proposal put forward by the
Administration will, if enacted, enhance our ability to more
effectively execute our cybersecurity missions.
Distinguished Members of the Committee, let me end by reiterating
that I look forward to exploring opportunities to advance this mission
in collaboration with the Committee and my colleagues in the public and
private sectors. Thank you again for this opportunity to testify. I
would be happy to answer your questions.

Chairman Quayle. I would like to thank the whole panel for
their testimony today. Now, I want to remind Members that
Committee rules limit questioning to five minutes. The Chair
will at this point open the round of questions, and I will
recognize myself for five minutes.
My first question is to you, Dr. Strawn. In your testimony,
you stated that the research in NITRD's portfolio is managed,
selected and funded by one or more of the 14 member agencies
under their own individual appropriations. Now, my question is,
how do we avoid duplication here and is there some sort of
mechanism that you currently have in place to monitor where all
these federally funded research initiatives are going and what
they are accomplishing?
Mr. Strawn. Thank you for the question. We do believe, Mr.
Quayle, that one of the primary functions of the NITRD program
which provides for interaction among the agencies and
discussion of what their plans and programs are for the coming
years results in cooperative ventures in finding out that other
agencies are doing something that they thought they would need
to do and now they can rely on the other agencies' results
rather than doing so. So filling gaps and avoiding overlaps is
something that I think we have always considered to be an
important part of our obligations.
Chairman Quayle. So you think that you have the ability to
make sure that we are not having duplicative research and also
within the various agencies? One of the other things within
that is that there are some concerns that as various agencies
try to fight for turf, especially within the cybersecurity
realm, that they are going to less likely to want to work with
other agencies because they have that protective turf battle
going on.
Mr. Strawn. Well, I suppose agencies are a little like
companies in that there is cooptition going on, cooperating at
some places and yet there is a limited amount of federal funds
and so forth they are in competition for appropriations.
Certainly the NITRD program as a venue for cooperation doesn't
enforce or attempt to boss the agencies around in these regards
but when they become aware of what each other is doing, we have
seen plenty of cases where it has led to cooperation and better
extension of federal funds.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you.
My next question is for Ms. Furlani. When you have the
changing nature of cyber threats, and we are going to be
starting to develop some standardization for cybersecurity
procedures, and standardization always conjures up a very
inflexible model, how do we make sure that we do set up the
procedures so that we have the flexibility to address these
changing cyber threats because they will continue to change as
years go on?
Ms. Furlani. We frequently change our recommended standards
for the Federal Government and we do that because we work so
closely with industry, who is aware of what is changing and
they give us that feedback and that recognition of how we
should be modifying. We put out our drafts for public comment.
We get comments internationally as well as locally and we adapt
as we go, and we also work to move our standards and other
standards along in the international arena because we also have
the responsibility to work with industry to develop voluntary
consensus standards and make sure that the Federal Government
is using voluntary, consistent standards wherever applicable.
And so being aware and connected with industry as closely as we
are has been very effective in making sure that we are adapting
as we move along because technology moves just too fast for
standing in one place.
Chairman Quayle. So as different best practices are
developed in various industries that you deal with, especially
on the cybersecurity front, that you just have an evolving
standards practice basically?
Ms. Furlani. We are flexible enough to adapt to new
changes, new needs and we listen and we have our mechanisms
that work that through and again try to move them into the
international standards so our industries can compete globally.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. Thank you very much.
Now, Rear Admiral Brown, the Administration has proposed a
cybersecurity legislative package tasking the Secretary of DHS
with working with interested parties to propose standardized
frameworks to address cybersecurity risks to critical
infrastructure. The package also states that the Secretary
should work with the Director of NIST to develop alternate
standards if the voluntary standards developed by the
interested parties do not meet the required criteria. What
role, if any, does the Secretary envision for NIST in the
initial voluntary standards development process?
Admiral Brown. Sir, we already have a very close
relationship with NIST. We have been working in particular on
several parts of the private sector and believe that building
upon that information and the relationship that we have, the
development of the standards, and from DHS's operational
perspective that we will continue to leverage that and apply
that in the rule sets that we will be putting forward.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. Thank you very much.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Wu for five minutes.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to use my five minutes to put two questions to
whomever on the panel wishes to answer them. The concept of
anonymity and privacy are frequently conflated in our
discussions, and setting privacy aside for the moment, I would
like to focus on anonymity. It is very, very legitimate to very
much completely identify someone who is going into look at,
say, medical information or banking information whereas if
someone is going to read a newspaper or do a posting on a
political wall, at least in our society we would view that as
something which should be protected by anonymity if the user so
chooses. There are increasingly attribution technologies. Also,
if you come off your Facebook page, you are locked in by your
community pretty much as your identity and there are also
proposals for inherently secure Internet backbone, which may
also lead to traceability on the Internet. Could you all
address how these what we view as advantageous technologies can
also be reconciled with a continuing need for freedom of the
Internet so that certain societies, certain governments will
not be further empowered to crack down on what we view as
inherently private and desirable activities.
Mr. Strawn. Let me take a quick crack at that, Mr. Wu. I
think that better identity management may also help assure
anonymity in the right situations. For example, in the academic
world, library checkouts are an example of where anonymity has
typically been appropriate and probably continues to be, but
let us say at a university, only students of that university
and perhaps some others are permitted to check books out or do
what have you. If we have the ability to do identity management
by attribute as opposed to just by name, if a person can log
into a trusted identity management and indicate that they are
in fact a student because it is trusted who they are, then the
attribute of being a student can be used to check out the books
and the publications at a library, and so better identity
control can enable anonymity in that sense as well as enable
full identity when appropriate.
Ms. Furlani. Yes, I would like to amplify on that because
of the National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace.
This is one of the goals to have an ecosystem where there might
be credentials and you could choose, each individual could
choose whether they want to be anonymous today or whether they
want their bank to know who they are, that they really can move
that money around, and so that is one of the goals. We have
workshop coming up in June to explore what it means to have
such a system, and we will be talking with industry as usual to
understand how this could be facilitated.
Mr. Jahanian. I would just add that as my colleague
highlighted already, identity management is key to this. I
would also like to add that at National Science Foundation, we
have a number of research activities that look at this issue,
particularly at anonymization techniques, identity management,
and we all recognize that ultimately we have to reach a balance
between protecting public privacy and public safety, national
security and economic prosperity. So I do want to add that we
have a number of research activities that are ongoing
addressing the very issue that you highlighted.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much.
My second question is directly international rather than
obliquely international, and that is that just as the proposed
legislation preempts a lot of state legislation, so many of the
problems really are of a multinational nature. But there has
been already a lot of jockeying about international standards,
and could you address the issue of how to negotiate truly
international standards and the issue of certain countries
jockeying for advantage in setting up islands of technology and
these islands not only grant commercial advantage but they also
potentially decrease Internet freedom in those islands?
Ms. Furlani. Certainly this is an issue that we work with,
and the openness and the way that the international standards
are developed and we try to make sure that our experts are
participating actively and the value is seen of having
standards that everyone can use and setting that baseline has
been pretty effective in solving this issue, and we continue to
watch out for such opportunities to make sure that the
understanding is there because it is really a value proposition
that if we can collaborate on these, we all benefit.
Mr. Wu. Let me just add that I look forward to NIST
continuing to take a lead role in international negotiation.
Thank you for your tolerance, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Wu.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Brooks for five minutes.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As much as I am going
to be able to be here for the entire hearing, some of the other
Members have time constraints, I am going to defer my time to
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Brooks.
I appreciate the courtesy there.
I have a couple of questions, and the first question is for
all Members, all witnesses here today, and Dr. Furlani, I
realize you have touched on this subject in response to the
Chairman's question a while ago but I would like to ask all of
you this. One of the concerns that is often voiced about the
Federal Government's approach to cybersecurity is that it does
not take into consideration often enough the expertise that is
available in the private sector, and so I would like to ask
each of you how your agency intends to collaborate with the
private sector, private industry to take advantage of their
expertise, and I guess, Dr. Strawn, we will begin with you.
Mr. Strawn. Thank you, Mr. Smith. I think that a little
historical example might help. I mentioned previously that our
agencies have been working on a strategic plan for
cybersecurity research, and that plan has not only involved
agency collaboration but has involved several interactions with
the private sector, holding workshops where private sector
experts are invited in to comment and assist us in formation of
that plan. We have a history of doing that with other
activities as well and we continue to see that mechanism both
in asking for public feedback from documents that we prepare
and prior to that asking input as we prepare documents from
experts in the various fields.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Dr. Jahanian?
Mr. Jahanian. Yes, I am happy to answer that. Our panel
review process actively involves not only scholars from
academic institutions but also government folks as well as
experts from industry, so that is one aspect of it. We run a
number of workshops that involve both academics as well as
individuals from the private sector as they advise us about our
programs, about the future of research investments and so on,
but I also want to highlight a couple of other things. For
example, the research contributions that I have listed in my
written testimony and other outcomes and innovations that have
been developed with National Science Foundation's funding and
other federal partners are now being used by the private sector
as well as government agencies. In fact, recently I did a quick
count of past five years of various technology that has been
transferred from the cybersecurity program from National
Science Foundation. I was pleasantly surprised to see the
number of technologies that have made it into the private
sector, commercialized, used by Federal Government agencies and
by the private sector. I counted 20 startups that have been
launched just over the last 2, three years based on the
research that we funded. I also highlight that some of this of
course is leading toward securing our infrastructure,
protecting our national security, but also is fueling job
growth. Another program that I want to highlight is that the
National Science Foundation relies heavily on SBIR and STTR to
fuel innovation and foster adoption of that innovation by
government as well as the private sector.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Thank you.
Dr. Furlani?
Ms. Furlani. Yes. I had mentioned it earlier that we hardly
do anything without talking with industry first. If we see a
problem that we need to consider and how we might formulate
some strategy for protecting cyberspace, we would typically
open a workshop and ask anyone of interest to come and discuss
it. Then once we collect our thoughts and put something down in
writing that people can react to, it is put out for public
comment and we take those comments extremely seriously. We work
through every one. We put back publicly what we have done with
each comment, and if whatever draft we put out changes
significantly, then we put it out again so that there is a
second round, so we move very carefully.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Admiral Brown, since I am almost out of time, let me ask
you to address another question in addition, if you would. In
San Antonio, we have an Operations Warfare Center at Lackland
Air Force Base that you are probably familiar with, very
similar to the National Counterterrorism Center. The Operations
Warfare Center helps the Department of Defense in planning to
stop or prevent cyberattacks. Do you think there is any
possibility of that kind of operations center might be a
prototype and useful to the government in other areas?
Admiral Brown. Yes, sir. Tied to your first question, what
we have established inside DHS is the National Cybersecurity
and Communications Integration center. It is an operations
center to be able to look at and provide situational awareness,
and tied to your first question, that is part of our
relationship with the private sector. We have representatives
there from an operational view and so that has proved to be
very effective in our ability to operate in the environment
that we see.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Admiral Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McCaul. [Presiding] The Chair now recognizes a good
friend from Illinois, we co-introduced the Cybersecurity
Enhancement Act the last Congress, which passed overwhelmingly,
Mr. Lipinski.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. McCaul.
I want to start out by asking a question of Dr. Jahanian
and Dr. Strawn. In a 2009 hearing before this Committee, one
expert described the ``never ending tug of war between security
and usability,'' and this is, I think, a very important issue
that has at times been overlooked. I think we are now giving a
better focus to this. I just wanted to ask if you can describe
how research in social, behavioral and economic sciences can
improve both usability and security, and also how is social
science research incorporated into the soon-to-be-released R&D
strategic plan, whoever wants to start?
Mr. Strawn. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski. I will say a quick
word on it and then I will turn to my colleague since much of
this work is done in the National Science Foundation. But the
NITRD program has had working groups in socioeconomic impacts
of information technology for some time. It also has a subgroup
of that group specifically in education purposes, which is a
social science activity, I would say. The cybersecurity
research program, research strategic program that we have has a
dimension of seeking economic incentives for better
cybersecurity practices. So I think that within the NITRD
program, we have a number of cases where socioeconomic research
is functioning and is a part of the overall picture.
Mr. Jahanian. Congressman Lipinski, you raise a very
important point. The issue of cybersecurity goes far beyond
technology. It involves human beings. It involves humans in a
loop, if you will. Two years ago when we launched the--3 years
ago when we launched the trustworthy cross-cutting program at
National Science Foundation, we actually acknowledged that
there are four components or themes to this program. One is
security, how vulnerable is it to attack, the system is
vulnerable to attack; reliability, does it work as it is
intended, privacy, does it protect a person's information, and
finally, usability, can human beings use the system in an
efficient way, in a secure way. I do believe that in fact the
programs that we have launched in recent years directly address
the usability issue. We have a number of research activities
that are funded by National Science Foundation that recognize
humans in the loop and interaction of humans with computer
systems.
As part of our new initiative, we are also looking at
cybereconomic incentives, and if you permit me in 30 seconds I
will try to explain what that is. Consider the attacks that
exploit human behavior, user behavior, weak passwords, for
example. We are also seeing increasingly social engineering
where you receive an e-mail and you click on a link in your e-
mail and inadvertent you download, one downloads a program that
infects your computer and can be used for all sorts of
malicious activities. So recognizing that, we need to look at
human behavior, understanding human behavior and also
understanding the motivation of attackers and be able to
reconcile that with the technologies that we develop and
technologies that we deploy. Also, we need to consider
incentives that make cybersecurity ubiquitous. Why is it that
not everybody is using good hygiene, if you will, when it comes
to cybersecurity? How do you incentivize good behavior and
disincentivize bad behavior? Also, understanding the motivation
behind bad actors, as I mentioned, and also understanding
various kinds of user models. Incentives to facilitate adoption
of trustworthy technologies is not just limited to individuals,
it also includes government agencies and the private sector. So
understanding all of that plays an important and critical role
in our solution and our approach to dealing with this important
problem.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. In the very short time I have
left, what is being done--because I think cybersecurity
education and building our workforce to address cyber
challenges is very important. Is there anything that you are
doing with K-12 students, any of the agencies, for education?
Just quickly.
Admiral Brown. Yes, sir. From DHS, we have an ongoing
relationship with the National Cybersecurity Alliance, a
program called C-SAVE, and that is very much focused on K-12
and we are going to continue to build that capability.
Ms. Furlani. And also with the National Initiative on
Cybersecurity Education, we work as the lead but the Department
of Education is one of our partners and looking at that very
issue.
Mr. Jahanian. NSF is also participating in that same
activity and looking at the issue.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Bartlett.
Mr. Bartlett. Thank you very much.
In the Department of Defense, our weapons system
developments take a very long time. They can easily take a
decade. Obviously in that decade, technologies are changing,
some of them dramatically. So when we begin a development, we
are interested in the technologies and how fast they can
develop and what is the ultimate achievable. For an airplane,
for instance, we are interested in stealth and how little can
we look to the radar. On the other hand, we are also interested
in how fast the capability of radar will grow so that they can
see us, although we are really tiny, and then what about the
capability of once they have identified our airplane of taking
it out with a missile from another airplane or from the ground
or by and by maybe something from a satellite.
A bit ago, Gina Dugan, the director of DARPA, was in my
office and I asked her if she could help us in that kind of an
analysis because we are looking to develop a new deep strike
heavy bomber, and I have no idea which of those technologies is
growing the faster and I don't want to put billions of dollars
in developing a plane that is simply going to be easily spotted
and taken out of the sky when it is finally fielded 12, 15
years from now. She said oh, we really can help you with that
sort of thing, and what she gave me as an example was something
in cybersecurity, and she showed me a graph, and it showed that
the codes, the lines of code that the bad guys use in malware
is not increasing but the lines of code that we are using to
defend ourselves is increasing exponentially. Every month,
every year it gets bigger and bigger.
What we are asking of the system is two things which kind
of appear to be mutually exclusive. On the one hand, we want it
wide open so that it is readily accessible, and on the other
hand, we want it really secure. Are we going to be able to bend
that curve, that exponentially increasing curve of the lines of
code that we use to defend ourselves and will our systems
ultimately be consumed with the necessity of protecting
themselves so they won't be able to do any useful work for us?
Mr. Jahanian. Congressman Bartlett, we should have you
write our solicitations for the National Science Foundation.
You articulated the problem extremely well. The technology base
for our systems is rapidly evolving. Every three to five years,
we deploy new computers, new systems because their new
functionalities have come out, new performance enhancements.
The settings in which our computer systems are being deployed
and the functionalities that they provide also is not static.
My belief is that future security challenges will follow
adoption of Internet patterns that we see. For example, mobile
devices with cloud computing, different settings are going to
impose new challenges for us.
So you are absolutely right that the code base is
increasing. The complexity of systems that we are trying to
secure is definitely getting more challenging. We are also
seeing an increasing trends toward cyber-enabled
infrastructures and system such as power grids. Information
technology has become so pervasive that we are seeing it in
power grids, we are seeing it in the financial sector,
transportation networks and so on and so on, and it has been
identified already our national critical infrastructure has
become so dependent on information technology and computer
networks that the vulnerability is there and we need to do
something about it.
From a research point of view, our thoughts and our
thinking, I should say, the thinking of the broader scientific
community is that we need to develop a scientific foundation
for dealing with this problem. We cannot be just chasing the
bad guys, trying to stay slightly ahead of the latest attack
and latest trends that we see. The scientific approach must
promote discovery of new laws, if you will, meaning scientific
laws. We have to be able to do hypothesis testing. We have to
be able to demonstrate repeatable experiments. We have to
enable data gathering. We need new metrics. We need to have
critical analysis to this problem. In doing so, I should just
highlight that the National Science Foundation did launch a
program in our trustworthy computing program that focuses on
the overall trustworthiness of our critical infrastructure and
it directly addresses the scientific foundation that is needed
to solve this problem.
Mr. Bartlett. Thank you. Clearly, this affects just about
every one of us and every part of our government, and I still
am not certain that we can bend that curve. It seems to me that
we are going to be using ever-increasing percentages of our
capability just to protect ourselves. It is a huge problem.
Thank you all for being involved, and thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for holding this hearing.
Mr. McCaul. And thank you, Mr. Bartlett, for your
expertise.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Sarbanes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
all for your testimony today.
Congressman Bartlett and I and other Members of the
Maryland delegation are very excited and proud that the new
cyber command is going to be stood up at Fort Meade in our
state, and we are trying to prepare for that as well as we can,
and I wanted to go back and maybe give you all a little bit
more time to speak to the question that Congressman Lipinski
posed about how you prepare a workforce because that is
obviously something we are very interested in seeing happen in
Maryland and sort of where do you start, where does that
pathway, that career pathway to being ready to take these
diverse set of job opportunities that cybersecurity will
provide, you know, chief security officers, analysts, forensics
experts, etc., where that pipeline starts, what is the kind of
coursework you think is important to offer, what is the role of
two-year colleges, community colleges as well as the four-year
colleges? And in particular, I would be curious to have you
speak to the complications with respect to security clearance.
That always seems to be an issue. You can deliver up a cohort
of highly qualified people and they still have to jump through
the security clearance process. Are there ways to anticipate
that and integrate it into the educational process so that when
they kind of graduate from the pipeline, they are actually
ready to get right into the job? And so I offer that to any of
the panel members to respond to. There is three minutes. Thank
you.
Mr. Strawn. I will just say a quick overview about how
important the NITRD program agrees or believes that these
issues are. We have also recently been working on a strategic
plan for the whole NITRD activity in addition to the Strategic
Plan for Cybersecurity, and the three pillars of the NITRD
strategic plan are technology and its increasing partnership
with us and new ways of use. That is pillar one. Pillar two is
trust and confidence, which we are here talking about today,
and pillar three is a cyber-ready society including pipeline
issues of professionals and general knowledge for the public to
fully utilize cyber. So we are focusing our efforts to focus on
these activities directly.
Admiral Brown. Sir, I will talk a little bit about what we
are doing at DHS, but I also want to right up front talk about
what the teamwork is that you see here. We have already
mentioned the efforts that NICE has. We have mentioned the fact
that I think there are over 106 centers of academic excellence
that DOD and DHS have been working on scholarship for service
to identify people early on to be able to get them the right
skill sets and afford them an opportunity to work for the
government. We have also just recently started, again, DOD,
DHS, doing the same type of center for academic excellence for
the two-year schools that you mentioned.
The clearances are an issue but part of what we have been
doing, particular under the NICE initiative, is to identify all
the skills that are required, career paths. There are many that
don't necessarily require clearances and so we need to take
advantage of that opportunity and the skills and the people
that come there. And finally from a DHS perspective on that
last point that you talked about, trying to bring them in so
they are ready, we started an intern program inside DHS as well
as a fellowship program, and we look to be able to take that
model and expand it and bring it across the rest of the Federal
Government. That is just some of the things that we are doing.
Mr. Jahanian. May I add a couple of points? As you probably
know from my bio, in addition to my academic experience, I have
private sector experience, particularly in cybersecurity. I
think this problem of education, workforce development,
curriculum development is extremely important to the Nation. It
is a very, very important problem that is being addressed by
multiple agencies. I will highlight a couple of programs.
Scholarship for Service, that was mentioned. National Science
Foundation has been extremely pleased with our involvement in
the Scholarship for Service program. In particular, it is being
offered at 34 institutions today and more than 1,000 students
who have graduated from this program have returned to
government service, so it is a great success story.
Another track related to Scholarship for Service includes
capacity building. Again, we offer funds to universities and
colleges to develop curriculum, and there are a number of
center-scale activities that have been launched related to this
which involve multiple institutions collaborating, developing
new curriculum specifically in the cybersecurity area.
Another program that I think is extremely important in
terms of training technicians and training particularly entry-
level positions is the Advanced Technological Education program
which addresses directly the two-year colleges. In my
testimony, I highlighted three regional centers, and again, it
is a terrific success story, allowing individuals to be
retrained or go through a two-year program led by our community
colleges, be trained and go back into the workforce,
particularly the government sector.
Mr. McCaul. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Alabama, Mr. Brooks.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Strawn, in the Administration's proposed legislation
released in early May, you mention a few places where research
and development is mentioned. For the sections you reference,
it is clear that NITRD would lead these efforts--excuse me. Is
it clear that NITRD would lead these efforts? Is it necessary
for that leadership to be explicitly defined in the statute?
Mr. Strawn. Mr. Brooks, we are usually careful to use the
word ``coordinate'' as opposed to ``lead'' in terms of the
activities of the NITRD program based on the fact that each
agency has their separate mission, has their separate
appropriations and appropriations committees, and our goal is
to make the whole greater than the sum of the parts by bringing
everyone together in terms of the knowledge of what is going
on, finding ways to work together and collaborate, but given
the way the government is organized, it seems to us that
collaboration is the way we can best fulfill our mission.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you.
Next, Dr. Jahanian, is there a current need for
postdoctoral research fellowships in cybersecurity and are
cybersecurity postdocs eligible for already established NSF
fellowship programs?
Mr. Jahanian. At this point in time, we don't believe that
we need to have a separate postdoc program for the
cybersecurity area in particular. As you probably know,
information technology and computer science is a very hot,
exciting area. There are jobs available for our Ph.D.s all over
the country, in the private sector, in government as well as
our academic institutions, and yes, the postdoc funding that is
available through the National Science Foundation through my
directorate that goes through our research programs is
available to support postdocs across the field.
I do want to highlight that during the recent economic
crisis 2, three years ago, we recognized that there were a
number of bright minds who were getting their Ph.D.s and were
potentially leaving the research field, so we came up with a
program which lasts only two or three years called computing
innovation fellows that allowed us to support postdocs
specifically for a short period of time to maintain the
pipeline for our research activities, research programs in
academic institutions and industry, and it has been a very,
very successful program, supporting more than 100 postdocs. But
I don't believe in the long run this is something that we need
to invest in. However, it is something that we are looking at
and we are going to continue to consider.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you. Another unrelated question to Dr.
Jahanian. The fiscal year 2012 budget request includes $12
million in new spending for cyber activities within the Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences Directorate. What is the need
and purpose for this funding? Does SBE have appropriate
expertise in cybersecurity issues to accomplish the goals of
this funding or will other directorates be taking the lead?
Mr. Jahanian. I briefly alluded to this issue of our need
to address the role of humans in dealing with cybersecurity
challenges. First, let me state that we expect that there will
be a single cybersecurity solicitation from NSF including the
science directorate, SBE and Office of Cyber Infrastructure, so
these are not independent programs that are all going to be
under one umbrella.
The second thing that I want to raise is that we expect
fully to have scientists from various disciplines to
participate in addressing some of the issues dealing with
cybersecurity including computer scientists, mathematicians as
well as economists. I responded to an earlier question about
our thoughts toward cybereconomic incentives, in particular,
dealing with the kind of threats that involve social
engineering. By that I mean, when you receive an e-mail and you
click on a link and suddenly your machine is infected, your
computer is infected. So we need to understand incentives that
make cybersecurity ubiquitous, how do we incentivize, as I
mentioned, good behavior and disincentivize bad behavior,
understand the motivation behind bad actors and understand new
user models, and I also mentioned that we need to incentivize
facilitation of adoption of trustworthy technologies by various
government agencies as well as the private sector. So
understanding all of that allows us to develop new technologies
and incorporate some of that into the technologies that we
expect will come down the road.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Jahanian.
I yield the remainder of my time.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Brooks.
The Chair now recognizes himself for five minutes. As I
mentioned, Congressman Lipinski and I introduced a
cybersecurity enhancement bill last Congress that passed
overwhelmingly. We plan to reintroduce that as early as next
week, but we wanted to have the benefit of your testimony on
this bill. I know you have had a opportunity to review the
legislation, and if I could go over four major points to the
legislation that I wanted to cover, and the first deals with,
Dr. Strawn and Dr. Furlani, the NIST standards, giving NIST the
authority to set security standards for federal networks. Can
you give me your comments in terms of whether that is helpful
to the Federal Government? Dr. Strawn?
Mr. Strawn. I think the fact that NIST has been involved
with setting standards for us for the last decade in my direct
experience as CIO has been very helpful and so any additional
responsibilities that NIST might take such as identified in the
proposed legislation I think would be helpful.
Mr. McCaul. Ms. Furlani?
Ms. Furlani. We have been working in that space for some
time, particularly thinking about the security aspects of
domain name security and working to deploy that in the dot-gov
and dot-com domains and so I think it is a reasonable fit.
Mr. McCaul. The next area establishes a federal university-
private sector taskforce to coordinate research and development
and also authorizes I think much-needed cybersecurity research
and development programs. I think, Dr. Jahanian, you may be
best qualified to speak to that provision.
Mr. Jahanian. Yes. I think it is very important and it has
been already highlighted by others that we need to involve the
private sector as we think about addressing the issues that
confront the country, cybersecurity challenges that impact our
economic security, national security and of course public
safety. So as I indicated already in my testimony, the National
Science Foundation and other agencies actively involve the
private sector in how we approach cybersecurity in our research
programs, in our merit review programs, in the workshops we
run, SBIR, STTR, So expanding that and bringing the private
sector and academics together, I think it serves the country
well.
Mr. McCaul. Well, thank you for that.
And lastly, there has been a lot of talk about a
cybersecurity workforce professionals. The bill creates
scholarship programs, both undergraduate and graduate, at the
NSF, and that is to be repaid with federal service. So I think
that question actually could go to both Dr. Jahanian and to Mr.
Brown in terms of DHS having a cyber federal workforce. Dr.
Jahanian?
Mr. Jahanian. Yes. The question was--as I indicated in
answer to a previous question, I believe the issue of workforce
development, education and curriculum development and capacity
building is extremely important. It has to be at the center of
our response to cybersecurity challenges. So this is very much
aligned with the needs of the country.
Mr. McCaul. Admiral Brown?
Admiral Brown. Sir, I think Scholarship for Service is
extremely important. It has been great for us in the public
sector. From DHS perspective, we have teamed extremely well
with NSF on that, and we have reaped some of the benefits. Some
senior leaders have been graduates of that program as well as
some of our phenomenal analysts, so it is a great program.
Mr. McCaul. So I take then from the witnesses' testimony
that you are all supportive of this legislation? Is that
correct? You don't have to all yell at once.
Mr. Jahanian. I forgot to push the button.
Mr. McCaul. One last question, and this has to do probably
more when I was ranking Member on the Cybersecurity
Subcommittee on Homeland Security, Admiral Brown. The cyber
command is standing up at Fort Meade. In my home state,
Lackland Air Force Base which, as you know, conducts cyber
operations, and the coordination between DHS and I think the
DOD and NSA is very important in terms of the left hand knowing
what the right hand is doing. It seems to me, you can't fully
protect and defend the Nation as DHS is charged with their
mission if you are not coordinating with those who know the
offensive capability the best. Has that enhanced over the years
and can you tell me to the extent you can in an open setting
what your relationship is now with the Air Force?
Admiral Brown. Sir, the basic premise of your question, the
answer is, you just described my job description. As the
cybersecurity coordinator for DHS, my responsibility is to work
with both NSA and with U.S. Cyber Command so that we are
synchronizing, we are from both the DOD and DHS perspective
aware of our operations, that we are capable of working
together, and for U.S. Cyber Command, that means working with
its components like the 24th Air Force. So that is part of my
job is to make sure that I am providing that situation
awareness to DHS so that we are prepared when we are looking at
protecting the dot-gov and working with the private sector and
the dot-com and vice versa to be able to provide that
information, to be able to work with NSA and with U.S. Cyber
Command as they are executing their missions and
responsibilities.
Mr. McCaul. That is excellent news, because five years ago
when we held hearings on the issue, that was not the case.
There wasn't that kind of coordination, so I commend you for
taking the lead on that, and I think that is going to make the
country a lot safer.
Thanks to the witnesses. We have one last round of
questions, as I understand. Mr. Wu is recognized.
Mr. Wu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I understand, this may
be the last question. I want to do the Congressional hearing
question equivalent of a core dump. There has been a lot of
discussion about cloud computing. We have also migrated to
mobile devices, a lot of computing there, a lot of information
sharing. Could whomever wants to address this, address the
security implications and challenges of cloud computing and
mobile devices and directions to go to try to solve some of
those issues?
Mr. Strawn. Thank you, Mr. Wu. You have nailed some
important questions right there, and they are illustrative of
the history of IT that every time we think we are on top of
things, something new emerges, and therefore we have to sort of
think it over again and start up and we are always looking for
basic principles like Dr. Jahanian was talking about but many
times we are simply reacting to the new technologies. It is
certainly true that cloud computing for one is a potentially
very important technology. The NIST activities have been taking
some lead in that and I am sure that Ms. Furlani will have
something to say about that.
I have an opinion that once we are over the transition to
cloud computing, we will actually be in a more secure
environment rather than a less secure environment because we
will have people whose core competencies are to provide secure
information and secure access to information. The various
organizations that are required to provide that type of
security for themselves, it isn't a core competency, so once we
are over the transition, I look for actually superior security.
Ms. Furlani. Yes, we are leading the Federal Government's
look at how standards need to be deployed and worrying about
the cybersecurity privacy and security issues, and we have
recently published a special publication to look at those
specific issues. It is out for public comment right now. We
have also established the--proposed a definition for cloud
computing which has been taken up by everyone so that we are
all at least speaking on the same terms so that we know what we
are speaking about, which helps get us over that hump. The
second piece I wanted to mention is the mobile devices. That is
something we have been looking at and again holding workshops
on understanding what we need to be thinking in that aspect
from the standards and testing point of view.
Admiral Brown. Sir, just to build off of what Ms. Furlani
had said, we have been active participants in that work,
particularly the cloud computing, the definitions and
interagency efforts have been going on, but from a mobile-
device standard, U.S. Cyber Command on a regular basis is
putting out information to the public sector about what the
threats are, the best practices that need to be done and making
sure that some of that is available as we continue to look at
the employment and deployment of those capabilities.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Wu.
I want to thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony.
The record will remain open for two weeks and so Members may
have additional questions for you in writing. I would ask that
you respond.
With that, the witnesses are excused and this hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:30 a.m., the Subcommittees were
adjourned.]
Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. George O. Strawn, Director, National Coordination
Office for Networking and Information Technology Research and
Development

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Responses by Dr. Farnam Jahanian, Assistant Director, Directorate for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering, National
Science Foundation

Question submitted by the Honorable Mo Brooks

Q1. Your testimony touches on the way investments in cybersecurity
research are tied to investments in cybersecurity education and
workforce development. Why is this important? Are there real-world
implications if federal investments shift from education and workforce
development in this field?

A1. If these investments were to shift or stop, the pipeline of
cybersecurity scientists, engineers and professionals would be slowed.
With insufficient cybersecurity experts, the US would no longer be
competitive in the science and engineering of cybersecurity and in the
development of new cybersecurity technologies and start-ups.
For example, the Scholarship for Service (SFS) program at NSF
provides direct evidence that investments in cybersecurity education
can have a profound impact on the Nation and its ability to secure
cyberspace. To date, SFS has admitted 1400 students; 1100 of the
graduates have been successfully placed in the Federal government,
including at the National Security Agency, Department of Homeland
Security, Central Intelligence Agency, and the Department of Justice.
The Advanced Technology Education (ATE) program focuses on the
education of technicians in high technology fields. The ATE center-
scale track is funding three cybersecurity education centers. Each
center has myriad partners, including a dozen or more community
colleges and universities; each center has enrolled over 1500 students
since its inception. Both SFS and ATE reach every region of the country
and significantly increase the pool of cybersecurity professionals
available for jobs in the U.S.
Our investment in fundamental, unclassified, long-term research in
cybersecurity has an educational component as well. NSF-funded research
projects are the training grounds for the graduate students who will
turn into the next generation of advanced cyber security professionals.
NSF principal investigators (who are usually university faculty)
recruit graduate students to work with them side by side to make
discoveries. This day by day faculty-student research training is the
basic way we ensure a continuing supply of innovators. Trustworthy
Computing currently has about 500 ongoing projects; most of them have
at least one graduate student. These NSF principal investigators also
recruit undergraduates to work in their labs through supplements to
their grants in the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
program. Finally, NSF's most prestigious program that supports junior
faculty--the CAREER program--explicitly addresses the integration of
research and education to ensure that young faculty learn early in
their careers the critical connection between fundamental research and
science and engineeering education.

Question submitted by the Honorable David Wu

Q1. In Rear Admiral Brown's testimony, he notes that no single
agency controls cyberspace and the success of our cybersecurity mission
relies on effective communication and critical partnerships across the
government. However, the Administration's legislative proposal released
on May 12th recommends consolidating a significant amount of
cybersecurity related activities at DHS, arguably making DHS the de
facto lead on cybersecurity activities in the Federal government. If
this structure is enacted, how can we ensure that it will not reduce
incentives for other agencies to be actively engaged on cybersecurity,
believing that DHS has it covered?

A1. The model proposed in the legislation reflects established
partnerships with Department of Homeland Security (DHS) on broad
cybersecurity operational matters and those involving FISMA legislative
and policy requirements. In addition, NSF interacts with DHS and other
agencies to share cybersecurity ``best practices'' and ``lessons
learned'' through the government-wide Chief Information Security
Officer forum and routinely leverages DHS expertise to address an
increasingly dynamic threat environment. DHS conducts independent
benchmarking and qualitative reviews of Federal agency cybersecurity
programs as part of the FISMA review process. NSF has participated in
these assessments for the last two years, and has used the results to
make continued improvements to our cybersecurity program.
Such a framework clearly defines the structure of the authorities
and responsibilities of the partners. In this case, subsection 3553
assigns DHS a leadership role in setting overall policy and providing
guidance and requirements. Subsection 3554 assigns specific
responsibilities to agencies, including: assessing risk; determining
appropriate levels of security; implementing policies and procedures;
actively monitoring effectiveness; and sharing cybersecurity
information. Thus, the proposal envisions DHS and the agencies working
together towards better cybersecurity operations across the federal
government.
NSF frequently works in partnership with other agencies. Another
example--focused on cybersecurity education--is the National Initiative
for Cybersecurity Education (NICE), which is led by NIST with the
participation of the Departments of Homeland Security, Defense, Labor,
and Education, the Office of Personnel Management, the National Science
Foundation, the Director of National Intelligence, and other Federal
agencies.
NSF remains the lead agency, however, for long-term, foundational
research in cybersecurity. In FY 2011, NSF will invest up to $129.4
million in cybersecurity research, including $55 million in the cross-
cutting Trustworthy Computing program. Its projects range from security
at the microscopic level, detecting whether a silicon chip contains a
malicious circuit, to the macroscopic, determining strategies for
securing the next generation electrical power grid. These investments
are critical to an effective national strategy of achieving a
``trustworthy'' cyberspace.

Question submitted by the Honorable Randy Neugebauer

Q1. What aspects of the current federal system of research and
development in the United States allow us to stay ahead of the curve in
predicting and responding to future cybersecurity threats? What must be
improved?

A1. A major reason that cybersecurity is such a challenging problem
is that attacks and defenses co-evolve. Every day, we learn about more
sophisticated and dangerous attacks: systems that were secure yesterday
are no longer secure. To respond to this continued escalation, we have
created a healthy and vibrant U.S. cybersecurity R&D ecosystem that--
with effective nurturing--has kept us at the frontier of innovation and
deployment.
This ecosystem is driven by fundamental research. It is important
to note that many of our cybersecurity technologies deployed today
capitalize on fundamental research and discoveries made years, even
decades, ago. Fundamental problems that are being addressed now are
often difficult to solve but may bear fruit that will give us dramatic
new advantages against cyberthreats. For example, doubly homomorphic
encryption is a technique that will allow us to secure computers at the
same level we can currently secure networks: even physical access to a
computer would not allow useful information to be stolen. While this
approach was first proposed back in 1978, recent NSF-funded research
has led to its implementation, but only in limited ways. With continued
work by our brightest researchers, we could soon see a fully practical
approach that will be adopted by industry.
NSF's cybersecurity research efforts are focused on building
systems whose trustworthiness derives from first principles. To do
that, we are formulating and developing a comprehensive research
portfolio around a view of systems that are deemed trustworthy, i.e.,
systems that people can depend on day after day and year after year to
operate correctly and safely. Such systems include transportation
systems (avionics, metro, automobile systems), medical devices (medical
implants, robotic surgery operated remotely that can be used to save
lives in remote areas and on battlefields), and the rapidly developing
smart power grid. Included in this notion of trustworthiness are a
number of critical concepts: reliability (does it do the right thing?);
security (how vulnerable is it to attack?); privacy (does it protect a
person's information?); and usability (can a human easily use it?).
Such research needs to be game-changing and forward-looking.
Of course, one program in one agency cannot solve the challenges of
cybersecurity alone, and so part of the research ecosystem is the rich
exchange of ideas, goals, and results. This exchange is across
disciplines, across governmental agencies via the NITRD program,
between industrial partners and research institutions, and across
nations; it has fueled new ideas, approaches, and results.
Exchanges between academia and industry bring fundamental results
into practice. NSF-funded principal investigators, working with
industry partners and mission agencies, continually seed translation of
knowledge into new technologies and more effective practice. NSF-funded
research activities have led to the formation of start-up companies in
the IT sector that are bringing innovative solutions and technologies
to the marketplace, both helping to protect cyberspace and fueling job
growth. Other NSF-funded research activities have led to current
industries directly adopting results to harden existing IT
infrastructure. By promoting a healthy connection between academia and
industry, NSF further enhances its research portfolio in trustworthy
computing with foundational concepts and new ideas that are directly
relevant to the commercial sector.
For example, the NSF Team for Research in Ubiquitous Security
Technology (TRUST) Science and Technology Center combines 6
universities with 16 industrial partners, and has produced new
knowledge ranging from how to protect automobile control systems from
attack to revealing flaws in methods used by websites to guard against
attacks by programs impersonating people. Such partnerships need to be
encouraged.
The trend toward increasingly cyber-enabled systems, i.e., the
integration of computation, communication, and control into physical
systems, offers new challenges. Healthcare, education, and finance are
already at risk of attack, and physical infrastructure--manufacturing,
energy production, and transportation--will be next. An effective
national strategy to secure cyberspace must include investments in
these areas of research, which will allow our society to continue to
benefit from a robust, secure, dependable cyber infrastructure that
supports all application sectors, including those on which our lives
depend. NSF will continue to make significant investments in support of
a secure cyberinfrastrucrue.
Cybersecurity researchers need access to research infrastructure
with operational data in order to develop and validate their new
theories, approaches, and technologies. For many reasons, such data has
been hard to obtain. One excellent example of a long-term effort to
provide such data is the PREDICT archive, developed by the Department
of Homeland Security's Science & Technology Directorate. In partnership
with industry and other organizations, more data archives like this
need to be developed and put into routine use.
More broadly, as we become ever more cross-disciplinary, cross-
agency and international, the coordination costs of supporting the R&D
enterprise increase. Partnerships are a critical component, but they
also require considerable investments of time. We need to develop tools
and approaches to become more efficient and effective. For example, new
technologies need to be employed that allow for more effective remote
collaboration such as virtual presence, as well as for research
portfolio and gap analysis.
Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Responses by Ms. Cita Furlani, Director, Information Technology
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology

Questions submitted by Representative Ben Quayle

Q1. I understand the National Initiative for Cybersecurity
Education (NICE) and the expectation of a NICE strategic plan being
released in the near future. Can anyone provide further clarity on when
that document will be available for our review?

A1. The NICE strategic plan is expected to be released for public
review in mid-July.

Q2. You mention NIST's participation in international consensus
standards. Could you elaborate on how cybersecurity standards
development happens in conjunction with other nations? How are other
nations dealing with the protection of their civilian networks?

A2. Cybersecurity standards development occurs in conjunction with
other nations in open, consensus based standards organizations. NIST
and other U.S. agencies participate in these international bodies and,
in particular, NIST and other U.S. agencies work closely with the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI), a federation of standards
developers, government, industry, consumers, and other stakeholders.
ANSI is the U.S. Member Body (i.e., representative) to the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and serves to
promote and facilitate U.S. voluntary standards development activities.
ANSI's collaboration with the U.S. government performs a vital
coordinating role for the entire standards community, ensuring that
U.S. interests are adequately represented in international standards
arenas.

Q3. Under the Administration's proposed cybersecurity legislative
package, the Secretary of DHS is tasked with working with interested
parties to propose standardized frameworks to address cybersecurity
risks to critical infrastructure. The package also states that the
Secretary should work with the Director of NIST to develop alternate
standards if the voluntary standards developed by the interested
parties do not meet the required criteria. What role, if any, do you
envision for NIST in the initial voluntary standards development
process?

A3. NIST has a long history and depth of expertise in voluntary
consensus standards development processes. We will continue to work
closely with DHS in areas of cybersecurity standards and standardized
frameworks. In this case we plan to continue to bring our technical
expertise, experience working with industry and extensive cybersecurity
body of work to assist with organizations who are working on addressing
their cybersecurity risks.

Q4. Some witness testimony touched on cloud computing. Could you
provide more detail about how cybersecurity impacts the growing cloud
services, and what your agency is doing to secure this region?

A4. Concerns over cybersecurity are having a number of impacts on
the growing cloud services. Significant impacts include:

For some customers, limiting their use of public
cloud services primarily to low security impact data and
processing. Many customers are reticent to use a cloud solution
for moderate or high security impact data and processing.

Some customers choose the private cloud deployment
model for security reasons. In some cases, use of the private
deployment model is a temporary phase during which a customer
gains familiarity with cloud services before migrating to a
public cloud solution. In other cases, customers may retain
some portion of their cloud-based work in private deployments.

Cloud providers often implement vendor-specific
security measures (such as monitoring of customer processing)
and impose customer agreements (contracts) that specify that a
customer's account will be terminated if it uses a cloud
service to launch cyber attacks.
NIST is addressing the need for cybersecurity in cloud services
through several complementary efforts: NIST has produced three draft
special publications (SP800-144, SP800-145, and SP800-146) focusing on
cloud computing. Two of these address security. SP800-144 addresses
security issues in public cloud computing, and SP800-146 provides
general guidance on cloud computing, including security.

The NIST Cloud Computing program runs a working group
dedicated to security issues. The group is generating a document that
will list security impediments that could limit the adoption or
usefulness of cloud computing and, for each impediment, information on
how to mitigate it. The mitigation of a security impediment may be a
NIST-led effort or may refer to efforts conducted by other entities.
The NIST Cloud Security Working Group's output will be incorporated
into the ``NIST U.S. Government Cloud Computing Technology Roadmap''
document. Release 1.0 of this document, for public comment, is planned
for early November 2011.

NIST is working with various voluntary consensus
standards bodies. These include, but are not limited to,

European Telecommunications Standards Institute
(ETSI),

Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF),

IEEE,

Organization for the Advancement of Structured
Information Standards (OASIS),

Open Grid Forum (OGF),

Object Management Group (OMG), and

US National Body contributing to the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO).

The NIST Cloud Computing program also runs several other
working groups that relate to security. The Standards Roadmap Working
Group includes security in its consideration of the standards needed
for cloud computing adoption. The Reference Architecture Working Group
includes security as a key element for cloud architectures. The
Business Use Cases Working Group identifies security requirements which
must be implemented to support an agency's deployment and use of cloud
computing to support its mission. The Standards Acceleration to
Jumpstart Adoption of Cloud Computing (SAJACC) Working Group considers
technical security aspects in low-level technical use case scenarios.

NIST also serves in a Cloud Computing technical advisory
role to the U.S. Chief Information Officer Council. The scope of this
effort includes security. An example is the security guidance NIST
provides to the Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program
(FedRAMP), which specifies requirements to satisfy a number of controls
for managing security in cloud services.

Q5. In mid-April, the Obama Administration released the National
Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace (N-STIC). It establishes
a framework for the development of securing online transactions, and
within the FY12 budget request is the establishment of a National
Program Office focused on interagency coordination, headed by NIST.
Could you please discuss your agency roles in NSTIC, and why NIST has
been selected to lead the implementation of the Strategy?

A5. The National Program Office (NPO) will be responsible for
coordinating the processes and activities of organizations that will
implement the Strategy. NIST - with its long history of working
collaboratively with the private sector to develop standards and best
practices for cybersecurity and identity management - is uniquely
suited to work with the private sector to bring the collective
expertise of the nation to bear in implementing the Strategy.
The NPO will lead the day-to-day coordination of NSTIC activities,
working closely with the Cybersecurity Coordinator in the White House.
The National Program Office will:

Promote private-sector involvement and engagement;

Support interagency collaboration and coordinate
interagency efforts associated with achieving programmatic
goals;

Build consensus on policy frameworks necessary to
achieve the vision;

Identify areas for the government to lead by example
in developing and supporting the Identity Ecosystem,
particularly in the government's role as a provider and
validator of key credentials;

Actively participate within and across relevant
public- and private-sector fora; and

Assess progress against the goals, objectives, and
milestones of the Strategy and the associated implementation
activities.
A core focus of NSTIC is to help the country address some of the
key policy and technology challenges - such as cost, interoperability
and privacy - that have prevented Americans from obtaining and
regularly using stronger authentication technologies. Passwords today
are easily defeated through a variety of attacks from cybercriminals
and identity thieves, and do not provide appropriate levels of security
for many online transactions. Because of this, many transactions that
could be online - in health care, banking, government, and other
sectors - still require individuals to appear in person. NIST will work
collaboratively with industry to develop standards and best practices
that will address these challenges, enabling American consumers,
businesses, governments and other organizations to more easily adopt
stronger types of authentication that augment or replace passwords
while enhancing individuals' privacy.

Question submitted by Representative David Wu

Q1. In Rear Admiral Brown's testimony, he notes that no single
agency controls cyberspace and that the success of our cybersecurity
mission relies on effective communication and critical partnerships
across the government. However, the Administration's legislative
proposal released on May 12th recommends consolidating a significant
amount of cybersecurity-related activities at DHS, arguably making DHS
the de facto lead on cybersecurity activities in the Federal
government. If this structure is enacted, how can we ensure that it
will not reduce incentive for other agencies to be actively engaged on
cybersecurity, believing that DHS has it covered?

A1. Cybersecurity is a dynamic and complex space that needs to
leverage a combined talent of active partnerships with industry and
academia. No one organization can have it covered and this very hard
problem requires collaboration for us to continue to succeed in
cyberspace. Two of the many great attributes of NIST are its close
collaboration with other agencies, industry and academia as well as
NIST's open processes used to develop, design and deploy its extensive
cybersecurity tools, guidelines and reference materials for doing
everything from DNSSec for securing the internet to Information
Security Best Practices for Small Businesses.

Questions submitted by Representative Randy Neugebauer

Q1. What aspects of the current federal system of research and
development in the United States allow us to stay ahead of the curve in
predicting and responding to future cybersecurity threats? What must be
improved?

A1. One aspect for NIST is our active and collaborative work with
other agencies, industry and academia in areas of research and
development. This gives NIST access to a large body of experts whose
cutting edge work in the IT industry enables us to stay ahead of the
curve on the development, design and deployment of new technologies.
NIST uses this extensive knowledge base and legacy of connections to
continue its internationally recognized cybersecurity research and
development efforts. As a result, NIST's cybersecurity-related R&D and
associated technology transfer has directly resulted in the adoption by
the public and private sectors of many commonly assumed security
programs such as USCERT, CERT-CC, Role Based Access Controls, PIV
Cards, eCommerce, Security Automation and Digital Signatures. NIST is
always looking to improve its methods, techniques and reference
materials for conducting accurate and repeatable measurements in all
areas of science and technology, including cybersecurity.

Q2. In your testimony, you mention the international voluntary
consensus cybersecurity standards. What is the assessment of both the
strength of current international standards and their flexibility in
responding to unanticipated events in the future? What are key areas in
which international consensus standards must be strengthened or
improved?

A2. The U.S. Government recognizes the importance of international
voluntary cybersecurity standards for both US industry and US citizens.
This focus aligns well with NIST's mission. Consistent with that focus
and in keeping with our mission, NIST ensures its cybersecurity experts
play key and leading roles in international standards bodies whether
serving as members, co-chairs or chairs in various cybersecurity
workgroups. These standards bodies are comprised not only with experts
from government, but mostly from the US private sector, to ensure that
they continue to be responsive to the needs of U.S. industry.
National and international cybersecurity standards efforts include,
but are not limited to 100's of published standards and current
standards projects such as:

Biometric standards for data interchange formats,
common file formats, application program interfaces, profiles,
and performance testing and reporting

Management of information security and systems

Management of third party information security
service providers

Intrusion detection

Network security

Incident handling

IT Security evaluation and assurance

Cryptographic and non-cryptographic techniques and
mechanisms

Security of the global supply chain

Identity management

Privacy enhancing technologies.
Based on current technology, the relevant cybersecurity standards
portfolio is quite strong in most of the areas listed above, while
others are still actively being developed. As an example, one new
technology for which current cybersecurity standards are being revised
or for which new standards are being pursued is cloud computing. NIST
is actively engaged to ensure that this standards work comes to
fruition as quickly as possible and is focused on standards that will
be immediately useful. All stakeholders must be vigilant to ensure that
these and other cybersecurity standards are updated to keep pace with
technology advances.
Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Responses by Rear Admiral Michael A. Brown, Director, Cybersecurity
Coordination, Department of Homeland Security

Questions submitted by Representative Ben Quayle

Q1. What will be the impacts on U.S. industry if other countries do
not adopt similar approaches to cybersecurity as proposed in the
Administration's legislation? How can we assure that there would be a
balance between legitimate risk reduction efforts and the ability of
U.S. businesses to compete globally?

A1. The Administration will make every effort to coordinate our
domestic efforts to secure critical infrastructure with our
international engagement. As President Obama stated in the May 2011
International Strategy for Cyberspace, "the United States is committed
to working with like-minded states to establish an environment of
expectations, or norms of behavior, that ground foreign and defense
policies and guide international partnerships." To that end, as the
United States moves forward with efforts to better protect critical
infrastructure networks, we will collaborate with our international
partners in an effort to harmonize those efforts, where appropriate.
The Administration's cybersecurity proposal would establish a risk
mitigation regime, in which industry would develop the solutions to
common cyber risks, and other critical infrastructure companies would
use those frameworks as a guide to better secure their own networks.
Under this proposal, the Administration does not encourage a top-down,
government-developed approach, but rather a broader implementation of
security practices that are currently working for global companies. The
Administration believes that companies that already have robust
cybersecurity practices will not be significantly impacted by this
proposal, regardless of where they do business. However, to ensure that
industry has a strong voice in the process and that U.S. business
interests are adequately considered, the proposed risk mitigation
regime would be implemented through a public rulemaking process.

Q2. Some witness testimony touched on cloud computing. Could you
provide more detail about how cybersecurity impacts the growing cloud
services, and what your agency is doing to secure this region?

A2. Cloud computing raises many of the same security issues that
emerged when shared computer services were created in the 1960s;
however, the cybersecurity mission to protect integrity, availability,
and confidentiality remains the same. The inherent advantages of cloud
computing create some security challenges, but they also provide a
number of security advantages. Although we may never fully eliminate
all cloud computing risks, we are able to tolerate the different levels
of risk posed to different users, organizations, and missions. Even if
private, community, and public cloud computing business models use the
same security mitigations and countermeasures, different business
models create different security risk environments. The Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) encourages cloud computing providers to propose
innovative security solutions that effectively protect Federal systems,
information, and communications.
DHS does not support requiring providers to follow particular
designs or architectures for cloud computing. Such an approach would
interfere with the innovative and entrepreneurial forces that created
cloud computing. Instead, DHS is collaborating with industry and
government partners to establish cloud computing security standards.
For example, the Federal Chief Information Officer established the
Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP) to provide
a standardized approach to assessing and authorizing cloud computing
services and products. The National Protection and Program
Directorate's Office of Cybersecurity and Communications is actively
participating in FedRAMP development. FedRAMP allows joint
authorizations and continuous security monitoring services for
government and commercial cloud computing systems intended for multi-
agency use.

Q3. In mid-April, the Obama Administration released the National
Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace (N-STIC). It establishes
a framework for the development of securing online transactions, and
within the FY12 budget request is the establishment of a National
Program Office focused on interagency coordination, headed by NIST.
Could you please discuss your agency roles in NSTIC, and why NIST
has been selected to lead the implementation of the Strategy?

A3. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) provided its privacy
and cybersecurity subject matter expertise during the development of
the National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace (NSTIC).
This effort enabled the Administration to obtain input from public and
private sector critical infrastructure partners through working groups
that meet under the Critical Infrastructure Protection Advisory Council
and the National Infrastructure Protection Plan partnership frameworks.
The Department uses NSTIC to build a shared foundation for
authentication of identity across government, business, and the general
public. DHS's cybersecurity mission allows it to work with Federal,
state, local, and critical infrastructure partners to encourage and
employ improved authentication policies and technologies. A healthy
cyber ecosystem, however, is dependent on privacy-enhancing,
interoperable, and reliable risk-based authentication capabilities for
information and data exchanges that occur within domestic and
international commerce. The Department of Commerce is well-positioned
to promote this aspect of the cyber ecosystem through the NSTIC.
Because users' communication devices need to be interoperable,
appropriate underlying standards are necessary. The National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST), in collaboration with DHS and other
Federal, state, local, and private sector partners, can effectively
address standards requirements on both the national and international
levels. Additionally, DHS has provided a detailee to NIST to support
the implementation of the NSTIC and will continue to support the NSTIC
through additional subject matter expertise as needed.

Questions submitted by Representative Lamar Smith

Q1. How does the cybersecurity division work of the Science and
Technology Directorate's Homeland Security Advanced Research Projects
Agency (HSARPA) inform the activities of the National Protection and
Programs Directorate (NPPD) and the National Cybersecurity Center
(NCSC)? Conversely, how does the NPPD and the NCSC inform the research
and development direction of the cybersecurity division? Is there
anyone who serves as a formal liaison between these entities within
DHS?

A1. The National Protection and Programs Directorate's Office of
Cybersecurity and Communications' (CS&C) Research and Standards
Integration (RSI) program serves as the formal liaison between the
operational needs of CS&C and the Homeland Security Advanced Research
Projects Agency's (HSARPA) Cyber Security Division (CSD). RSI's mission
is to gather cybersecurity-related research and development (R&D)
requirements from all elements within CS&C, including the National
Cyber Security Division and the National Cybersecurity and
Communications Integration Center (NCCIC), and prioritize and harmonize
them. RSI then communicates these requirements to CSD for inclusion in
its overall R&D requirements. RSI also participates in the
identification and selection of R&D supported by CSD. By participating
in principal-investigator meetings, RSI tracks and helps apply CSD's
R&D results to enhance operational capability within CS&C through the
use of a repeatable technology transition process.
CS&C has detailed a member of the Senior Executive Service to
HSARPA/CSD to assist in the establishment of the Transition to Practice
program, which is aimed at identifying projects and technologies that
can be transitioned and commercialized. This detailee works to identify
technologies related to the cybersecurity needs of CS&C.

Q2. Over the past several years, DHS cybersecurity personnel have
grown from around 30 to over 400 full time employees. The legislative
plan proposed by the Administration codifies and expands many of DHS's
current cybersecurity responsibilities. How much additional funding
will be needed to carry out these duties and employ the necessary
workforce? Recognizing the growth of cyber threats, can we expect the
costs of managing these responsibilities to continue to grow in future
years? How can we guarantee any sort of cost containment?

A2. Similar to the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) public
and private sector partners, DHS is growing its cybersecurity
workforce. The Department estimates that within the National Protection
and Programs Directorate, the workforce will continue to steadily
increase from current strength during the next several years. However,
we do not anticipate the Administration's legislative proposal to
increase the Department's resource needs substantially as much of the
proposal is codifying ongoing activities. Additionally, the mandatory
critical infrastructure risk mitigation regime was purposely crafted to
minimize Federal Government growth and utilize existing private sector
resources. DHS has requested a modest increase in cybersecurity funding
for FY 2012 and does not intend to alter that request based on the
legislative proposal.

Question submitted by Representative David Wu

Q1. In your testimony, you note that DHS's operational missions
benefit from, and drive the requirements for, the research and
development work of the Science and Technology Directorate. In the
fiscal year 2012 homeland security appropriations bill passed by the
House on June 1st the budget proposed for the Science and Technology
Directorate was $398 million, a 54 percent reduction from fiscal year
2010. How would the proposed budget for the Science and Technology
Directorate impact the ability of DHS to meet its operational goals and
mission in the area of cybersecurity?

A1. The proposed budget passed by the House allocates $398 million
for the Science and Technology Directorate's (S&T) Research,
Development, Acquisition, and Operation (RDA&O). At that funding level
S&T would have virtually no money for discretionary research and
development. S&T would not fund any cybersecurity R&D.

Q2. To what extent was the Science and Technology Directorate
involved in the development of the first and second iterations of
EINSTEIN? And what involvement does the Science and Technology
Directorate currently have with the development of the third phase of
the EINSTEIN system?

A2. The Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) Science and
Technology Directorate (S&T) served as the testing oversight body for
the deployment of EINSTEIN's Security Incident and Event Management
analytics capability (referred to as National Cybersecurity Protection
System Block 2.1). S&T did not perform any testing activities for the
first or second iterations of EINSTEIN. EINSTEIN 1 was not an
acquisition program and did not require test and evaluation. The MITRE
Corporation performed test and evaluation oversight for EINSTEIN 2.
With respect to EINSTEIN 3, the S&T Test and Evaluation and
Standards Office designated a Test Area Manager for Test & Evaluation
oversight of the Program. This Manager has been engaged in the EINSTEIN
3 project since October 2010. S&T's focus in this area is on the formal
operational test and evaluation of the acquisition. The S&T
representative is also a standing member of the DHS Acquisition Review
Team, in support of the DHS Acquisition Review Board, and is actively
involved in the bi-weekly EINSTEIN 3 integrated product team meetings
and the Test and Evaluation working integrated product team meetings.
S&T has been actively engaged with the program throughout the
development of test related acquisition artifacts and is providing
subject matter expertise for the duration of EINSTEIN 3's testing
activities.

Question submitted by Representative Randy Neugebauer

Q. What aspects of the current federal system of research and
development in the United States allow us to stay ahead of the curve in
predicting and responding to future cybersecurity threats? What must be
improved?

A. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) participates in the
Networking and Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD)
Cyber Security and Information Assurance Interagency Working Group
(CSIA IWG) to enhance the flow of rapidly changing information
assurance needs and recent research and development (R&D) advancements
across the Federal R&D community. The CSIA IWG is co-chaired by DHS's
Science and Technology Directorate (S&T) and the National Institute of
Standards and Technology's Computer Security Division. Through
collaborative execution of the R&D roadmap and national R&D theme
areas, DHS works with other stakeholders in the R&D community to ensure
that current and future threats are addressed.
DHS S&T has led the development of a Federal R&D Strategic Plan
within the CSIA IWG. A primary objective of the Federal cybersecurity
R&D strategic plan is to express a vision for the research necessary to
develop technologies that can neutralize the attacks on the cyber
systems of today and lay the foundation for a scientific approach that
better prepares the field to meet the challenges of securing the cyber
systems of tomorrow.
Maintaining a long-term focus on the national theme areas and their
relationship to the R&D requirements of DHS is essential to providing
consistent and continuous support to the Federal R&D community. While
the threats rapidly change, R&D approaches must be maintained to
facilitate the fundamental breakthroughs necessary to predict and
respond to future cybersecurity threats.
An important area of improvement is reconciling the tension between
short-term needs for operational tools and long-term acquisition
cycles. We need to develop efficient and effective processes for
rapidly transitioning new R&D products into operational use. The
Federal R&D Strategic Plan includes the definition of an inter-agency
program for transitioning government-funded R&D into commercial
operations.



