- EXPLORING MARS AND BEYOND: WHAT'S NEXT FOR U.S. PLANETARY SCIENCE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXPLORING MARS AND BEYOND: WHAT'S
NEXT FOR U.S. PLANETARY SCIENCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-51

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

71-181 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2012

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
Tennessee                        FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics

HON. STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER JR.,          GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
Wisconsin                        MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
RALPH M. HALL, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Tuesday, November 15, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Steven M. Palazzo, Chair,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    11
Written Statement............................................    13

Statement by Donna Edwards, Subcommittee on Space and
Aeronautics, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................    14
Written Statement............................................    16

Statement by Representative Ralph M. Hall, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    17
Written Statement............................................    17

Witnesses:

Dr. Jim Green, Planetary Science Division Director, Science
Mission Directorate, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    18
Written Statement............................................    20

Dr. Steve Squyres, Chair, Committee on the Planetary Science
Decadal Survey, National Academies of Science
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    25

Discussion
...............................................................    27

...............................................................

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Jim Green, Planetary Science Division Director, Science
Mission Directorate, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration.................................................    42

Dr. Steve Squyres, Chair, Committee on the Planetary Science
Decadal Survey, National Academies of Science..................    51

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Submitted Statement for the Record by The Planetary Society......    56

Submitted Statement for the Record by Dr. Mark Sykes, CEO and
Director of The Planetary Science Institute....................    62

EXPLORING MARS AND BEYOND: WHAT'S
NEXT FOR U.S. PLANETARY SCIENCE

----------

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:08 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steven
Palazzo [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS

Exploring Mars and Beyond:

What's Next for U.S. Planetary Science?

tuesday, november, 15 2011
10 a.m.-12 p.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

Introduction

On November 25, 2011, NASA will launch the Mars Science Laboratory
(MSL). MSL will land a rover--roughly the size of a Mini-Cooper
automobile--on the surface of Mars to conduct a variety of experiments
that will deepen our understanding of the history of the geological,
atmospheric and chemical composition of Mars and inform future
missions, including human expeditions. Yet, even as MSL begins its
journey to Mars, the follow-on missions in 2016 and 2018--planned
jointly with the European Space Agency (ESA)--have been scaled back
significantly and could be on the brink of cancellation altogether.
Until the Administration delivers its fiscal year 2013 budget request
to Congress, NASA is left without definitive answers for our European
partners. This uncertainty has left ESA to explore alternative
opportunities--perhaps with Russia--or to cancel part of the mission
themselves.
The uncertainty surrounding the Mars program highlights a larger
issue of the future of U.S. flagship planetary missions. The most
recent planetary decadal survey, Visions and Voyages for Planetary
Science in the Decade 2013-2022 lays out a robust program for planetary
exploration that includes several top-priority flagship missions--
including a Mars sample return mission and a mission to Jupiter's moon
Europa. The recommended program does not anticipate that all flagship
missions would be pursued. Instead, relative priorities are assigned to
assist NASA in making its final programmatic decisions that often
include other factors such as technology readiness and budgetary
constraints. The report acknowledges this process by emphasizing the
necessity for the U.S. to scale these flagship missions appropriately
to the anticipated funding in the near term, recommending a significant
de-scoping of these missions to achieve the science objectives less
expensively.
The purpose of this hearing will be to receive testimony from NASA
and the National Academies of Science on the prospects for future
exploration of Mars and implications of the current fiscal crisis to
the future of U.S. planetary science. The Office of Management and
Budget was invited to testify but chose not to participate.

Witnesses

Dr. Jim Green, Planetary Science Division Director,
Science Mission Directorate, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration

Dr. Steve Squyres, Chair, Committee on the Planetary
Science Decadal Survey, National Academies of Science

Overarching Questions

What is the current status of the U.S. Mars exploration
program? How does Mars Science Laboratory fit into the larger Mars
exploration strategy?

How does NASA's decision to no longer provide the launch
vehicle for the 2016 joint NASA/ESA Mars mission and possibly further
de-scope participation in the 2018 mission impact NASA's Mars
Exploration Program as well as prospects for future international
collaboration?

What is the future prospect for a U.S.-led Mars Sample
Return mission, as identified by the most recent National Academies
planetary decadal survey as the top priority for planetary science in
the coming decade?

What are NASA's long-term plans for flagship planetary
missions? Does the Jupiter Europa Orbiter (JEO) mission have a
reasonable chance of being funded?

Background

Since Mariner 4 sent back the first-ever images of Mars in 1965,
the American public and indeed the world have been amazed by what we
learn about the solar system we live in. The legacy of our spacecraft
is rich. In the 1970s, Pioneer 10 & 11 sent never-before-seen pictures
of Jupiter and Saturn. Pioneer 10 measured Jupiter's intense radiation
belts, located the planet's magnetic field, and discovered that Jupiter
is predominantly a liquid planet. After passing by Jupiter, Pioneer 10
continued towards the outer regions of the solar system making valuable
scientific investigations until 1997. Pioneer 11 provided valuable data
about Saturn, cosmic rays and the solar wind up until 1995. Today,
Messenger (MErcury Surface Space ENviroment and Ranging) provides us
with the closest ever view of Mercury and it is providing details about
the planet's gravity field, mineralology, and atmospheric composition.
Juno is en route to study Jupiter in greater detail and GRAIL will
provide us with a gravitational map of the moon.
But for all of the discoveries to date, there is still so little we
know about our solar system and our neighboring planets. NASA's
Planetary Science Division within the Science Mission Directorate
builds on previous missions to advance our understanding of the solar
systems through progressively more sophisticated missions to planets,
moons, comets and asteroids. Its mission is to "advance scientific
knowledge of the origin and history of the solar system, the potential
for life elsewhere, and the hazards and resources present as humans
explore space." Guided by the National Academies of Science decadal
survey process, NASA develops a planetary exploration strategy that
aims to balance lower-cost, lower-risk missions with higher-cost,
greater-risk flagship missions based on the sequence of "flyby, orbit,
land, rove, and return samples" for each potential destination.

Planetary Decadal Survey Recommendations

The most recent decadal survey, Visions and Voyages for Planetary
Science in the Decade 2013-2022 was issued in March 2011. Requested by
NASA, and managed and written by the National Academy of Sciences, the
report develops a comprehensive strategy for U.S. planetary science in
the coming decade. Per the report, the recommended program ``will
achieve long-standing scientific goals with a suite of new missions
across the solar system. It will provide fundamental new scientific
knowledge, engage a broad segment of the planetary science community,
and have wide appeal for the general public whose support enables the
program.''
The decadal report committee utilized four main criteria to measure
proposed missions as a means of selecting and prioritizing future
missions. First and foremost was the ability to provide high science
return per dollar. Programmatic balance across mission targets
throughout the solar system as well as the appropriate mix of small,
medium and large missions was the second criteria. The other two
criteria were technological readiness and the availability of
trajectory opportunities within the timeframe discussed.

Flagship Missions

The report concludes that the top-priority large flagship mission
for the coming decade would be to establish a three-mission Mars Sample
Return campaign - one that would not be completed into the decade
beyond 2022. That would require completion of the Mars Astrobiology
Explorer-Cacher (MAX-C), currently planned as a joint mission with the
European Space Agency in 2018.
The ability to afford such a mission, however, was called into
question by the report. As of the report's release in March 2011, the
MAX-C mission was expected to cost NASA $3.5 billion (in FY2015
dollars) in large part because of an envisioned delivery of two large
rovers using a single entry, descent, and landing (EDL) system derived
from the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) EDL system. Such large rovers
would require major redesign of the MSL EDL system. The report
recommends that NASA pursue a de-scoped mission not to exceed $2.5
billion in order to main program balance (as identified above as part
of the selection criteria). As detailed in the Mars Exploration Program
description below, NASA has in fact de-scoped the mission and is
currently in negotiations with ESA on what the scaled-down mission
might look like. Per the report's recommendations, international
collaboration is an essential element to affordability and therefore
feasibility of such a mission.
Absent a significant de-scope and an appropriate partnership
agreement with ESA for a future mission to return collected samples,
the report recommends any such Mars collaboration be abandoned for the
second priority mission, the Jupiter Europa Orbiter (JEO). Again,
however, serious reservations about the cost of the mission came into
play. As currently designed, the JEO mission would cost $4.7 billion
(in FY2015 dollars), which results in an unacceptable programmatic
imbalance by crowding out funding for other planetary missions. The
report states:

While the committee recommends JEO as the second highest
priority Flagship mission, close behind MAX-C, it should fly in the
decade of 2013-2022 only if changes to both the mission and the NASA
planetary budget make it affordable without eliminating any other
recommended missions. These changes are likely to involve both a
reduction in mission scope and a formal budgetary new start for JEO
that is accompanied by an increase in the NASA planetary budget. NASA
should immediately undertake an effort to find major cost reductions
for JEO, with the goal of minimizing the size of the budget increase
necessary to enable the mission.

Priorities for Small and Medium Missions

The report does not make specific recommendations on the small
Discovery program missions. It does register its continued support for
these missions as a valuable asset to the overall program and
recommends that it continue at its current level capped at $500 million
(FY2015) and a cadence of 24 months for selections.
Medium missions, known as New Frontiers, are capped at $1 billion
(FY2015) per mission (excluding launch vehicle costs) with a goal of
selecting two such missions in the decade. The report identifies five
candidate missions and two alternates for which NASA should select
based on competitive peer review. Candidate missions include Comet
Surface Sample Return, Lunar South Pole-Aitken Basin Sample Return,
Saturn Probe, Trojan Tour and Rendezvous and Venus In Situ Explorer.
The alternates would be Io Observer and Lunar Geophysical Network.

Launch Vehicle Costs

The cost of launch services is another challenge to NASA's
planetary exploration program. As noted above, the New Frontier
missions were capped without including the costs of launch vehicles.
This is a departure from previous decadal survey recommendations that
absorbed launch costs into total program costs. The decadal survey
committee noted the increasing costs of launch vehicles and was
concerned with those costs taking a larger share of the overall program
costs.
Further exacerbating the launch issue is the planned retirement of
the Delta II launch vehicle. The Delta II has been a staple for
planetary missions; however, the Air Force terminated its long-standing
contract for Delta II's citing budgetary constraints. This decision
impacts NASA's ability to use the rocket for future scientific
payloads, since it would have to absorb all of the Delta II
infrastructure and processing costs which had been paid for by the Air
Force. Since the decadal survey was released, NASA modified its NASA
Launch Services II contract with United Launch Services to enable up to
five additional Delta II rockets per the contract's on-ramp provision.
But even with the additional rockets, uncertainty remains. As the
report states:
The absence of the Delta II will shortly leave a gap in
reliable, relatively inexpensive launch capabilities important for
missions to the inner planets and some primitive bodies. . . As noted
many past missions have relied on the Delta II, and future missions
will not have this option. The concern is that alternative launch
vehicles of established reliability, such as the Atlas V and the Delta
IV, are substantially more expensive even in their smallest versions.
The situation is complicated further by the volatility of the costs of
these vehicles, and dependence of costs on future contract
negotiations. Increases in launch costs pose a threat to formulating an
effective, balanced planetary exploration program.

Need for Plutonium-238

Another area of concern is the availability of Plutonium-238 for
future missions. Radioisotope Power Systems (RPSs) utilize heat
converted from the nuclear decay of radioactive isotopes to generate
electricity. RPSs are frequently used to power spacecraft that travel
large distances and in extreme environments. Their ability to operate
continuously regardless of their orientation or distance from the Sun
make them particularly advantageous. Since 1961, 28 U.S. space missions
have safely flown using radioisotope energy sources.
The United States ended production of plutonium-238, the key
nuclear component of RPSs in 1988. Separation of the isotope from
existing inventories stopped in 1996 leaving the remaining stock of
plutonium-238 to be purchased from Russia. Despite no new production,
its use continues. Most recently, the Mars Science Laboratory used
about 3.5 kg for the Multi Mission Radioisotope Thermoelectric
Generator (MMRTG) and the next Discovery mission has reserved 1.8 kg
for two Advanced Stirling Radioisotope Generators (ASRGs).
The decadal survey indicates that in order to complete the
recommended program new plutonium-238 production is essential or more
deliveries from Russia will be necessary. It concluded:

The Committee is alarmed at the status of plutonium-238
availability for planetary exploration. Without a restart of plutonium-
238 production, it will be impossible for the United States, or any
other country, to conduct certain important types of planetary missions
after this decade.

The fiscal year 2012 president's budget requested $10 million each
for NASA and the Department of Energy to enable the U.S. to produce
plutonium-238. The House Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce,
Justice, Science and Related Agencies approved the request for NASA in
their bill reported out of the full committee on July 7, 2011.
Specifically, the bill report states:

Plutonium-238.-The bill makes available $10,000,000 from this
account, as requested, to restart production of Plutonium-238 (Pu-238),
a radioisotope that is an essential source of electrical power for
long-range planetary science missions. The Committee urges NASA to work
expeditiously with the Department of Energy to bring Pu-238 production
back online as quickly as possible while simultaneously pursuing
Advanced Stirling Radioisotope Generator technology that will allow
NASA to make better, more efficient use of available Pu-238 stocks.

However, the House Appropriations Subcommittee for Energy and Water
denied funding for DOE, citing it as a NASA requirement that should be
funded solely by NASA. Specifically, their bill states:

Plutonium-238 Production Restart Project.-The National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) uses the vast majority of
plutonium-238 (Pu-238) produced or procured by the federal government.
The Committee remains concerned that the Administration continues to
request equal funding from NASA and the Department of Energy for a
project that primarily benefits NASA. The Committee provides no funds
for this project, and encourages the Administration to devise a plan
for this project that more closely aligns the costs paid by federal
agencies with the benefits they receive.

Likewise, the Senate Appropriations Committee recommended similar
action--the subcommittee responsible for NASA provided funding for the
project, while the subcommittee responsible for DOE withheld funding.

Current Mars Exploration Program

Scientific discovery of the Red Planet continues thanks to a steady
cadence of missions that have built on the sequence strategy of "flyby,
orbit, land, rove and return samples."
There are several missions currently operating on Mars, all of
which are well past their designed mission lifetime.
Mars Odyssey is the longest running spacecraft ever in orbit around
another planet. Launched in 2001, the Mars Odyssey quickly discovered
evidence of large amounts of water ice just below the surface. Since
then, Odyssey has given scientists the opportunity to monitor seasonal
changes of the Martian atmosphere and compile lengthy year-to-year
comparisons of Martian weather. Odyssey now also serves as a relay
service for the Mars Exploration Rovers and is in a prime position to
serve as a communications relay for the landing of the Mars Science
Laboratory.
The Mars Exploration Rovers (MER)--better known as Spirit and
Opportunity--have captured the imaginations of the young and old
through their ongoing trek across the Martian terrain sending both
pictures and valuable information about the history of water on Mars.
The rovers were originally slated for a 3-month mission in early 2004.
Opportunity continues to send back information to scientists and Spirit
only stopped working in 2010.
The Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) is also providing a valuable
look at the history of water on Mars. Launched in 2005, MRO provides
images of the surface, mineral analysis, atmospheric measurements and
daily weather monitoring. Additionally, MRO provides a critical data
and communications link effectively serving as an "interplanetary
Internet" enabling current and future Mars rovers a communications
bridge back to Earth.

Mars Programs Currently in Development

The Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) hopes to build on this foundation
of knowledge by further examining the Martian environment. Set to
launch on November 25, 2011, MSL--better known as Curiosity--will land
in August 2012 utilizing a groundbreaking "sky crane" landing system.
Once on the ground, the small car-sized rover will utilize a suite of
scientific cameras and instruments with the objectives of:

Assessing the biological potential of the site by
investigating organic compounds, other relevant elements, and
biomarkers

Characterizing geology and geochemistry, including
chemical, mineralogical, and isotopic composition, and geological
processes

Investigating the role of water, atmospheric evolution,
and modern weather/climate

Characterizing the spectrum of surface radiation

The Mars Atmospheric and Volatile EvolutioN (MAVEN) mission is
currently under development and scheduled to launch in late 2013. MAVEN
was selected under NASA's Mars Scout program, which supports smaller,
low-cost competed missions led by a principal investigator. MAVEN seeks
to obtain measurements of the Martian atmosphere in order to gain a
better understanding of the climate changes that have occurred over the
planet's history.

Joint NASA-ESA Mars Missions

The United States originally planned to partner with the European
Space Agency on a joint two-phase mission that would build on the
previous work of both U.S. and European exploration of Mars and lay the
framework for an eventual sample return mission.
The first mission, ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter, is currently
scheduled to launch in 2016. The mission includes an orbiter with
several science instruments including the ability to monitor methane or
other trace atmospheric gasses. It would also be a demonstration for
Europe to test entry, descent and landing (EDL) capabilities to the
surface. In addition to collaborating on the science instruments on the
orbiter, NASA would launch the mission on an Atlas V rocket. In
September 2011 NASA informed ESA that the U.S. would no longer be able
to afford the rocket to launch the 2016 mission. ESA has subsequently
solicited participation from the Russian Space Agency, Roscosmos, for
the 2016 mission to include a possible launch on a Proton rocket. This
solicitation has also opened up the possibility of Russian
participation on the orbiter instruments.
The second NASA-ESA ExoMars/MAX-C mission was to send in 2018 two
rovers--one led by the U.S. and the other by Europe--to operate in
separate but complementary missions. The rovers would be armed with a
drill and a storage cache to collect suitable samples for a future
return mission. The mission is planning to utilize the EDL technologies
developed for MSL and also be launched by the U.S. on an Atlas V
rocket.
The current budget situation in the United States, however, has led
NASA to reconsider its obligations to ESA under the currently signed
agreement. In April 2011, NASA and ESA agreed to send only one rover
that would combine the research and storage components of the
previously separate rovers.
A meeting between the two agency heads in October 2011 left even
further questions about the future of both the 2016 and 2018 missions
on the table. NASA was unable to make any commitments to ESA prior to
the official fiscal year 2013 president's budget proposal due out in
February 2012. Without a clear agreement with NASA, ESA is conducting
its own analysis of alternatives.
ESA continues to provide funding for the 2016 mission even as
discussions open the up the possibility of combining the entire mission
into one launched only in 2018. ESA has already secured approximately
850 million of the needed 1 billion Euros needed to meet ESA's
commitments for the two-launch mission from its member states. ESA has
indicated that even if the mission were to be de-scoped to a single
launch, it would still need about the same amount of money due to
already obligated funds.

Budget Outlook

The fiscal year 2012 budget request for NASA's Planetary Science
Division is $1.54 billion.
The House Appropriations Committee approved a FY12 budget for NASA
on July 7, 2011. The final report did not provide a specific
recommendation for planetary science funding, but reduces the overall
Science Mission Directorate budget by $512,800,000 below the
president's request (recommending $4,504,000,000, which is $431,409,000
below fiscal year 2011). Report language provides specific language
regarding flagship missions by saying:

Planetary Science missions.-The Committee accepts the findings of
the most recent Planetary Science decadal survey and supports the
application of the survey's decision rules to determine how best to
structure the program within the available budget. The program elements
most significantly impacted by these decision rules are the flagship
missions, which must be substantially descoped in order to remain
within the portfolio. The Committee directs that $4,000,000 of the
Outer Planets Flagship (OPF) budget be used to conduct the necessary
descoping studies for the decadal survey's two highest priority
flagship missions: Mars Sample Return (MSR) and the Jupiter Europa
Orbiter (JEO). The results of these studies shall be transmitted to the
Committee as soon as they are complete. The remaining $39,000,000 of
OPF funds should be held pending the completion of the descoping
analysis and, depending on the results, either used in support of an
acceptably descoped flagship mission or proposed for reprogramming to
other Planetary Science project lines in accordance with the decadal
survey's decision rules.
The Senate approved its FY12 budget for NASA on November 1, 2011
providing $1.5 billion for Planetary Science. See Appendix A for a
complete breakdown by mission area. In its report, the committee
states:

The Committee notes that the most recent decadal survey in
planetary science urges NASA to reformulate planetary science flagship
missions to fit within the projected budget, as recommended. The NASA
budget, like the Federal budget overall, is shrinking, not growing.

The following chart, provided by NASA, illustrates the constraints
the division is currently under and dramatically demonstrates the
downward pressure on the future budget for planetary science.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Palazzo. The Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics
will come to order.
Good morning. Welcome to today's hearing entitled
``Exploring Mars and Beyond: What's Next for the U.S. Planetary
Science.'' In front of you are packets containing the written
testimony, biographies and, Truth in Testimony disclosures for
today's witness panel. At this time I will recognize myself for
five minutes for an opening statement.
Today's hearing has been called to examine the future
course of NASA's Planetary Sciences program, looking
particularly at NASA's plans to carry out recommendations put
forward in the Decadal Survey released earlier this spring by
the National Academy of Sciences.
Before getting started, however, I would like to thank our
witnesses for agreeing to testify today. I realize a lot of
work and effort goes into preparing for your appearance, and I
want you to know that your wisdom and experience will be of
immense value to this Committee and Congress in the months and
years ahead as we strive to maintain a vital national space
program.
In March of this year, the National Academy of Sciences
published Visions and Voyages for Planetary Science in the
Decade 2013-2022. This report reflects a broad consensus of the
planetary science community, first by identifying key questions
to guide NASA in the decade ahead as it endeavors to develop
the next series of missions, and then by providing NASA the
tools needed to maintain a balanced and vital program that
looks broadly across our solar system. It is the product of an
immense effort that sought a wide range of input, including
papers, meetings and reviews by a committee chaired by Dr.
Steven Squyres.
Unfortunately, budget forecasts provided by NASA to the
Academy proved to be optimistic. To its credit, the survey
committee had the foresight to anticipate budget shortfalls and
included in their recommendations steps that the agency should
follow to align programs with resources, all the while
maintaining balance across a set of missions.
For fairly obvious reasons, exploration of Mars has become
the largest component of NASA's Planetary Science program, as
well as one of its most visible. Through development of
critical technologies, NASA has orbited the planet with
powerful satellites, put rovers on its surface, and in less
than two weeks' time NASA is preparing to launch yet another
rover that will be bigger and more capable still.
The conundrum now facing NASA is selecting a mission that
is the next logical step in our exploration of Mars, and how to
pay for it. The Decadal Survey selected as its top priority
mission a Mars sample-caching rover that would, in effect, be
the first of a three-phase mission to return Mars soil samples
to Earth. This will be a very expensive undertaking, and one
obvious option would be to engage with the European Space
Agency on a collaborative mission, thus reducing costs to the
United States.
In November 2009, NASA Administrator Bolden and ESA
Director General Dordain signed a joint Statement of Intent
that spelled out a series of steps for the exploration of Mars
that both agencies, working collaboratively, hoped to pursue.
Quoting from the statement: ``NASA and ESA agree to consider
the establishment of a new joint initiative to define and
implement their scientific, programmatic and technological
goals for the exploration of Mars.''
Initially focusing on 2016 and 2018, this initiative would
span several launch opportunities with landers and orbiters
conducting astrobiological, geological, geophysical,
climatological and other high-priority investigations and
aiming at returning samples from Mars in the mid-2020s.
So the question is, are we ready to make that commitment?
Will NASA be a reliable partner, able to sustain obligations
that span years, Administrations, and unpredictable budgets? If
not resolved quickly, I am deeply worried that NASA will be
viewed by our international partners as an unreliable,
schizophrenic agency. On the one hand NASA is actively seeking
international partners to collaborate on future missions; on
the other, the Administration appears to be interfering with
the agency's efforts to reach out and engage foreign
governments in future flagship missions. If these internal
conflicts aren't soon resolved, NASA could be left alone to fly
its own missions with budgets that will result in fewer flight
opportunities. Meanwhile, other international space agencies
will collaborate, and in time, they may well be able to fly
space missions that were once the domain of NASA.
Adding further uncertainties are NASA's struggles with the
James Webb Space Telescope. To its credit, NASA identified
offsets across the Science Mission Directorate, including
Planetary Science, but did it in a way that did not undermine
its ability to proceed with a descoped Mars sample-caching
rover. Unfortunately, the White House has not yet approved the
plan for release, preventing NASA from living up to its
commitments to ESA, and frustrating our European partners.
Adding further insult, the White House won't even reveal what
offsets will be taken out of Planetary Science's fiscal year
2012 budget, suggesting that they will wait until next February
with the fiscal year 2013 budget request rollout to identify
offsets in the fiscal year 2012 operating plan. I can't begin
to make sense of the rationale for such a delay.
Before closing, I also want to stress the importance of
maintaining balance in the Planetary Science portfolio, both in
terms of mission size and destination. NASA must ensure that
flagship missions don't overwhelm the Planetary Science budget,
as well as preserve a regular cadence of small to medium size
missions.
I realize my statement has covered a lot of territory, but
in today's environment, discussing future Planetary Sciences
missions necessarily involves agency budgets, international
partners, the planetary science community, and the James Webb
Space Telescope.
I want to point out that the Office of Management and
Budget was invited to testify at this hearing, but chose not to
appear. I am not surprised, but I find it regrettable. OMB has
enormous influence over NASA, as their decisions in many ways
define the agency's future roles and missions. It would have
been helpful to gain their perspective in these discussions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Palazzo follows:]

Prepared Statement of Steven M. Palazzo, Subcommittee Chairman
Today's hearing has been called to examine the future course of
NASA's Planetary Sciences program, looking particularly at NASA's plans
to carry out recommendations put forward in the Decadal Survey released
earlier this spring by the National Academy of Sciences.
Before getting started, however, I'd like to thank our witnesses
for agreeing to testify today. I realize a lot of work and effort goes
into preparing for your appearance, and I want you to know that your
wisdom and experience will be of immense value to this Committee and
Congress in the months and years ahead as we strive to maintain a vital
national space program.
In March of this year the National Academy of Sciences published
Visions and Voyages for Planetary Science in the Decade 2013-2022. This
report reflects a broad consensus of the Planetary Science community,
first by identifying key questions to guide NASA in the decade ahead as
it endeavors to develop the next series of missions, and then by
providing NASA the tools needed to maintain a balanced and vital
program that looks broadly across our solar system. It is the product
of an immense effort that sought a wide range of input, including
papers, meetings, and reviews by a committee chaired by Dr. Steven
Squyres.
Unfortunately, budget forecasts provided by NASA to the Academy
proved to be optimistic. To its credit the survey committee had the
foresight to anticipate budget shortfalls and included in their
recommendations steps that the agency should follow to align programs
with resources, all the while maintaining balance across a set of
missions.
For fairly obvious reasons, exploration of Mars has become the
largest component of NASA's Planetary Science program, as well as one
of its most visible. Through development of critical technologies, NASA
has orbited the planet with powerful satellites, put rovers on its
surface, and in less than two weeks time is preparing to launch yet
another rover that will be bigger and more capable still.
The conundrum now facing NASA is selecting a mission that is the
next logical step in our exploration of Mars, and how to pay for it.
The decadal survey selected as its top priority mission a Mars sample-
caching rover that would, in effect, be the first of a three-phase
mission to return Mars soil samples to Earth. This will be a very
expensive undertaking, and one obvious option would be to engage with
the European Space Agency on a collaborative mission, thus reducing
costs to the US.
In November 2009, NASA Administrator Bolden and ESA Director
General Dordain signed a joint Statement of Intent that spelled out a
series of steps for the exploration of Mars that both agencies, working
collaboratively, hoped to pursue. Quoting from the statement: "NASA and
ESA agree to consider the establishment of a new joint initiative to
define and implement their scientific, programmatic, and technological
goals for the exploration of Mars. Initially focusing on 2016 and 2018,
this initiative would span several launch opportunities with landers
and orbiters conducting astrobiological, geological, geophysical,
climatological, and other high-priority investigations and aiming at
returning samples from Mars in the mid-2020s." So the question is, are
we ready to make that commitment? Will NASA be a reliable partner, able
to sustain obligations that span years, Administrations, and
unpredictable budgets?
If not resolved quickly, I am deeply worried that NASA will be
viewed by our international partners as an unreliable, schizophrenic
agency. On the one hand NASA is actively seeking international partners
to collaborate on future missions; on the other, the Administration
appears to be interfering with the agency's efforts to reach out and
engage foreign governments in future flagship missions. If these
internal conflicts aren't soon resolved, NASA could be left alone to
fly its own missions with budgets that will result in fewer flight
opportunities. Meanwhile other international space agencies will
collaborate, and in time, they may well be able to fly space missions
that were once the domain of NASA.
Adding further uncertainties are NASA's struggles with the James
Webb Space Telescope. To its credit, NASA identified offsets across the
Science Mission Directorate--including Planetary Science--but did it in
a way that did not undermine its ability to proceed with a de-scoped
Mars sample-caching rover. Unfortunately, the White House has not yet
approved the plan for release, preventing NASA from living up to its
commitments to ESA, and frustrating our European partners. Adding
further insult, the White House won't even reveal what offsets will be
taken out Planetary Science's FY12 budget, suggesting that they'll wait
until next February with the FY13 budget request rollout to identify
offsets in the FY12 operating plan. I can't begin to make sense of the
rationale for such a delay.
Before closing, I also want to stress the importance of maintaining
balance in the Planetary Science portfolio, both in terms of mission
size and destination. NASA must ensure that flagship missions don't
overwhelm the Planetary Science budget, as well as preserve a regular
cadence of small to medium size missions.
I realize my statement has covered a lot of territory, but in
today's environment, discussing future Planetary Sciences missions
necessarily involves agency budgets, international partners, the
planetary science community, the James Webb Space Telescope.
I want to point out that the Office of Management and Budget was
invited to testify at this hearing, but chose not to appear. I am not
surprised, but I find it regrettable. OMB has enormous influence over
NASA, as their decisions in many ways define the agency's future roles
and missions. It would have been helpful to gain their perspective in
these discussions.

Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize our Ranking Member, Ms.
Edwards, for her opening statement.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you very Chairman Palazzo, and thank you
for holding the hearing today to receive testimony on the
prospects for future exploration of Mars and the implications
of the current fiscal environment on the future of U.S.
planetary science.
Over the past 15 years, NASA has carried out a systematic
exploration of Mars using orbiting spacecraft, landers and
rovers. These missions have resulted in dramatic changes in our
understanding of the planet, its potential to harbor life, and
our ability to eventually carry out human exploration of Mars.
They have also established the United States as the undisputed
leader in Mars exploration. The United States is the only
Nation is the world that is capable of successfully landing and
operating a spacecraft on Mars. Our Mars exploration program
has been a scientific success story. It is the envy of the
world and it has inspired countless young people to pursue
education and careers in science and technology.
What we don't know is whether or how that story of success
will continue, and especially whether the United States will
retain its leadership role. While the Mars Science Laboratory
rover, Curiosity, is set to launch in less than two weeks, the
future of the U.S. Mars exploration program is quite unclear.
Given the extremely difficult fiscal challenges facing our
Nation, international collaboration, as recommended by the
National Academy of Sciences' Planetary Science Decadal Survey,
would seem to be a sensible path forward that will allow the
United States to sustain systematic exploration and pursue the
top-priority large mission, Mars Sample Return. Indeed, the
President's national space policy also calls for such
international collaborations in space activities. Building on
their longstanding international partnership in space science,
NASA and ESA, the European Space Agency, planned a joint
initiative to collaborate on a series of future Mars missions.
However, the status of that initiative now appears to be in
question.
In order to keep the vitally important James Webb Space
Telescope on track, NASA will need to find an additional $1.2
billion over the next five years from within its science and
agency operations budget. Decisions on how those science budget
offsets will be made have significant implications for the
future of the Mars program. Reportedly, OMB officials are
overruling the scientific experts at NASA on how those offsets
should be best allocated across the agency's science programs,
with the result that NASA's long-planned joint NASA-ESA Mars
program appears to be in serious jeopardy. If these reports are
accurate, such action by OMB is a serious cause for concern,
and I too would like to hear from OMB about that. This
Subcommittee needs to find out whether those reports are
accurate. And if they are not, we need to find out what is
holding up NASA's plans to move forward with ESA.
I certainly want to make sure that NASA works vigorously to
make sure that costs are kept under control as the agency
embarks on the joint Mars program. Strategies to instill cost
discipline on expensive missions can certainly be put into
place, and we must be careful to avoid shortsighted,
bureaucratic decisions that can end up dismantling a highly
successful program and skilled workforce, jeopardizing U.S.
leadership, and retreating from a carefully constructed
international partnership. The results of ill-conceived
decisions, bureaucratic decisions, cannot be easily recovered
at some later date, and we have to place a priority, I think,
on the science.
So I hope to hear from each of our witnesses today on the
following. Has NASA's science program developed a credible plan
to accommodate the cost growth of James Webb that will enable
NASA to pursue the long-planned joint Mars initiative with the
European Space Agency? What is preventing NASA from being able
to move forward and commit to the partnership on the 2016 and
2018 joint Mars missions, and what is needed to get things
moving? What is at stake if the United States doesn't commit to
moving forward with ESA on Mars?
I look forward to hearing the responses to these questions
and others from the testimony of our witnesses today, and I
thank you for being here and thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your
indulgence with my tardiness.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Edwards follows:]

Prepared Statement of Donna Edwards
Chairman Palazzo, thank you for holding today's hearing to receive
testimony on the prospects for future exploration of Mars and the
implications of the current fiscal environment on the future of U.S.
planetary science.
Over the past 15 years, NASA has carried out a systematic
exploration of Mars using orbiting spacecraft, landers, and rovers.
These missions have resulted in dramatic changes in our understanding
of the planet, its potential to harbor life, and our ability to
eventually carry out human exploration of Mars. They have also
established the United States as the undisputed leader in Mars
exploration. The United States is the only nation is the world that is
capable of successfully landing and operating a spacecraft on Mars. Our
Mars exploration program has been a scientific success story, is the
envy of the world, and has inspired countless young people to pursue
education and careers in science and technology.
What we don't know is whether or how that story of success will
continue, and especially whether the U.S. will retain its leadership
role. While the Mars Science Laboratory rover, Curiosity, is set to
launch in less than two weeks, the future of the U.S. Mars exploration
program is very unclear.
Given the extremely difficult fiscal challenges facing our nation,
international collaboration, as recommended by the National Academy of
Sciences' planetary science decadal survey, would seem to be a sensible
path forward that will allow the U.S. to sustain systematic exploration
and pursue the top priority large mission--Mars Sample Return. Indeed,
the President's national space policy also calls for such international
collaborations in space activities. Building on their long-standing
international partnership in space science, NASA and ESA planned a
joint initiative to collaborate on a series of future Mars missions.
However, the status of that initiative now appears to be in question.
In order to keep the vitally important James Webb Space Telescope
on track, NASA will need to find an additional $1.2 billion over the
next five years from within its science and agency operations budgets.
Decisions on how those science budget offsets will be made have
significant implications for the future of the Mars program.
Reportedly, OMB officials are overruling the scientific experts at NASA
on how those offsets should best be allocated across the agency's
science programs, with the result that NASA's long-planned joint NASA-
ESA Mars program appears to be in serious jeopardy. This action by OMB
is a serious cause for concern.
This Subcommittee needs to find out whether those reports are
accurate. And if they are not, we need to find out what is holding up
NASA's plans to move forward with ESA. I certainly want to make sure
that NASA works vigorously to make sure that costs are kept under
control as the agency embarks on the joint Mars program. Strategies to
instill cost discipline on expensive missions can certainly be put into
place. We must be careful to avoid short-sighted, bureaucratic
decisions that can end up dismantling a highly successful program and
skilled workforce, jeopardizing U.S. leadership, and retreating from a
carefully constructed international partnership. The results of ill-
conceived decisions cannot be easily recovered from at some later date.
So I hope to hear from each of our witnesses today on the following:

1.  Has NASA's Science program developed a credible plan to
accommodate the cost growth on James Webb that will enable NASA to
pursue the long-planned joint Mars initiative with ESA?

2.  What is preventing NASA from being able to move forward and
commit to the partnership with ESA on the 2016 and 2018 joint Mars
missions, and what is needed to get things moving?

3.  What's at stake if the U.S. doesn't commit to moving forward
with ESA on Mars?

I look forward to hearing the responses to these questions and the
testimonies of our witnesses today.

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Ms. Edwards.
At this time I will yield to the Chairman of the Science,
Space, and Technology Committee for a brief opening statement.
Mr. Hall.
Chairman Hall. Thank you, Mr. Palazzo, and I thank you for
calling this hearing to examine NASA's planetary science
program.
I can't think of a more exciting and successful robotic
space program that has electrified so many of our people, young
and old, with images and discoveries about the solar system in
which we live: the Mars exploration rovers, the Cassini mission
is still returning incredible data and pictures from Saturn,
the Galileo mission that orbited Jupiter and to me one of the
most notable achievements are the Voyager satellite that were
launched in 1977 and still operating today and are the farthest
manmade objects lofted from Earth.
There are so many other remarkable missions I didn't name
but the point is that NASA's Planetary Science program has
accomplished so very much and has helped stake NASA's claim as
one of the world's leading science and exploration
institutions, and it is important that we work together to
maintain this string of exciting missions for the next
generation to enjoy the wonderment of science.
There is, of course, the business side to attend to during
today's hearing, and I don't mean to distract from that task
but I just want to thank our witnesses for being here and to
urge NASA, the Administration, the science community and
Congress to sustain this noble enterprise. I only wish they
worked as hard at keeping the space station as they have in
this program.
I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hall follows:]

Prepared Statement of Chairman Ralph M. Hall
Mr. Palazzo, thank you for calling today's hearing to examine
NASA's Planetary Science Program. I can't think of a more exciting and
successful robotic space program that has electrified so many of our
people, young and old, with images and discoveries about the Solar
System in which we live.
The Mars Exploration Rovers; the Cassini mission that is still
returning incredible data and pictures from Saturn; the Galileo mission
that orbited Jupiter; and to me, one of the most notable achievements
are the Voyager satellites that were launched in 1977 and still
operating today, and are the farthest man-made objects lofted from
Earth. There are so many other remarkable missions I didn't name, but
the point is that NASA's Planetary Science program has accomplished so
much, and has helped stake NASA's claim as one of the world's leading
science and exploration institutions.
And it's important that we work together to maintain this string of
exciting missions for the next generation to enjoy the wonderment of
science.
There is, of course, the business side to attend to during today's
hearing, and I don't mean to distract from that task. But I just wanted
to thank our witnesses for being here, and to urge NASA, the
Administration, the science community, and Congress to sustain this
noble enterprise.

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
Before proceeding with the introduction of witnesses, I
would like to ask unanimous consent to enter into the record
written statements submitted by the Planetary Society, the
European Space Agency, and by Dr. Mark Sykes, CEO and Director
of the Planetary Science Institute. Hearing no objection, so
ordered.
[The information appears in Appendix II:]
Chairman Palazzo. At this time I would like to introduce
our witness panel. Our first witness is Dr. Jim Green, Director
of Planetary Science Division of NASA. Dr. Green began his
career in NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in 1980. In 1985,
he transferred to the Goddard Space Flight Center, where he
served as Chief of the Space Science Data Operations Office as
well as Chief in the Science Proposals Support Office. He also
served as a Co-Investigator and Deputy Project Scientist on the
IMAGE Mission. In August 2006, Dr. Green was named Director of
the Planetary Science Division. Dr. Green received his Ph.D. in
space physics at the University of Iowa. Welcome, Dr. Green.
Our second witness is Dr. Steven Squyres, the Goldwin Smith
Professor of Astronomy at Cornell University. Dr. Squyres
received his Ph.D. from Cornell in 1981 and spent five years
working at Ames Research Center before returning to his alma
mater as a faculty member. Dr. Squyres has participated in many
of NASA's planetary missions including the Voyager mission to
Jupiter and Saturn, the Magellan mission to Venus, and most
recently, as Principal Investigator for the science payload on
the Mars exploration rover project. Dr. Squyres served as Chair
of the Planetary Decadal Survey for the National Research
Council, and within just the last two weeks was named as Chair
of the NASA Advisory Committee. Dr. Squyres, thank you for
joining us today.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes each after which the Members of Congress will
have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Jim Green, Planetary
Science Division Director of the Science Mission Directorate in
NASA.

STATEMENT OF DR. JAMES GREEN, DIRECTOR, PLANETARY SCIENCE
DIVISION, MISSION DIRECTORATE, NASA

Dr. Green. Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to
testify concerning the NASA's Planetary Science program, our
plans to implement the National Academy of Sciences' Planetary
Decadal Survey, and our joint Mars exploration program with the
European Space Agency, or ESA.
We are in the midst of what we call at NASA and our
planetary science community call the Year of the Solar System.
This current 670-day period--it is a Mars year, after all--is
chockfull of astounding scientific results and amazing
accomplishments of many of our planetary missions to a wide
variety of bodies throughout the solar system. My written
testimony summarizes these for you.
In my brief few minutes here, I will only say that the
capstone of the Year of the Solar System activity is the launch
and landing of the Mars Science Laboratory and its rover
Curiosity on the surface of Mars. MSL now sits on top of its
launch vehicle awaiting its launch window opening on November
25th, and for me, Thanksgiving will occur after a successful
launch.
Looking to the future, NASA is committed to the National
Academy of Sciences' Planetary Decadal Survey in planning the
future of our planetary science program. We take the Planetary
Science Decadal Survey very seriously because it represents a
broad national science community consensus. The Planetary
Science Decadal assures the progress on our highest priority
science questions and keeps NASA and the planetary science
community focused on these objectives.
The survey recommends NASA conduct a balanced mix of
missions:Discovery, New Frontier, and flagship missions. The
survey's highest priority flagship mission is a Mars 2018 rover
and sample-caching mission as a first step in a Mars science
sample return campaign. It can only be done, as the decadal
survey states, if NASA is able to reduce the cost to less than
$2.5 billion. The survey further recognizes the need for Mars
2016 and 2018 missions to proceed together, and the survey
recognizes that NASA must move forward with these, only with
these to accomplish these missions.
NASA has been studying approaches to return samples from
Mars to Earth for well over a decade, and now the science
community is ready and eager for us to get started as
delineated in the new Planetary Science Decadal Survey. Since
2007, NASA and ESA have been planning Mars sample return
concepts together. The joint effort led to a 2009 Statement of
Intent signed by the NASA Administrator and Director General of
ESA on a joint Mars robotic exploration program, and this
includes Mars 2016 and 2018 missions. We are working
extensively with ESA since the 2009 agreement to define a
program to accomplish these missions within the available
budget. The results of this effort must be ready soon if we are
to make the 2016 launch window and to enable the NASA/ESA
partnership to move forward.
The decadal survey's second priority flagship is a Jupiter
Europa mission. This orbiter, as the decadal survey recognizes,
or JEO, Jupiter Europa Orbiter, would cost approximately $4.7
billion, far more than the available budget for a planetary
flagship mission, and so the decadal recommends to NASA to
undertake a redefined JEO mission at a cost that would minimize
the size of the budget necessary to be increased to enable this
mission. That JEO mission concept study is well underway and
should be completed late next spring.
The survey's third priority flagship mission is a Uranus
orbiter and probe, and rounding out the list are an Enceladus
orbiter and a Venus climate orbiter.
Currently, NASA is working to define an approach with ESA
to implement the highest priority flagship. Overall, we are
working to define a flagship mission that can be implemented in
this decade in the context of a balanced mix of mission sizes
and classes recommended by the decadal.
I would like to take this opportunity now to publicly thank
Dr. Steve Squyres for his leadership of the academy committee
that produced the planetary decadal survey. It is providing us
a tremendous valuable guide in planning our future planetary
science portfolio as we knew it would be.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before this
Committee today, and I am pleased to answer any questions you
may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Green follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. James Green, Director,
Planetary Science Division, Science Mission Directorate,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the accomplishments, status, and future
direction of NASA's Planetary Science program and, in particular, the
Mars Exploration Program. NASA's Planetary Science program has produced
a long series of visible and exciting triumphs of American science,
engineering, and exploration leadership. NASA spacecraft have visited
every planet in our solar system, as well as many of the variety of
small bodies such as comets and asteroids that have much to tell us
about the solar system's formation. So many of our past and current
efforts are coming to fruition in the near future that NASA thinks of
the period from October 2010 through August 2012--the length of one
Martian year--as the Year of the Solar System.

Recent Accomplishments and Current Missions

NASA's current Planetary Science missions in space are returning
imagery and data that are revolutionizing our understanding of our
solar system's history and its potential habitability--past, present or
future.

Planetary missions Deep Impact and Stardust, whose prime
missions were completed, were retargeted to two comet bodies: Hartley 2
and Tempel 1. Surprisingly, Hartley 2 was found to spew basketball and
smaller sized snowballs of cometary material. Scientists now recognize
that this comet is near its evolutionary end state of completely
dissipating into the solar system. By revisiting Tempel 1, we obtained
new views of how the comet evolved after its perihelion passage and
obtained information on the region previously impacted during the Deep
Impact flyby.

MESSENGER arrived in orbit around Mercury last March.
Since then, it has found that Mercury's magnetic field is offset far to
the north of its core--a feature we cannot now explain. MESSENGER is
exploring surface features scientists are calling ``hollows'' that
indicate they may be actively forming today.

Launched in September 2011, the GRAIL mission to reveal
the structure of the interior of Earth's moon arrives in lunar orbit on
New Year's Eve and will conduct its science mission through the first
half of 2012.

Launched in August 2011, the Juno mission to Jupiter is
on its way to an arrival in 2016. During its one-year mission in polar
orbit, Juno will draw a detailed picture of Jupiter's magnetic field
and find out whether there is a solid core beneath its deep atmosphere.

The Dawn spacecraft is currently in orbit around the
asteroid Vesta. There it found that Vesta's southern hemisphere boasts
one of the highest mountains in the solar system, three times the
height of Mt. Everest. The striations encircling Vesta and other
features point to a giant impact with another body. Dawn will depart
Vesta in mid-2012 on its journey to Ceres so it can compare these two
large asteroids that appear to have dramatically different histories.

Cassini continues its long reconnaissance of Saturn and
its moons, and will do so through 2017. Cassini has observed aurorae
and seasonal change on Saturn and Titan its largest moon. It has
observed water and organic molecules ejected from geysers on the
southern reaches of the small moon Enceladus. And Cassini has found
that the giant moon Titan has rain and lakes-not of water but of
methane and ethane-making it much like what we believe the early Earth
was like.

The New Horizons spacecraft will flyby Pluto in 2015-the
first mission to do so-and will continue into the Kuiper Belt that
comprises many Pluto-like objects. In 2010, the spacecraft passed its
halfway point.

OSIRIS-REx will be the next mission in our New Frontier
Program, the first U.S. mission to return samples from an asteroid back
to Earth.

The next Discovery mission will be selected from the
following candidates: a geophysical monitoring station on Mars; a
mission to land a boat in a lake on Titan; and mission to land on a
comet multiple times and observe changes as it approaches the Sun.

At Mars, we have several missions in operation, recently
completed, or in development. NASA has long had a strategic, multi-
mission approach to thoroughly investigating Mars with a scope,
intensity, and duration exceeded only by our study of planet Earth.
That is because, beyond Earth, Mars is the most likely and most
accessible place to look for signs of life in the solar system. And so
we want to study its atmosphere and geology to understand Mars' past,
present, and future potential to harbor life.

Currently in orbit around Mars are the Mars
Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) and the Mars Odyssey, which have revealed
tantalizing features that appear to have been shaped by water flowing
on the surface in the past. We have recently found evidence of briny
liquid water flows that disturb the surface of some areas on a
seasonally variable basis. MRO imagery was crucial in selecting the
landing site for the Mars Science Laboratory.

The Mars Exploration Rover Spirit, which ceased
operation in March 2011, made the first close-up inspection of water-
altered rocks and carbonates. In August, the Mars Exploration Rover
Opportunity reached Endeavor Crater. This crater, about the size of the
beltway around Washington, DC, contains clay minerals that may hold
clues to an ancient, habitable environment in the early, wet Noachian
epoch of Mars.

The Mars Atmosphere and Volatile Evolution (MAVEN)
mission in development for launch in 2013 will help us understand how
and why the Martian atmosphere transitioned from the denser, wetter
atmosphere of its past to the thinner, dryer one we see today.

The Mars 2016 Trace Gas Orbiter, planned as part of
the ESA-US ExoMars Mission concept (Mars 2016 and Mars 2018) currently
under review, is designed to investigate the seasonally variable
concentrations of methane and other gases in the Martian atmosphere and
attempts to determine their origins.

Capping this Year of the Solar System, the Mars Science Laboratory
(MSL) now sits on top of its Atlas V launch vehicle on its launch pad,
with final preparations for launch on track for the opening of the
launch window on November 25th. The Mars Science Laboratory rover,
named Curiosity, is the next long stride forward in our scientific
exploration of the Martian surface. The Curiosity rover will analyze
dozens of samples scooped from the soil, drilled from rocks, and pulled
from the atmosphere. MSL is designed to seek to determine the planet's
habitability-that is, whether it ever did or whether it could support
life. Curiosity's ability to detect and characterize organic compounds,
and determine where the ``signs of life'' might be preserved, will be
vital to the selection of instruments and landing site for any other
mission involving landing on the Red Planet.
NASA's Planetary Science program over the past decade has been a
balanced program of competed missions such as those selected through
the Discovery and New Frontiers program, and strategic missions such as
Cassini and most of the Mars missions. Mars has warranted special
attention because of its potential to answer the broadest range of
questions concerning solar system history and habitability.

Planning the Future of Planetary Science - Implementing The Decadal
Survey

NASA uses the recommendations of the National Academy of Sciences'
Decadal Survey in planning the future of our Planetary Science program
in the climate of a constrained Federal budget. Decadal surveys have
proven indispensable in establishing a broad national science community
consensus on the state of the science, the questions to be addressed,
and most importantly, a prioritized list of candidate actions and
mission concepts to be pursued or studied over the decade. NASA
contracts with the National Academy of Sciences to prepare decadal
surveys in all four science areas of NASA's Science Mission
Directorate: Astrophysics, Earth Science, Heliophysics, and Planetary
Science.
NASA received a new Planetary Science Decadal Survey in March 2011.
This survey, Vision and Voyages for Planetary Science in the Decade
2013-2022 (NRC, 2011), is the product of hundreds of eminent planetary
scientists from around the Nation. NASA is extremely grateful to Dr.
Steven Squyres for his superb leadership of the Academy committee that
authored the Survey report.
The new Planetary Science Decadal Survey has three features that
make it an effective guide for NASA and the Nation's planning. First,
it recommends a balanced program, and defines what ``balanced'' means
in terms of the relative levels of investment in small, medium, and
large (or flagship) missions, technology development, and research &
analysis. Second, it defines a priority order for flagship mission
concepts, subject to NASA's ability to define mission concepts that fit
their expected budget envelope. Third, it defines a set of decision
rules to help NASA make decisions under different budget outlook
scenarios. This latter feature is proving especially useful, as the
budget outlook is less optimistic than the Survey assumed for either
their ``Recommended Program'' or ``Cost-constrained Program'' options.

The Survey's first recommendation is that:

``NASA's suite of planetary missions for the decade 2012-2022
should consist of a balanced mix of Discovery, New Frontiers, and
Flagship missions, enabling both a steady stream of new discoveries and
the capability to address larger challenges like sample return missions
and outer planet exploration.''

The Survey also identified ``the need to maintain programmatic
balance by assuring that no one mission takes up too large a fraction
of the planetary budget at any given time.'' NASA is planning its
Planetary Science portfolio accordingly and using the Planetary Science
Subcommittee of the NASA Advisory Council for guidance and feedback on
our specific implementation plans.
The Survey's highest priority flagship mission is a Mars sample-
caching mission. The Survey identified this as the highest priority
flagship if three conditions pertain: 1) it is to begin the NASA-
European Space Agency Mars Sample Return campaign; 2) NASA must be able
to implement its portion of the mission at a cost to NASA of no more
than approximately $2.5 billion; and, 3) the mission must be launched
by 2018. NASA is working with ESA to define a mission that meets these
criteria and can be accommodated within anticipated resources.
Following the Mars sample-caching mission, the next highest
priority flagship mission is the Jupiter Europa Orbiter. Europa and
Mars Sample Return were both in the prior Decadal Survey (from 2002),
and, thus, NASA has a long history of studying Europa mission concepts.
Here again, NASA had been coordinating with ESA on these studies and,
prior to the recent Decadal Survey, had been studying a joint two-
satellite Jupiter System Mission. Given the cost of the Europa mission,
estimated by the Survey at $4.7 billion, the Survey recommended that:

``NASA should immediately undertake an effort to find major cost
reductions for JEO, with the goal of minimizing the size of the budget
increase necessary to enable the mission.''

NASA is currently conducting such a study with this objective. The
third priority flagship mission in the Survey is a Uranus Orbiter and
Probe mission. Rounding out the Survey's list of flagship candidates
are an Enceladus Orbiter and a Venus Climate Mission.
The Decadal Survey also recommended that NASA continue to allow
Discovery missions to be proposed to Mars. In fact, NASA is currently
supporting development of a mission concept for a Mars geophysical
monitoring station as one of three in competition to be the next
Discovery mission. This mission would collect data on the interior of
Mars. Other than the Earth and to a lesser extent the Moon, there have
been no surface-based observations of the interior of terrestrial
planetary bodies.

Potential Mars Mission Under Consideration

NASA is studying the Mars sample-caching mission for launch in 2018
and also the Mars 2016 Trace Gas Orbiter (TGO) in concert with ESA.
NASA and ESA have been working on this since 2007. As a basis for these
discussions, in November 2009, the NASA Administrator and the Director
General of ESA signed a Statement of Intent for Potential Joint
Exploration of Mars ``to consider the establishment of a joint
initiative to define and implement their scientific, programmatic, and
technological goals for the exploration of Mars. Initially focusing on
2016 and 2018, this initiative would span several launch opportunities
with landers and orbiters . . . ''
As currently envisaged, the Mars 2016 and 2018 missions are linked
since the 2016 mission is an orbiter that would not only perform
atmospheric trace gas science but also provide the space
telecommunications relay services to enable communication between
mission controllers on Earth and the 2018 rover-cacher. In July 2010,
NASA and ESA selected science instruments for the 2016 TGO mission from
a joint Announcement of Opportunity. In June 2011, NASA and ESA agreed
to explore a single rover for the 2018 mission to accomplish both our
science and technology goals. The 2018 mission to put a cacher-rover on
the surface of Mars would take advantage of the best energetics (the
energy required to transfer mass from the Earth to Mars) in a decade
and a half.
Due to increasing budget pressures associated with the nation's
fiscal challenges, in June 2011 NASA requested ESA's support for a
review of the potential joint Mars program in an effort to maximize
available resources, while continuing to meet key scientific and
technical requirements of both Agencies. This joint review is currently
underway. As part of the ongoing technical review, ESA recently invited
the Russian Space Agency, Roscosmos, to consider potential
participation in the Mars 2016 and Mars 2018 missions. Russia has yet
to formally respond to this invitation.
NASA has had a long and productive history of successful
cooperation with ESA, particularly in the area of space science. This
relationship has spanned decades. Last month Administrator Bolden and
the ESA Director General Dordain met to discuss among other topics the
progress of the ongoing Mars exploration program review. At that time
they both reaffirmed their Agencies' commitment to explore cooperation
on a mutually beneficial Mars exploration program.

Summary

We are in an era of scientific revolution in our understanding of
the solar system. The new Planetary Decadal Survey recognizes this
scientific revolution and charts an exciting and compelling way
forward. To summarize according to the questions posed in your letter
of invitation to testify:

1)  NASA is studying the implementation of the Mars 2016 and Mars
2018 missions with ESA within available budgetary resources. The Mars
2018 mission would satisfy the objectives of the mission identified by
the Decadal Survey as the highest priority flagship mission for the
coming decade, subject to the conditions identified above and to
funding availability. And it would be the first step towards returning
a sample from Mars, which has long been a goal of our larger Mars and
planetary exploration strategy.

2)  NASA is pursuing a strategic continuum of flyby, orbit, land,
rove, and return samples. Ultimately, we plan to return samples from
the surface of Mars, both for their scientific value and for the
information they will provide in support of what will ultimately be
human exploration of the Red Planet. MSL is an integral part of this
long-range strategy, both for the entry, descent, landing, and roving
technologies it enables and for the scientific contribution it will
make to the question of Mars' past and present habitability.

3)  NASA and the scientific community have no shortage of
compelling and innovative ideas for a robust planetary exploration
program, but the fact is that we are in very challenging fiscal times,
which requires focus, partnerships, and the development of innovative
approaches to reduce the costs of these exciting missions. The Decadal
Survey was aware of these constraints and provided multiple concepts
for potential flagships, depending on the funding available. Of the
recommended flagship missions, we are currently focusing on the Decadal
Survey's highest-priority--Mars sample caching--while simultaneously
seeking new ways of pursuing the other compelling missions such that
they can be realized within the constrained budgets we face. For
example, NASA also is currently studying a Jupiter Europa Mission, the
Survey's second priority flagship mission. The Survey's third priority
flagship mission is a Uranus Orbiter and Probes mission.

NASA's plans for addressing the Planetary Science Decadal Survey
recommendations will be detailed as part of the President's FY 2013
budget request. This is also the time frame in which NASA and ESA will
need to have our plans firmly in place in order to implement any
proposed Mars 2016 and Mars 2018 missions.
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate your
continued support of NASA's Planetary Science program. I would be
pleased to respond to any questions you or the other Members of the
Subcommittee may have.

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Dr. Green.
I now recognize our next witness, Dr. Steve Squyres, Chair
of the Committee on Planetary Science Decadal Survey for the
National Academies of Science. Dr. Squyres.

STATEMENTS OF DR. STEVEN SQUYRES, GOLDWIN SMITH PROFESSOR OF
ASTRONOMY, CORNELL UNIVERSITY

Dr. Squyres. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you very much for the opportunity to appear
here today.
The National Research Council's decadal recommendations to
NASA covered many topics. These include the Planetary Research
and Analysis Program, technology development, small Discovery
missions and medium-sized New Frontiers missions. In all of
these areas, the agency's response so far has been to follow
the NRC recommendations closely.
But one area today where NASA has not followed NRC
recommendations has been the implementation of large flagship
missions. Flagship missions are vital to the health of
planetary science, and as stressed in the NRC decadal report,
flagship missions are an essential part of a balanced program
of exploration. A program made up of only small- and medium-
class missions would be unable to address the most challenging
and important issues in planetary science. The decadal report
did not state that flagship missions have lower priority than
other smaller missions. It stated that an appropriate response
to a declining budget is to delay or descope flagship missions,
which is a very different thing.
The NRC report provided a prioritized list of planetary
flagship missions with clear decision rules for choosing among
them. The highest priority flagship mission recommended by the
NRC is a Mars sample collection and caching missions to be
conducted jointly with ESA, the European Space Agency. This
mission would collect a well-chosen suite of samples for return
to Earth at a later date. Sample return is the crucial next
step in Mars exploration and is the best way of addressing the
question of whether life ever took hold on Mars. The mission
would also conduct significant new science on the Martian
surface.
Other high-priority flagship missions discussed in the
report included a mission to investigate a probable subsurface
ocean of liquid water on Jupiter's moon Europa and an orbiter
probe mission to the ice giant planet Uranus.
As the spectacularly successful Cassini-Huygens missions to
Saturn and Titan has shown, international partnerships can be
enabling for flagship missions. The NRC report concluded that
partnership with ESA is essential for the Mars sample caching
mission and for the Mars program overall. The same may also be
true for high-priority flagships as well.
ESA can bring substantial capabilities and resources to a
partnership, lessening both the risk and the financial burden
to NASA. In my view, the publicly available budget guidelines
that have been provided to NASA by the Office of Management and
Budget are sufficient as they stand to allow the agency to
enter into a partnership with ESA and to carry out the program
recommended by the NRC. To date, however, the Administration
has not committed to this partnership.
If no such commitment to a flagship mission is made, the
result will be highly detrimental to the future of U.S.
planetary science. Speaking more pragmatically, I fear that an
inability to enter into a mutually beneficial partnership with
a willing, eager and highly capable agency like ESA may
jeopardize future international partnerships as well.
Three other points are noteworthy regarding the recommended
Mars mission specifically. First, NASA's current concept is
substantially descoped from the original one, exactly in line
with the decadal recommendation to descope flagship missions in
the face of declining budgets. Second, the current concept
makes extensive use of existing hardware designs, reducing cost
risk. Third, the remaining missions in the sample return
campaign can be carried out over an extended period of time, if
necessary, spreading the cost out in time as well.
Finally, I would like to stress a critical point. The
ability to carry out the most challenging tasks in deep space
exploration, tasks like landing a rover on Mars or orbiting
Europa, is one of our Nation's great scientific and technical
crown jewels. If we give up that capability by abandoning
planetary flagship missions, then we do a disservice not just
to ourselves but also to future generations of American
scientists, engineers and explorers. So in my view, it is
essential that NASA maintain this unique capability. The
resources to do it within a balanced program are available.
What is needed is the willingness to commit these resources for
this essential task.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Squyres follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. Steven W. Squyres, Goldwin Smith Professor of
Astronomy, Cornell University
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear today. My name is Steven W. Squyres, and my title
is Goldwin Smith Professor of Astronomy at Cornell University. I have
participated for the past thirty years in a number of NASA solar system
exploration missions. Recently I chaired the planetary decadal survey
for the National Research Council.

The Planetary Decadal Survey

The NRC's decadal survey report was requested by NASA and the
National Science Foundation to review and assess the current status of
planetary science and to develop a comprehensive science and mission
strategy. The committee that was established to write the report
broadly canvassed the planetary science community to determine the
current state of knowledge and to identify the most important
scientific questions to be addressed during the period 2013-2022. The
report presented, to the greatest extent possible, the consensus view
of the planetary science community. The principal support for research
related to solar system bodies in the United States comes from the
Planetary Science Division (PSD) of NASA's Science Mission Directorate.
The annual budget of PSD is currently approximately $1.3 billion. The
bulk of this is spent on the development, construction, launch and
operation of spacecraft. Two types of spacecraft missions are
conducted: large ``Flagship'' missions strategically directed by the
PSD, and smaller Discovery and New Frontiers missions proposed and led
by principal investigators. In my testimony today, I will focus, as
requested, on the issue of Flagship missions.

Flagship Missions in a Balanced Program

Because my testimony today concerns Flagship missions, I will
particularly stress the issue of programmatic balance. The challenge
faced by NASA is to assemble a portfolio of missions that achieves a
regular tempo of solar system exploration and a level of investigation
appropriate for each target object. A program consisting of only
Flagship missions once per decade or even less frequently could result
in long stretches of relatively little new data being generated,
leading to a stagnant community. However, a portfolio of only smaller
missions would be incapable of addressing important scientific
challenges like in-depth exploration of the outer planets or returning
samples from Mars. A key finding of the decadal survey was that
``NASA's suite of planetary missions for the decade 2013-2022 should
consist of a balanced mix of Discovery, New Frontiers, and Flagship
missions (emphasis added), enabling both a steady stream of new
discoveries and the capability to address larger challenges like sample
return missions and outer planet exploration.'' The program recommended
by the NRC was designed to achieve such a balance.
I should also remark on the NRC's recommended decision rules, which
dealt with how to reshape the program if necessary in the face of
declining budgets. The decadal report did not state that Flagship
missions have lower priority than other smaller missions. It stated
that an appropriate response to declining budgets is to delay or
descope Flagship missions - a very different matter from eliminating
them.

Flagship Mission Priorities

Based on the broad inputs from the planetary science community and
the prioritization criteria described above, the decadal survey
identified and prioritized a number of candidate Flagship missions.
The highest priority Flagship mission identified by the NRC is a
Mars rover mission that would be the first of three missions in a
campaign to return samples from the surface of Mars. It would be
responsible for characterizing a landing site that has been selected
for high science potential, and for collecting, documenting, and
packaging samples for return to Earth. The Mars community, in their
inputs to the decadal survey, was emphatic in their view that a sample
return mission is the logical next step in Mars exploration. Mars
science has reached a level of sophistication that fundamental advances
in addressing the important questions above will only come from
analysis of returned samples. This mission would also explore a new
site and significantly advance our understanding of the geologic
history and evolution of Mars, even before the cached samples are
returned to Earth. A crucial aspect of the entire Mars sample return
campaign is that it would be carried out in partnership with the
European Space Agency, reducing the costs to NASA. I will return to
this point below.
The second highest priority Flagship mission identified by the NRC
is a mission to characterize Jupiter's moon Europa. Europa is likely to
have a deep ocean of liquid water beneath its icy crust, making it an
object of enormous interest as a possible abode for life. The mission
would put a spacecraft in orbit around Europa, investigating its
probable ocean and interior, its ice shell, its chemistry and
composition, and the geology of prospective landing sites. The third
highest priority Flagship mission is an orbiter and probe mission to
the ice giant planet Uranus. Galileo and Cassini have performed
spectacular in-depth investigations of the Jupiter and Saturn systems,
respectively. The Kepler mission has shown that many exoplanets are
ice-giant sized. Exploration of a planet like Uranus is therefore the
obvious and important next step in the exploration of the giant
planets. This mission would deploy an atmospheric probe into Uranus and
then enter orbit, making measurements of the planet's atmosphere,
interior, magnetic field, and rings, as well as multiple flybys of the
larger uranian satellites.

The Problem

The NRC's decadal recommendations to NASA covered many topics.
These included recommended funding levels and content for the planetary
research and analysis program and technology development program. They
also included specific recommendations for the structure and content of
the small Discovery and medium-sized New Frontiers mission lines. I'm
pleased to report that in all of these areas, the Agency's response has
been to follow the NRC recommendations closely.
Unfortunately, the one area to date where NASA has not followed the
NRC's recommendations has been implementation of Flagship missions. As
outlined above, Flagship missions are vital to the health of planetary
science. And as stressed in the NRC decadal report, Flagship missions
are an essential part of a balanced program of planetary exploration.
The lack of progress in implementing the recommended approach to
Flagship missions is cause for serious concern.
An obvious issue regarding Flagships is their cost. Because the
costs of Flagship missions are high, even proportionally modest cost
overruns can have serious consequences for the rest of the program.
This is the reason that the decadal report placed strong emphasis on
independent and conservative cost estimation processes. But even in the
current cost-constrained environment the lack of progress in
implementing a Flagship mission is surprising.

The Solution

In my view, the publicly-available budget guidelines that have been
provided to NASA by the Office of Management and Budget are sufficient
to allow the Agency to carry out the Mars sample collection and caching
mission recommended as the highest priority by the NRC. The key to
achieving this in an affordable way is partnership with the European
Space Agency.
As the spectacularly successful Cassini/Huygens mission to Saturn
has Titan shown, international partnerships can be enabling for
Flagship missions. The NRC report concluded that partnership with ESA
is essential for the Mars sample caching mission, and for the Mars
program overall. ESA can bring substantial capabilities and resources
to a partnership, lessening both the risk and the financial burden to
NASA. To date, however, the Administration has not committed to this
partnership.
A potential objection to the proposed mission is that it would be
the first in a series of three missions required to return the samples
to Earth, each involving significant costs. This concern is offset by
three factors. First, the first mission in the campaign would do
significant new science on its own, partially providing an immediate
justification for its costs. Second, the campaign has been
intentionally designed so that the three missions can be spread out in
time, substantially if necessary, to spread the costs over an
acceptable period. Third, partnership with ESA throughout the entire
campaign will substantially lower the total costs to NASA.
Important steps have already been taken to reduce both cost and
cost risk. NASA's current concept for the Mars sample caching mission
is substantially descoped from the original one, in line with the
decadal recommendation to descope Flagship missions in the face of
declining budgets. In addition, the current concept makes extensive use
of existing hardware designs, reducing the risk of unexpected cost
growth. Despite this important progress, however, no commitment to the
mission has been made.

Summary

If no commitment to a Flagship mission is made in response to the
decadal survey recommendations, the result will be highly detrimental
to the future of U.S. planetary science. More pragmatically, I fear
that an inability to enter into a mutually beneficial partnership with
a willing, eager, and highly capable agency like ESA would jeopardize
future international partnerships as well.
I would also like to stress a critical point: The ability to carry
out the most challenging tasks in deep space exploration--tasks like
landing and roving on Mars--is one of our nation's scientific and
technical crown jewels. If we give up that capability by abandoning
planetary Flagship missions, then we do a disservice not just to
ourselves, but also to future generations of American scientists,
engineers, and explorers. In my view, it is essential that NASA
maintain this unique capability. The resources to do it within a
balanced program are available. What is needed is a willingness to
commit those resources to this essential task.
So my message to the Subcommittee today is simple: In order to
achieve a balanced program of planetary exploration, and to maintain
American leadership in this field, NASA must be permitted to use its
available resources to implement the Flagship mission program
recommended by the NRC's decadal survey.

Chairman Palazzo. Thank you, Dr. Squyres.
I thank the panel for their testimony, reminding Members
that Committee rules limit questioning to five minutes. The
Chair will at this point open the round of questions. The Chair
recognizes himself for five minutes.
Dr. Green, how does restructuring the James Webb Space
Telescope program and the increased funds needed to complete
the program affect NASA's Planetary Science Division? Will
there be programs cancelled as well?
Dr. Green. The Administration has stated clearly that James
Webb is a priority and that the funding for James Webb in the
future based on its shortfall in the existing budget based on
the President's 2012 submission to Congress would be handled in
a 50/50 arrangement between the Science Mission Directorate and
other elements within NASA. In addition to that, OMB has been
working with the Science Mission Directorate to determine the
process and procedure to identify those funds and once that has
been completed, and it is not, it will be delivered to Congress
in February when the President delivers his 2013 budget.
Chairman Palazzo. How are you executing the programs in the
Planetary Science Division knowing that there will be likely
cuts to those programs nearly halfway through next year, or the
current fiscal year?
Dr. Green. Well, currently, as we create through our
partnership with ESA and discussions on how to implement Mars
2016 and the Mars 2018 mission, we have entered those
discussions knowing that there may be changes or possibly
changes in our current budget profile. So we have considerable
action with ESA. We have not made commitments that would by the
Administration commit them to that set of missions and so we
have done so in good faith that by the time the President has
determined his priorities, delivered his budget to Congress in
February, our path forward will be clear.
Chairman Palazzo. Dr. Squyres, there is a widely held
perception that NASA is no longer in charge of developing its
programs and is instead being directed by the OMB on which
programs to pursue. What is the danger to U.S. scientific
leadership and to the scientific community as a whole if this
is indeed the case? And does this undermine the legitimate work
of the decadal survey process?
Dr. Squyres. The danger to planetary science in the United
States is severe if that is the case. As I stressed in my
opening remarks, flagship missions are an essential part of a
balanced program of exploration. We rely on flagship missions
to do the most important science, and if we are not able to
implement those missions, then our leadership in areas like
answering fundamental questions like was there ever life on
Mars, is there life on Europa, these really important
questions, is going to be, I won't say challenged, it is going
to go away. We are going to lose a fundamental capability. And
moreover, not only do we lose the science but we cannot simply
give up that technical capability, the ability that we have to
do things like orbiting Europa or landing a rover on Mars. That
is something that we know how to do in this Nation, and if we
give that capability up, the people who know how to do that,
they are going to go off to other jobs, they are going to do
other things. These are smart people who are in demand and you
simply cannot reconstruct that instantly. So I feel that the
danger is severe both to the science that we have identified in
the NRC report now but also to our prospects for being able to
do similar science in the future.
Chairman Palazzo. Why do you say NASA is no longer working
toward flagship missions?
Dr. Squyres. I am perplexed, sir. I sense within the agency
a strong desire to do flagship missions, and my reason for
saying that is that I know that in response to the NRC's
report, NASA has totally restructured the partnership with ESA
for the Mars mission to make it much more affordable,
affordable within budget guidelines. They have done exactly as
Jim Green said and they have found ways to--they are working on
ways to dramatically decrease the size and cost and complexity
of the Europa mission. So the studies are going forward. The
designs and the missions are being revamped so that the decadal
recommendations can be followed and yet there is no commitment
being made. I am perplexed.
Chairman Palazzo. Dr. Green, would you like to comment?
Dr. Green. Yes, I would. Of course, we all know our roles
and responsibilities within the Federal Government. OMB, is
role, of course, is one of developing budget with OSTP's use of
the President's priorities and then implementing that through
interactions with the agencies and moving forward. My role
within the Federal Government is to advocate for planetary
science. I am the top official for the advocate for planetary
science as we move forward. We recognize in this environment a
difficult budget situation that we are in that compromises have
to be made, decisions have to be executed that are based on the
Administration's priority. Currently, OMB has not officially
notified NASA of canceling Mars 2016 or 2018. And so those
discussions are ongoing. We meet with OMB on a regular basis.
They know the details of our studies. We have worked with them
quite intimately and of course we are eagerly awaiting what the
ultimate priorities will be and whether we will be able to
proceed with the Mars 2016 and 2018 mission as our partnership
with ESA has delineated.
Chairman Palazzo. Thank you.
I now recognize our Ranking Member, Ms. Edwards from
Maryland.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to both
of our witnesses, and Dr. Green, I have to tell you, when I
hear your testimony and I see you, what I see is a person of
science who has real enthusiasm for the work that you are
doing. It actually radiates, and so you have given me that
energy too, and so thank you.
I want to get right to it. First of all, Dr. Green, did OMB
review the testimony that you are giving to this Subcommittee
today?
Dr. Green. Yes, OMB as our normal procedure does review our
written testimony.
Ms. Edwards. And did they have to approve it before you
could submit it to the Subcommittee?
Dr. Green. Yes, that is the normal process.
Ms. Edwards. And Dr. Green, Dr. Squyres testified that the
National Academies has deemed the joint NASA/ESA Mars sample
collection and caching mission to be the highest priority
flagship mission in planetary science, and I appreciate Dr.
Squyres' testimony about the importance of balance within the
mission directorate. Yet according to Dr. Squyres, and I quote,
``To date, however, the Administration has not committed to
this partnership.'' Is Dr. Squyres correct in saying that the
Administration has not yet committed to the NASA/ESA mission?
Dr. Green. As I mentioned earlier, we have not been
notified by OMB that Mars 2016 or 2018 has been cancelled.
Therefore, our approach is to continue to work with ESA,
continue to find ways to lower our costs and meet both of the
objectives from European Space Agency and for NASA.
Ms. Edwards. But have you gotten an explicit commitment
from the Administration on the NASA/ESA partnership?
Dr. Green. Based on the fact that OMB has not cancelled
officially the 2016 and 2018 mission, which is part of our
Statement of Intent that Administrator Bolden and Director
General Dordain signed in 2009, we are proceeding on good faith
in our connections with ESA and continuing to plan this
mission.
Ms. Edwards. But not because you have gotten an explicit
commitment from the Administration?
Dr. Green. We believe that because we have a signed
amendment, a Statement of Intent to proceed on these studies,
that we will continue to do so.
Ms. Edwards. Dr. Squyres, do you believe that there is an
explicit commitment on behalf of the Administration for the
NASA/ESA mission?
Dr. Squyres. I have had the opportunity to engage in
conversation with individuals at the Office of Management and
Budget, and in those conversations, I have been told the
Administration is at this current time not ready to make such a
commitment.
Ms. Edwards. Okay. And so Dr. Green, does NASA want to do
the mission?
Dr. Green. NASA does want to do this mission.
Ms. Edwards. Does ESA want to do the mission?
Dr. Green. ESA does want to do this mission, and in fact,
we need each other more than ever before.
Let me comment and take this time to talk a little bit
about that relationship because it is extremely important to
understand. In the past, our connections with a European
partner or another agency have always been who leads the
mission, and one mission at a time. The particular effort that
we are engaging with ESA is for a series of missions, and
instead of a small contribution, it is a major contribution on
each other's part. So this is a long-term partnership that we
are moving forward with and we have the agreement by Director
General Dordain of ESA and Administrator Bolden to continue
aggressively to pursue our programs. So indeed, NASA is fully
behind the 2016 and 2018 mission.
Ms. Edwards. So let me just be clear. The scientists at
NASA want to do the mission?
Dr. Green. Yes.
Ms. Edwards. At ESA, they want to do the mission?
Dr. Green. Yes.
Ms. Edwards. Congress hasn't prohibited it.
Dr. Green. Yes.
Ms. Edwards. So who is blocking the two agencies from
moving forward?
Dr. Green. As I had mentioned earlier, OMB takes their job
seriously of looking throughout the Federal Government for
opportunities to overall lower the costs to this Nation, the
taxpayers, and consequently, they are using a system of
priorities to be able to look at these programs to decide which
will move forward and which will be cancelled.
Ms. Edwards. You know what, Dr. Green? I don't want to put
you in the position of having to answer that question. What I
want to know and it would be helpful to hear from OMB directly
about why things are being held up and who is holding them up,
given that the two agencies that would be principally
responsible for moving this forward at the recommendation in
the decadal survey as we have heard from Dr. Squyres why we are
sitting in a holding pattern. And so I look forward to hearing
from OMB about that.
And Dr. Squyres, just as I finish here, I just want to be
clear. Is there anybody in particular at OMB who told you about
the Administration's willingness or unwillingness to commit to
the partnership with ESA?
Dr. Squyres. Yes, it was a meeting with Sally Ericsson.
Ms. Edwards. Thank you.
Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize the gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Green and Dr. Squyres, in the last 20 years or so, the
search for extraterrestrial intelligence has become, I think, a
serious academic and scientific subject. How do you feel that
the National Academies of Science think about the likelihood of
microlife being found in our own solar system? Dr. Green, let
us start with you and then go to Dr. Squyres.
Dr. Green. One of the aspects of planetary science is in
the area of astrobiology--what we have been doing is looking
at, does life live in extreme places on this planet, and in
many of these extreme places, we do find life.
Mr. Smith. Actually, you are anticipating my next question,
but let me go back to that first one again. National Academies
of Science, do they think there is a strong likelihood of life
being found in our solar system?
Dr. Green. The National Academy through the planetary
decadal has a major undercurrent of astrobiology science that
is in it. It is indeed all about looking at regions in the
solar system with the potential of habitability and the
potential of life. So yes, indeed, it does.
Mr. Smith. And now my next question that you anticipated,
again to ask both of you, and actually, Dr. Squyres mentioned
it a while ago, the possibility of life being found on Mars or
Europa and right before this hearing today you were saying to
me that if we just find a thimbleful of water, it is very
likely that that is going to contain some form of life. So do
you think or do you want to say today that it is almost certain
that we will find microlife on Mars and Europa? Dr. Squyres.
Dr. Squyres. Sir, I learned a long time ago, about eight
years, when we first landed our rovers on Mars, not to predict.
Mr. Smith. I know where you are going and therefore give me
a percentage of likelihood.
Dr. Squyres. You know, if I could do that, sir, I would be
so----
Mr. Smith. If you say 100 percent, you will make a lot of
news today.
Dr. Squyres. Yeah, I would be thrilled. What I would like
to say is that it is no coincidence that the two highest
priority planetary flagship missions recommended were to Mars
and Europa. What sets those worlds apart is their potential for
life, and it is the judgment of the National Academy of
Sciences and National Research Council that the probability is
high enough that there could be life on those worlds or could
have been life on those worlds that it is worth investing the
resources in those flagship missions.
Dr. Green. Dr. Squyres, let me use a legal term. Is it more
likely than not we will find life on Mars and Europa, or one or
the other if you think it is more likely than one.
Dr. Squyres. I simply don't know, and that is the nature of
science, sir.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Dr. Green?
Dr. Green. I would agree with everything Steve said.
Mr. Smith. You are not going to bite at ``more likely than
not''?
Dr. Green. If we don't have the opportunity to look, we
will never know.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Fair enough. Let me on my next question to
both--actually, Dr. Green, I am going to pass on you. I don't
want to put you on the spot either, but let me direct my next
question to Dr. Squyres, and it is a follow-up to the
Chairman's question a while ago about OMB. OMB is clearly
saying that they feel there is not enough money for all the
planetary missions, and clearly they are, I think, picking and
choosing what they consider to be the Administration's
priorities. My question, Dr. Squyres, is this. Do you think the
Administration's priorities are the general consensus
priorities of the scientific community?
Dr. Squyres. The general----
Mr. Smith. And if not, where do they differ?
Dr. Squyres. The general consensus priorities of the
science community are, I believe, those expressed in the
decadal report. So to the extent that the Administration's
position differs, than it differs from the scientific
consensus.
Mr. Smith. Okay. What would be examples of that?
Dr. Squyres. Examples of that would be an unwillingness to
commit to these high-priority flagship missions despite the
fact that NASA has labored heroically and I believe
successfully to bring their costs into the affordable range,
indeed, into the range of budget projections that have been
provided publicly by OMB. So it is a little bit perplexing when
you see OMB's budget projections, which by the way are
declining precipitously for planetary exploration, which is
another issue for this Committee to consider. But even given
that, the missions that NASA has now restructured in response
to the decadal survey fit within the projected budget profiles
and yet the agency has not been given the opportunity to move
forward with those anyway.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Thank you, Dr. Squyres. Thank you, Dr.
Green.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Palazzo. Ms. Fudge, I understand you don't have
any questions at this time?
Ms. Fudge. That is correct.
Chairman Palazzo. So at this time the Chair recognizes Mr.
Rohrabacher from California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Green, what was the original budget estimates that we
approved of for the James Webb telescope?
Dr. Green. Because that is not in my direct field nor am I
involved in any of the budget determinations of James Webb, I
will have to get back to you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Dr. Squyres, do you know that?
Dr. Squyres. No, sir, I do not.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let me remind you, it was $1.6 billion,
and I suppose you don't know how much today we are being asked
to complete the program.
Dr. Green. I believe the James Webb group has completed
their initial, or their review of a re-plan and have provided
to Congress that cost estimate.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right. That is $8.8 billion. I would
suggest to you there is a relationship between that cost
overrun and the other cost overrun that we have to deal with
here in Congress, and the success of America's space programs.
Would you agree with that?
Dr. Green. Well, what I try to do within the Planetary
Science Division is to articulate our goals and our priorities
and let the Administration determine its overall priority.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I would suggest that the people of NASA
decide to get involved when certain elements of their operation
and other people within the space program are doing things that
are detrimental to the long-term interests of a well-funded and
effective space program. If there is anything that is a greater
danger, I would say that cost overrides of this nature are
certainly a greater threat to a viable space program than the
asteroid belt or anything else that you would face up there
that God has presented an obstacle for us to moving forward
into space. This is outrageous.
So you have $1.6 billion for the James Webb telescope, now
it is $8.8 billion. Would you think that perhaps the space
launch system at $18 billion now as an estimate might go up
with the same magnitude of an increase in cost? I won't be
burdening you both because obviously you don't know that, it is
not your area, but let me--Mr. Chairman, we need to put on
notice NASA and the rest of these people, these kind of cost
overruns are killing the program, and I certainly appreciate
the great words that you said and I have been a supporter of
the space exploration program. I think it is a gem, an
incredible thing that we can brag about and be proud about as
Americans. What we can't be proud about is this bureaucratic
incompetence that is leading to such massive billion-dollar
expenditures that are coming right out of the heart of these
programs. We have got to get serious about this, and if we are
not, it is not--by the way, I don't believe it is Congressional
back and forth and indecision that is causing these things. I
don't believe that. I believe that we have honestly set forth
some money for programs and we come back all the time with cost
overruns that kill our ability to do any other programs.
Well, I hope that we can send our exploration missions to
Mars and to Europa. I think you are right: that is a noble and
an historic endeavor and should be led by the United States of
America. We might end up having to do cooperation with our
European friends or maybe even the Russians in order to
accomplish these because of these damn cost overruns. Well, I
would hope that people realize you have a right to criticize
other people within the American space program when they are
doing these things that are going to end up with such a
horrible outcome for all of us.
Let me get back to the space launch program, are any of
these missions we are talking about, landing these things on
Mars, the rovers and the various Mars programs and Europa.
Except for a manned mission, is there some reason we need the
megarocket of all times, the space, they call it gigantic or
what--the space Titanic that we are building which will have
its own cost overruns as the iceberg in the way. Do we need
that extra-huge rocket to accomplish any of the missions you
are talking about today?
Dr. Green. Currently, the design of our 2016 and 2018
missions in cooperation with ESA will use the EELVs, the
expendable launch vehicles, that we currently have under
contract through the NLS-2 contract.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So if we end up with a cost overrun which
is now $18 billion at the same level as the cost overrun as the
James Webb telescope, it will suck up all the money from all
these various programs and we don't even need that rocket in
order to accomplish the missions that you are telling us are so
important today. I agree with you. Thank you very much.
Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize the gentleman from
Alabama, Mr. Brooks.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Radioisotope power systems utilize heat converted from the
nuclear decay of radioactive isotopes to generate electricity.
RPSs, as they are commonly known, are frequently used to power
spacecraft that travel large distances and in extreme
environments, yet the United States ended production of
plutonium-238, the key nuclear component of RPSs, back in 1988.
Despite no new production, its use continues. Most recently,
the Mars Science Laboratory used about 3.5 kilograms for the
multi-mission radioisotope thermoelectric generator and the
next Discovery mission has reserved 1.8 kilograms for two
advanced sterling radioisotope generators. The decadal survey
indicates that in order to complete the recommended program,
new plutonium-238 production is essential or more deliveries
from Russia will be necessary. It concluded, and I quote, ``The
committee is alarmed at the status of plutonium-238
availability for planetary exploration. Without a restart of
plutonium-238 production, it will be impossible for the United
States or any other country to conduct certain important types
of planetary missions after this decade.''
Dr. Green, what programs are in jeopardy if production does
not get underway for plutonium-238?
Dr. Green. Mr. Brooks, as you know, Congress actually has
been quite generous in allowing us to have the funding
necessary to work with the Department of Energy to move forward
in developing the plans necessary to restart the production of
plutonium-238 that as you point out so well is vital to many of
our missions in the future. We feel confident that as we move
forward in this budgetary process and as our relationships with
Department of Energy are quite excellent that we will begin to
do that development of the capability that then will generate
the fuel necessary for the future. So I believe we are on the
path to do that, and once again I want to thank Congress for
recognizing that and enabling us to facilitate that.
Mr. Brooks. Well, the House Appropriations Subcommittee for
Energy and Water denied funding for DOE for plutonium-238, but
back to my question. What programs are in jeopardy if
production does not get underway?
Dr. Green. We do have a limited supply of plutonium-238 in
the Department of Energy and so consequently that will be used
for potential missions such as, as you mentioned, our Discovery
mission. We are using plutonium-238 for the Mars Science
Laboratory right now. There is a lot of discussion based on
what the 2018 mission will look like and where it needs to go,
whether plutonium-238 will be needed for that.
Our Discovery program and our New Horizons, or New
Frontiers program and many of its missions all require
plutonium-238 to be able to be accomplished. So indeed, many of
the missions throughout the planetary decadal--and this is one
of the reasons why they are recommending the ability to produce
this vital material will be in jeopardy if we are not able to
do that by the end of this decade.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Green. Now, further, how long
does it take from the instance we decide to restart production
before we have available plutonium-238? Do you have a judgment
on that?
Dr. Green. We delivered a cost-sharing plan that also
outlines some of the basic capabilities to Congress more than a
year ago, and following that plan, let me just mention a couple
aspects of it. Currently, our need for plutonium is such that
existing capabilities within the Department of Energy can be
utilized. This means that no new facilities have to be
developed but only a time-sharing of the current use of those
facilities. So depending upon the environmental assessment
impacts and other studies that need to be done to then
delineate how we would move forward, production could begin
within the next couple years.
Mr. Brooks. In your judgment, when is the absolute deadline
for production to begin before it starts adversely affecting
some of our NASA missions?
Dr. Green. If we stay on the time scale as I mentioned, we
should be okay.
Mr. Brooks. Well, do you have a judgment as to what that
time frame is? How long?
Dr. Green. We would like to see the production of
plutonium-238 begin within the next several years, and once
that material is produced, there is quite a process--set of
processes that have to kick in to be able to make that
available for future missions and so there is a long lead time
that we have to be cognizant of.
Mr. Brooks. And finally, do you have a judgment as to the
cost to restart plutonium-238 production?
Dr. Green. As delineated in that report, utilizing the
existing facilities in the Department of Energy, that cost
estimate is anywhere between $70 and perhaps $90 million.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Green.
Chairman Palazzo. Mr. Clarke, welcome to the hearing. I
understand you don't have any questions at this time? Okay.
I now recognize the gentlewoman from Florida, Ms. Adams.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Green, there have been several reports in the media
recently that NASA is considering abandoning the flagship Mars
sample and caching mission due to specific direction from OMB.
Do you believe Mars missions to study atmospheric as well as
geophysical conditions are a crucial step for planning a human
exploration to Mars, something for which SLS could be used?
Dr. Green. Indeed, I believe that as the National Academy
has stated in other reports, sample return is absolutely vital
before we provide missions and plan missions for humans to
explore Mars.
Mrs. Adams. Do you believe, could the United States send
humans to Mars safely without this type of scientific inquiry
beforehand?
Dr. Green. Based on the decadal survey and what we know
about Mars, I do believe it is essential that we bring back
samples.
Mrs. Adams. So what role does the cost of launching these
missions play into your budget profile? For example, would it
be possible for NASA to build a satellite or a rover that you
did not have the money to launch it on time?
Dr. Green. I am sorry. Could you please restate that?
Mrs. Adams. What role does the cost of launching these
missions play into your budget profile? For example, would it
be possible for NASA to build a satellite or a rover that you
did not have the money to launch on time?
Dr. Green. Indeed, before we can move forward with any
mission, we have to be able to plan adequately for all aspects
of the mission, so that is our best guess in terms of what it
would cost to develop such a mission along with its science and
instruments, but in addition to that, we also have to budget
for a launch vehicle, and how we do that is, we use the current
contract that NASA has. It is called the NLS-2 contract. Based
on the mass of the spacecraft and other engineering aspects of
that----
Mrs. Adams. Just yes or no at this point, because I have
some other questions.
Dr. Green. Yes, we have to be able to budget for the launch
vehicle within our budget.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you.
Dr. Squyres, let us assume the Administration does not
allow the Mars partnership with ESA to move forward and the ESA
does the mission with Roscosmos? What would be the effect on
American planetary science if European and Russian scientists
having access to Martian soil and rock samples that Americans
do not?
Dr. Squyres. I think there are two detrimental effects.
One, of course, is that science in this Nation would suffer
because we would no longer have the ability to do the cutting-
edge science because the cutting-edge science requires access
to materials that we would not have. The other is that having
lost the capability to fly such missions, we would be poorly
positioned to develop other important science missions beyond
that, so I think we would lose two ways.
Mrs. Adams. You state in your written testimony that you
believe the publicly available budget guidelines given to NASA
by OMB are sufficient to allow Mars sample collection if we
partner with ESA. If the budget profile is sufficient, the
skill sets are available and the partner is willing, what is
stopping the mission from moving forward?
Dr. Squyres. In my view, it has been the unwillingness to
date of the Administration to commit to that partnership.
Mrs. Adams. And there is a widely held perception that NASA
is no longer in charge of developing its missions and it is
instead being directed by OMB on which missions to pursue. What
is the danger to U.S. scientific leadership and to the
scientific community as a whole if this indeed is the case?
Does this undermine the legitimate work of the decadal survey
process?
Dr. Squyres. The decadal survey was our best attempt as a
community of planetary scientists to state priorities for space
exploration. It was carried out at the request of NASA. We gave
them our best considered advice as a community of literally
thousands of planetary scientists and it is important to us to
either see that advice followed or to understand why it has not
been.
Mrs. Adams. What is the danger to U.S. scientific
leadership and the scientific community as a whole?
Dr. Squyres. The danger to our leadership is that we could
lose it, flat out. We have a capability as a Nation to do deep
space exploration that no other entity on this planet
possesses. We are better at this than anybody. And I would like
to see this Nation maintain that capability not just for the
science of these missions but for the utility that that
capability has to conduct other missions in the future that we
can't even conceive of at this time.
Mrs. Adams. And just to be clear, Dr. Green, you said that
OMB is the President's priority basically, correct?
Dr. Green. Well, the President----
Mrs. Adams. Yes or no.
Dr. Green. Yes.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Palazzo. At this time we will go into a second
round of questions for any Members that would like to ask
additional questions, and I will go ahead and recognize myself
first.
Dr. Squyres, or Dr. Squyres, in your dealings with our
international partners, most notably, the European Space
Agency, do you sense frustration with the United States or a
growing unwillingness to partner with us in the future?
Dr. Squyres. I hope, sir, that there is not a growing
unwillingness, and no, I have not sensed a growing
unwillingness. In fact, I have sensed exactly the opposite,
that there is an enthusiasm to future partnerships. It has not
been my perception in talking to my European colleagues that
they have concluded yet that we are an unreliable partner. I
sense enthusiasm. I do sort of sense frustration.
Chairman Palazzo. What is the scientific rationale for a
Mars sample return mission, and why is this deemed as the most
important flagship mission for the coming decade?
Dr. Squyres. I was hoping somebody would ask that. Mars
sample return is, in the view of our community, and the next
logical step in Mars exploration. If you look at what we have
accomplished at Mars in the last 15 to 20 years, we are now to
the point where the most significant step forward can come from
bringing samples back. The reason for that is that, it is
twofold. First of all, we have learned enough about Mars to
know the kinds of places we must go to get the most important
samples so we are ready. The other thing, and this is coming
from somebody who has devoted his career to building
instruments and sending them to Mars is that the best science
is always going to get done in laboratories on Earth. The kind
of instrumentation that exists in laboratories on Earth far
surpasses in its capability what you could ever hope to send to
the Martian surface on a robotic vehicle.
Moreover, it is important to recognize that return samples
are in a sense a gift that keeps on giving. The very best
science ever done with samples collected from the moon during
the Apollo program 40-plus years ago is being done today by
scientists who had not been born at the time those samples were
collected using instruments that had not been conceived of. So
if you can bring samples back, they not only enable you to do
cutting-edge science today but they enable you to do it for
potentially decades into the future.
Chairman Palazzo. I now recognize our Ranking Member, Ms.
Fudge from Ohio.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Both of these questions will be to both or either, but
preferably both. Thank you for coming. With the prospects of
flat or reduced budgets for planetary sciences, NASA will be
challenged to initiate expensive flagship missions while also
maintaining a balanced program that includes small- and medium-
sized missions. To both of our panelists, our witnesses, what
are the options for pursuing top-priority flagship planetary
missions and how should Congress weigh in on those options?
Dr. Green. For us to be able in the planetary budget, which
is declining, that the President submitted to Congress in
February, indeed, that is very challenging, and for us to be
able to pull off the decadal recommendations of a balanced
portfolio with small, medium and large flagship missions, we
have to be able to partner, and with ESA we have found an
outstanding partner. They have been fabulous throughout our
entire connections over the years and we have done a number of
major things together, and this partnership is very strong.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you.
Dr. Squyres. The only thing that I would add to Dr. Green's
statement is that I would like personally to commend the agency
on the work that they have done along these lines already. When
we wrote the decadal report, we identified the need to
dramatically reduce the scope, cost and complexity of both the
Mars and Europa missions, and NASA has already taken
substantial strides forward in doing both of those.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you.
To what extent is NASA's Robotic Planetary Science program
an enabler for human exploration missions beyond low Earth
orbit?
Dr. Green. You know, while humans are developing the
capability to leave low Earth orbit, this is really the decade
for planetary scientists. In other words, the President's
agenda for which he has a flexible path, a number of
destinations, we are there discovering a variety of aspects of
that phenomenon looking at the hazards, understanding what
those environments are all about. That is absolutely essential.
You know, human exploration is not Star Trek. It is not go
where no man has gone before. It really involves detailed
studies of a variety of objects that human exploration is
planning to go to such as back to the moon, asteroids, and of
course, Mars. So this is a perfect time for us to be able to
really get down to business and do a tremendous amount of
science in support of human exploration also.
Dr. Squyres. Yeah, I will just add that one of the things
that we stressed in the decadal report was the way in which
these missions to targets that are potential targets for human
exploration can lay the groundwork for that, and this is
something NASA has done since almost the beginning of the
agency. I teach a course at Cornell about the history of
exploration, and I was just talking to my class the other day
about the way that the Apollo landings on the moon were
preceded by the Ranger missions and the Surveyor missions and
the lunar orbiter missions and all of those missions laid the
groundwork that was partially enabling for the success of
Apollo. I think the same can happen at asteroids. I think the
same can happen at Mars.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Palazzo. Seeing no other Members with additional
questions, we will bring this hearing to a close. I thank the
witnesses for their valuable testimony and the Members for
their questions. The Members of the Subcommittee may have
additional questions for the witnesses, and we will ask you to
respond to those in writing. The record will remain open for
two weeks for additional comments from Members.
The witnesses are excused and this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:13 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Jim Green,
Planetary Science Division Director,
Science Mission Directorate,
National Aeronautics and Space Administration

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Steve Squyres, Chair,
Committee on the Planetary Science
Decadal Survey, National Academies of Science

Questions submitted by Subcommittee Chairman Steven Palazzo

Q1.  Your testimony cites the importance of a balanced program, and
included in such a program is the Research & Analysis (R&A) component.
It is this program where discoveries are generated, where analysis is
conducted, and where opportunities to train our future scientists
begin. Is the R&A account being unjustly raided to pay for the more
visible programs, such as the flagships? How do you recommend
preserving the vital balance among different sized programs given
current budgetary constraints?

A1. It has not been my impression that the R&A program has been
unjustly raided to pay for other programs. On the contrary, NASA
management has done a good job to date of protecting the R&A program,
as recommended in the decadal survey report. The decadal report
recommends specific levels of R&A funding for the decade 2013-2022, and
states that high priority should be placed on preserving this funding.
Some flexibility in R&A funding in the face of declining budgets,
however, is consistent with the decadal recommendations.

Q2.  In your view, can NASA meet its mission objectives for Mars 2018
and the future Mars Sample Return missions without flying Mars 2016?

A2. I know of no technical reasons related to Mars 2018 and beyond that
require the Mars 2016 mission to be flown. There could, however, be a
programmatic reason. Strong participation by the European Space Agency
(ESA) in the Mars missions in 2018 and beyond is necessary in order for
them to be affordable to NASA. If NASA were to pull out of the 2016
mission, this action could threaten the partnership with ESA for 2018
and beyond.

Questions submitted by Ranking Member Jerry Costello

Q1.  What puts the Mars program in the must-have category as opposed to
the nice-to-have category? How can I convince my colleagues in Congress
and my constituents that Mars is of national importance in these
fiscally constrained times?

A1. Mars is unique among the planets in being enough like Earth that we
can imagine life once having taken hold there. This means that Mars is
a place that we can go to seek answers to truly basic questions like
whether we are alone in the Universe, and how life began. Such
questions are among the most important faced by science, and are of
interest to every thinking person. It is these characteristics that
make Mars special.

Q2.  How important is it for the United States to maintain its
leadership in Mars exploration following the launch of the Mars Science
Laboratory? What is needed now in order to sustain our Nation's
leadership in Mars robotic exploration?

A2. I believe it is crucial for the United States to maintain this
leadership, both because of the importance of Mars science that I cited
above, and the difficulty of re-establishing this leadership if it is
lost. In order to sustain our leadership position, a new high-priority
mission of Mars exploration is needed--like the Mars Sample Return
campaign recommended by the planetary decadal survey.

Q3.  Congress, through the House and Senate appropriations bills for FY
12, and through successive Authorization Acts, has supported a robust
planetary science program, including robotic Mars exploration. What
criteria should Congress use to evaluate any proposals that would
disrupt the systematic robotic exploration of Mars that has been built-
up over the past decade?

A3. I believe that the appropriate criterion to use is consistency with
the recommendations of the National Research Council's planetary
decadal survey. This survey involved inputs from more than a thousand
professional planetary scientists, and represents the consensus
recommendations of that community to the United States government
regarding NASA's planetary program.

Q4.  If the U.S. reneges on the joint Mars initiative with ESA, what
would be the impact of a hiatus in our ability to sustain knowledge of
the Red Planet?

a.  Would we be ceding hard-earned leadership to other countries?

A4 (a). It's likely. We certainly would be giving up hard-earned
leadership, and there are many other national and international space
agencies that have both the capability and the intention to take on a
leading role in Mars exploration.

b.  Would other countries view us as an unreliable partner in future
space endeavors?

A4 (b). In my opinion, that would be a very serious risk.

Q5.  NASA has many technical capabilities. Why is the ability to land
and rove on Mars, which you refer to as being a national ``crown
jewel'', so hard to master and what would be the implication if the
United States stood down its robotic exploration of Mars for a period
of time?

A5. Landing and roving on Mars is so difficult because it is impossible
to predict the exact environmental conditions in the martian atmosphere
and at the martian surface. Any such spacecraft, therefore, must be
capable of surviving a wide range of possible conditions. Landing and
roving on Mars is, in my opinion, the most difficult thing we do in
planetary exploration. If we stand down our robotic exploration of Mars
for a long time it will be very difficult to re-start it, due to the
loss of critical workforce.

Q6.  How important are the strategic capabilities, scientific
knowledge, and technical experience that the U.S. has gained through
Mars and planetary science missions to NASA's future plans for solar
system exploration and human exploration beyond low-Earth orbit?

A6. They are crucial. The most important long-term target for human
space exploration is Mars. Today's robotic Mars program is laying the
essential groundwork for the future program of human Mars exploration.

Q7.  With the prospects of flat or reduced budgets for planetary
sciences, NASA will be challenged to initiate expensive flagship
missions while also maintaining a balanced program that includes small
and medium-sized missions. What are the options for pursuing top-
priority flagship missions and how should Congress weigh those options?

A7. Three approaches are crucial to making flagship missions
affordable. First, flagship mission development should be characterized
by adequate up-front investment in technology development, and very
conservative cost estimation practices. These work together to reduce
the risk of future overruns. Second, the scope of flagship missions
must be limited and in some cases reduced. The planetary decadal survey
report recommended substantial descoping of the two highest priority
planetary flagship missions, including the 2018 Mars sample caching
rover mission. Third, NASA should vigorously pursue strategic
partnerships with capable international partners like ESA to reduce the
total cost to the U.S. of high priority flagships.

Questions submitted by Subcomittee Ranking Member Donna Edwards

Q1.  In your prepared statement, you note that ``the publicly-available
budget guidelines that have been provided to NASA by the Office of
Management and Budget are sufficient to allow the Agency to carry out
the Mars sample return collection and caching mission.'' Could you
please explain the budget guidelines to which you are referring and why
you believe the Agency could carry out the Mars missions under those
guidelines?

A1. I am referring to the sharply-decreasing five-year projection for
the NASA planetary science budget provided in the FY 2012 budget
request. Specifically, those numbers were $1,488.9M in FY'12, $1,365.7M
in FY'13, $1,326.4M in FY'14, $1,271.0M in FY'15, and $1,188.9M in
FY'16. I believe the Agency could carry out the Mars program even under
those very harsh guidelines because of the substantial progress they
have made in reducing the scope of the program--most notably
reconfiguring the 2018 mission to include just one rover.

Q2.  The planetary science decadal survey committee, which you chaired,
recommended Mars Sample Return as its top priority in the large mission
category over the next decade.

a.  What guidance did the committee provide on how this priority
should be treated within a severely constrained fiscal environment?

A2 (a). The decadal guidance on this point had three main components.
First, it recommended that Mars Sample Return only be carried if the
cost to NASA of the 2018 mission could be reduced to no more than $2.5
billion. (Current projections are substantially less than that.)
Second, it recommended that it only be carried out if a partnership
with ESA could be arranged for the entire Mars Sample Return campaign.
Third, it recommended that if severe cuts to NASA's planetary program
become necessary, they should be implemented by descoping or delaying
(but not eliminating) flagship missions.

b.  How does uncertainty in the Mars program planning for 2016 and
2018 launch opportunities affect capabilities needed to implement Mars
Sample Return?

A2 (b). It affects it in several ways. One is that the 2018 mission is
intended to kick off the Mars Sample Return campaign with a sample
collection and caching rover. If that mission becomes uncertain, the
whole campaign becomes uncertain. Another is that uncertainty in 2016
and 2018 could weaken or ruin the partnership with ESA, which is
necessary to make Mars Sample Return affordable to NASA. Finally, as I
discuss below, uncertainty in 2016 and 2018 could lead to loss of
critical workforce capabilities within NASA, particularly at the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory.

Q3.  Some argue that funding to enable NASA to implement the planetary
science decadal survey priorities should be taken from the nation's
human spaceflight program. In your view, is that a good idea or not?

A3. In my view, that is a very bad idea. Human spaceflight has always
been central to the goals of NASA, and my personal opinion is that it
should remain central to those goals.

Q4.  With respect to offsets for the increases required to fund the
James Webb Space Telescope, has the science community within NASA or
external to NASA been asked for input on how those offsets are to be
made, especially with respect to planetary science?

A4. I am not aware of any requests to the science community for input
on how such offsets should be made.

b.  Has NASA or the Office of Management and Budget shared any
proposals on how those offsets might be made, and if so, what is your
reaction?

A4 (b). I am not aware of any publicly available proposals for how such
offsets might be made. I presume that OMB's intentions on this point
will be made clear in the FY'13 budget submission.

Q5.  If the NASA-European Space Agency (ESA) collaboration on Mars is
not allowed to go forward, what will be the impact on the NASA Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in California, the nation's premier
resource for planetary exploration?

A5. I fear it will be substantial. Specifically, I am deeply concerned
about the potential loss of some of the most talented members of JPL's
workforce.

b.  How hard will it be for JPL and the nation to preserve the skills
and capabilities needed to land on Mars at some point in the future if
the planned NASA-ESA collaboration is not approved?

A5 (b). It will be extremely difficult. The people at JPL who know how
to land on Mars are some of NASA's best. And they don't just know how
to land on Mars--they are aerospace engineers with broad talents and
deep knowledge. They are people who are drawn to a challenge and who
have skills that are much in demand. If there is no new planetary
exploration challenge for them to meet within NASA, I fear that they
will go elsewhere.

c.  What is the mood at JPL--is the workforce nervous about the
future after Mars Science Lab is launched?

A5 (c). In my recent conversations with scientists and engineers at
JPL, the mood is very nervous. The Laboratory is justifiably proud of
recent successes at Mars, and people are excited about the prospects
for new discoveries with MSL. But JPL's bread and butter is development
of new deep space missions, and unless there will be a flagship
planetary mission after MSL, JPL's workforce faces major uncertainties.

Q6.  What has been the impact of America's systematic approach to Mars
exploration on inspiring the next generation to pursue science and
engineering careers?

A6. I believe it has been substantial. I have received dozens, perhaps
hundreds, of emails and letters from students and parents telling me
how the career goals of young people have been shaped by the excitement
generated by NASA's Mars program. I honestly believe that this
inspiration may ultimately be one of the most important legacies of the
Mars program, in the same way that inspiring today's space scientists
and engineers--myself included--was a major legacy of Apollo.

Q7.  Is there any way to measure how a reduction in the pace of Mars
exploration or a stand down in Mars missions would affect student
interest in science and engineering?

A7. That strikes me as a difficult quantity to measure, but I am not an
expert in educational metrics. Perhaps that would be a good question to
pose to NASA's Education Program.

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Submitted Statement for the Record by The Planetary Society

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Submitted Statement for the Record by Dr. Mark Sykes, CEO and Director
of the Planetary Science Institute

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


