- OVERSIGHT OF THE NETWORKING AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND PRIORITIES FOR THE FUTURE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE NETWORKING AND
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
AND PRIORITIES FOR THE FUTURE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-37

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
68-318                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
Tennessee                        FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Research and Science Education

HON. MO BROOKS, Alabama, Chair
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       PAUL D. TONKO, New York
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, September 21, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Mo Brooks, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Research and Science Education, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Daniel Lipinski, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Research and Science Education,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    10
Written Statement............................................    12

Witnesses:

George Strawn, Director, National Coordination Office, Networking
and Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD)
Program
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15

Edward Lazowska, Director eScience Institute/Bill and Melinda
Gates Chair, University of Washington
Oral Statement...............................................    27
Written Statement............................................    28

Robert Sproull, Director of Oracle Labs, retired
Oral Statement...............................................    33
Written Statement............................................    35

Robert Schnabel, Dean, School of Informatics, Indiana University
Oral Statement...............................................    41
Written Statement............................................    42

Discussion
...............................................................    47

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

George Strawn, Director, National Coordination Office, Networking
and Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD)
Program........................................................    60

Edward Lazowska, Director eScience Institute/Bill and Melinda
Gates Chair, University of Washington..........................    66

Robert Sproull, Director of Oracle Labs, retired.................    70

Robert Schnabel, Dean, School of Informatics, Indiana University.    72

OVERSIGHT OF THE NETWORKING AND

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

AND PRIORITIES FOR THE FUTURE

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Science Education,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:04 p.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mo Brooks
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Oversight of the Networking and Information Technology Research and
Development Program and Priorities for the Future

wednesday, september 21, 2011

2:00 p.m.--4:00 p.m.

2318 rayburn house office building

Purpose

On Wednesday, September 21, 2011, at 2:00 p.m. the Subcommittee on
Research and Science Education will hold a hearing to review the
networking and information technology research and development (NITRD)
program to ensure U.S. leadership in networking and information
technology and to discuss priorities for the future.

Witnesses

Dr. George Strawn, Director, National Coordination
Office, Networking and Information Technology Research and Development
(NITRD) Program

Dr. Edward Lazowska, Bill & Melinda Gates Chair in
Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington

Dr. Robert Sproull, Director of Oracle Labs, retired

Dr. Robert Schnabel, Dean, School of Informatics, Indiana
University

Overview

Advances in networking and information technology (NIT)
continue to transform the world in which we live. We increasingly rely
on the systems, tools, and services of this ever-growing and ever-
changing domain. It is not only as a matter of convenience in our daily
lives, but critical to our future economic prosperity, health, and
security.

The Networking and Information Technology Research and
Development (NITRD) Program is the federal government's mechanism for
coordinating the Nation's unclassified NIT research and development
(R&D) investments. NITRD's formal membership consists of 14 federal
agencies while many additional agencies participate in program
activities.

NITRD was originally authorized in the High-Performance
Computing Act of 1991 to help coordinate ongoing high-performance
computing programs throughout the federal government. The Act was
amended in 1998 and 2007. In the 111th Congress, the U.S. House of
Representatives passed the Networking and Information and Technology
Research and Development Reauthorization Act twice. The Senate did not
take up H.R. 2020 and removed the language in the 2010 America COMPETES
Reauthorization Act.

As required by law, in December 2010, the President's
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) released its
report, Designing a Digital Future: Federally Funded Research and
Development in Networking and Information Technology. The report finds
that ``NITRD is well coordinated and that the U.S. computing research
community, coupled with a vibrant NIT industry, has made seminal
discoveries and advanced new technologies that are helping to meet many
societal challenges,'' but also notes the need for more accurate
accounting and additional investments in basic research. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology,
Report to the President and Congress December 2010,Designing a Digital
Future: Federally Funded Research and Develpment in Networking and
Information Technology, p.v.

The Fiscal Year 2012 (FY 12) budget request for agency
programs captured under NITRD is $3.9 billion, roughly $200 million
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
more than the FY10 actual amount.

Background

Federal support for research and development in networking and
information technology (NIT) originally stemmed from an interest in and
the challenge of developing computers capable of addressing complex
problems, primarily those focused on national security and global
competition. Now, several decades after the dawn of the digital
revolution, NIT encompasses a broad array of technologies from smart
phones to digital libraries and cloud computing. Having changed the way
we listen to music, drive our cars, and communicate with each other,
this ever-growing field has led to the creation of many of the
technologies and systems we rely on daily.
Additionally, research and development (R&D) in NIT provides a
greater understanding of how to protect essential systems and networks,
systems and networks that support fundamental sectors of our economy,
from emergency communications and power grids to air-traffic control
networks and national defense systems. NIT R&D works to prevent or
minimize disruptions to critical information infrastructure, to protect
public and private services, to detect and respond to threats while
mitigating the severity of and assisting in the recovery from those
threats, in an effort to support a more stable and secure Nation.

Networking and Information Technology Research and Development Program
(NITRD)

The Networking and Information Technology Research and Development
(NITRD) program is the main federal R&D investment portfolio in
networking, computing, software, cybersecurity, and related information
technologies. NITRD coordinates this unclassified R&D across 14 federal
agencies (see Table 1).

The NITRD program has played a role in several important
technological advances including the computational decoding of the
human genome; modeling and simulation of complex physical systems
(aircraft, automobiles, power grids, and pharmaceuticals); unmanned
aerial vehicles, search-and-rescue robots; and computer-based education
and training.
The Subcommittee on NITRD of the National Science and Technology
Council (NSTC) is the internal deliberative organization for NITRD
policy, program, and budget guidance. The NITRD Subcommittee includes
representatives from each participating agency, as well as the Office
of Management and Budget (OMB). The Subcommittee coordinates the
planning, budgeting, implementation, and reviews of NIT R&D across the
NITRD member agencies to help assure continued U.S. leadership, satisfy
the needs of the federal government for advanced IT capabilities, and
accelerate development and deployment of new technologies. \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\  About the Subcommittee on Networking and Information
Technology Research and Development (NITRD Subcommittee), http://
www.nitrd.gov/subcommittee/program.aspx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NITRD research activities are organized in eight Program Component
Areas (PCAs). The PCAs also align the NITRD program budget categories.
The eight PCAs include: Cybersecurity Information Assurance (CSIA);
Human Computer Interaction and Information Management (HCI & IM); High
Confidence Software and Systems (HCSS); High End Computing
Infrastructure and Applications (HEC I&A); High End Computing Research
and Development (HEC R&D); Large Scale Networking (LSN); Software
Design and Productivity (SDP); and Social, Economic, and Workforce
Implications of IT and IT Workforce Development (SEW). \5\ However,
NITRD research areas and activities shift regularly as the NIT field
creates and develops new R&D challenges.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  NITRD Program PCA Definitions, http://www.nitrd.gov/
subcommittee/pca-definitions.aspx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The NITRD National Coordination Office (NCO) provides staff support
for the NITRD program. The NCO provides program and financial
management services, technical and subject matter expertise in
facilitation, strategic planning, technical writing, networking and
information technology services, and administrative staff support for
the NITRD Subcommittee and other NITRD subgroups. The National Science
Foundation (NSF) serves as the host agency for the NCO. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  About the Subcommittee on Networking and Information
Technology Research and Development (NITRD Subcommittee), http://
www.nitrd.gov/subcommittee/program.aspx.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legislative History

Congress originally authorized NITRD in the High-Performance
Computing Act of 1991 (P.L. 102-194), after recognizing that a number
of federal agencies had ongoing high-performance computing programs
without a coordinating body. The Act established that coordinating body
to improve interagency coordination, cooperation, and planning among
those agencies with high-performance computing programs. In addition,
it authorized a multi-agency research effort, called the High-
Performance Computing and Communications program, to accelerate
progress in the advancement of computing and networking technologies
and to support leading edge computational research in a range of
science and engineering fields. The statute established a set of
mechanisms and procedures to provide for the interagency planning,
coordination, and budgeting of the research and development activities
carried out under the program. The Act has since been amended through
the Next Generation Internet Research Act of 1998 and the America
COMPETES Act of 2007.
In 2007, the America COMPETES Act amended the existing statute in
several ways:

Specified that the external advisory committee for the
program must carry out biennial reviews of the funding, content and
management of the interagency R&D program and report its findings to
Congress;

Required the Office of Science and Technology Policy
(OSTP) to develop and maintain a roadmap for developing and deploying
high-performance computing (high-end) systems; and

Clarified that grand challenge problems supported under
the interagency program are intended to involve multidisciplinary teams
of researchers working on science and engineering problems.

NITRD Reauthorization in the 111th Congress

In the 111th Congress, the U.S. House of Representatives passed
H.R. 2020, the National Information and Technology Research and
Development Reauthorization Act. (See Appendix A for details.) The bill
sought to prioritize and strengthen federal information technology
activities across the federal government by:

Improving program planning and coordination through
strategic planning and an Advisory Council with appropriate policy and
technical expertise;

Rebalancing portfolios to focus less on short-term goals
and more on large-scale, long-term, interdisciplinary research with the
potential to make significant contributions to society and U.S.
competitiveness;

Requiring the program to support R&D in cyber-physical
systems and human-computer interactions, visualization, and information
management, including the convening of a university/industry task force
to explore collaborative R&D activities with participants from
universities, federal labs, industry and other partners; and

Formally codifying the role of the NCO and specifying the
source of funding for the office.

The Senate did not act on this legislation. H.R. 2020 was also made
a part of the House-passed America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of
2010, but the language was removed by the Senate before enactment.

2010 PCAST Report on NITRD

In December 2010, the President's Council of Advisors on Science
and Technology (PCAST) completed a legislatively required report on
NITRD. The report, Designing a Digital Future: Federally Funded
Research and Development in Networking and Information Technology,
found that ``NITRD is well coordinated and that the U.S. computing
research community, coupled with a vibrant Networking and Information
Technology (NIT) industry, has made seminal discoveries and advanced
new technologies that are helping meet many societal challenges.'' \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\  President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology,
Report to the President and Congress December 2010, Designing a Digital
Future: Federally Funded Research and Development in Networking and
Information Technology, p. v.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The 2010 report made several assessments about the role of the NIT
field in answering the Nation's challenges and priorities:

Advances in NIT are a key driver of economic
competitiveness. They create new markets and increase productivity.

Advances in NIT are crucial to achieving our major
national and global priorities in energy and transportation, education
and life-long learning, health care, and national and homeland
security.

Advances in NIT accelerate the pace of discovery in
nearly all other fields.

Advances in NIT are essential to achieving the goals of
open government. \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\  President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology,
Report to the President and Congress December 2010, Designing a Digital
Future: Federally Funded Research and Development in Networking and
Information Technology, p. vii.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Stressing the need that federal investments be in NIT basic
research, since the private sector is heavily involved in the
development side, the report suggests that an investment of at least $1
billion annually will be required for new, potentially transformative
research. The report also recognizes that in the current economic
uncertainty, repurposing and reprioritization of funding will be
necessary, but does not rule out new funding and indicates a lower
level of investment ``could seriously jeopardize America's national
security and economic competitiveness.'' \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\  Ibid., p. x.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The PCAST report includes recommendations for increased investments
in long-term, multi-agency research initiatives in health, energy and
transportation, and cybersecurity. It emphasizes, ``Where fundamental
NIT advances are needed to support these initiatives, mission agencies
should invest in fundamental research in NIT, either alone or in
collaboration with NSF, and should not limit their programs to
application-specific research.'' \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\  Ibid., p. xiii.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The report also calls for exercising leadership to bring about
changes in K-12 STEM education; enhancing the effectiveness of
government coordination of NIT research and development; and redefining
NITRD budget categories to separate NIT infrastructure for R&D in other
fields from NIT R&D.
With specific regard to education, the report finds that ``NIT is
the dominant factor in America's science and technology employment, and
that the gap between the demand for NIT talent and the supply of that
talent is and will remain large.'' \11\ The report recommends
increasing the number of graduates in NIT fields at all degree levels
and calls for the inclusion of computer science in K-12 education.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\  Ibid., p. 85.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NITRD Fiscal Year 2012 Budget Request

In February 2011, NITRD released its Supplement to the President's
Budget request. The Supplement is a summary of the NITRD research
activities planned and coordinated for Fiscal Year 2012 (FY 12) for
each of the participating agencies. The NITRD request totals $3.9
billion for FY 2012, a 1.9 percent increase from FY 10 expenditures,
and reflects many spending priorities recommended in the PCAST report.
The NITRD Supplement breaks down budget requests for each of the 14
federal agencies involved in NITRD according to the PCAs. \12\ (See
Appendix B for details.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\  The Networking and Information Technology Research and
Development Program Supplement to the President's FY 2012 Budget, p.
30.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For agencies within the jurisdiction of the Committee on Science,
Space and Technology, the budget request totals are reflected in Table
3:

Major changes in investments for agencies within the Committee's
jurisdiction include a $152 million (14 percent) increase for the
National Science Foundation (NSF). This amount includes $35 million for
High End Computing R&D for nanotechnology research and the Science,
Engineering, and Education for Sustainability (SEES) effort and
investment in Cyberinfrastructure Framework for the 21st Century
Science and Engineering (CIF21); $22 million for cybersecurity
activities; $60 million primarily to support a National Robotics
Initiative; $12 million for basic research in radio spectrum systems;
and $24 million in SDP for new software centers, CIF21, and increased
SEES investment.
The Department of Energy request includes a $112 million (27
percent) increase: $66 million for research and new partnerships to
address the challenges of emerging disruptive computing technologies
from the private sector; $30 million for cybersecurity research; and
$16 million for installation and operation of an Energy Sciences
Network (ESnet) dedicated optical network.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology includes an
increase of $53 million (65 percent), $25 million of which is to be
used to support new cybersecurity initiatives. The remainder is spread
across other PCAs for interoperability in emerging technologies
activities.

Appendix A

H.R. 2020

The Networking and Information Technology Research and Development Act
of 2009

SECTION-BY-SECTION ANALYSIS

Section 1. Short Title ``Networking and Information Technology Research
and Development Act of 2009.''
Section 2. Program Planning and Coordination
Requires the NITRD agencies to periodically assess the program
contents and funding levels and to update the program accordingly.
Requires the NITRD agencies to develop and periodically update (at
three-year intervals) a strategic plan for the program. The
characteristics and content of the strategic plan are described, and
include strengthening NIT education, fostering technology transfer, and
encouraging innovative, large-scale, and interdisciplinary research.
Encourages a more active role for OSTP in ensuring that the
strategic plan is developed and executed effectively and that the
objectives of the program are met.
Ensures that the existing advisory committee for NITRD is closely
linked to the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
while retaining the necessary breadth and depth of expertise in NIT
fields.
Specifies that the annual report now required for the NITRD program
explicitly describes how the program activities planned and underway
relate to the objectives specified in the strategic plan.
Specifies that the annual report now required for the NITRD program
include a description of research areas supported in accordance with
Section 3, including the same budget information as is required for the
Program Component Areas.
Section 3. Large-Scale Research in Areas of National Importance
Authorizes NITRD agencies to support large-scale, long-term,
interdisciplinary research with the potential to make significant
contributions to society and U.S. economic competitiveness and to
encourage collaboration between at least two agencies as well as cost-
sharing from non-federal sources.
Characteristics of the projects supported include: collaborations
among researchers in institutions of higher education and industry, and
may involve nonprofit research institutions and federal laboratories;
leveraging of federal investments through collaboration with related
State initiatives, when possible; and plans for fostering technology
transfer.
Authorizes support of activities under this section through
interdisciplinary research centers that are organized to investigate
basic research questions and carry out technology demonstration
activities.
Section 4. Cyber-Physical Systems and Information Management
Requires the program to support research and development in cyber-
physical systems; human-computer interactions, visualization, and
information management.
Requires the NCO Director to convene a university/industry task
force to explore mechanisms for carrying out collaborative research and
development activities for cyber-physical systems with participants
from universities, federal laboratories, and industry. The NCO is to
report to Congress on any findings and recommendations from the task
force on models for collaborative R&D.
Section 5. National Coordination Office
Formally establishes the NCO; delineates the office's
responsibilities; mandates annual operating budgets; specifies the
source of funding for the office (consistent with current practice);
and stresses the role of the NCO in developing the strategic plan and
in public outreach and communication with outside communities of
interest.

Chairman Brooks. The Subcommittee on Research and Science
Education will come to order. Good afternoon. As a very quick
preamble, we are expecting votes at any point in time. If we
are called for votes, we will have to break temporarily until
such point as the votes are concluded and then if it is all
right with you, Congressman Lipinski, be back five minutes
after the last vote? We will try to reconvene then five minutes
after the last vote.
That out of the way, welcome to today's hearing entitled
``Oversight of the Networking and Information Technology
Research and Development Program and Priorities for the
Future.'' Today we are presented with the opportunity to review
the Networking and Information Technology Research and
Development Program, abbreviated NITRD, and to discuss
priorities for the future.
The NITRD Program is the main federal research and
development investment portfolio in unclassified networking,
computing, software, cybersecurity, and related information
technologies. It also serves as the mechanism for interagency
coordination of this research and development. Fourteen member
agencies, including the National Science Foundation, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Energy,
NOAA, and the Department of Homeland Security provide budgets
for NIT research and development. Numerous other agencies are
also actively engaged in the coordination.
Networking and information technology includes an array of
technologies from smart phones to cloud computing.
Multidisciplinary innovations include computational decoding of
the human genome, modeling and simulation of complex physical
systems for aircraft, automobiles, power grids and
pharmaceuticals, near-real-time weather forecasts and climate
models, and unmanned aerial vehicles and search-and-rescue
robots. Among its many goals, NIT research and development in
this field works to minimize and prevent disruptions to
critical infrastructures like power grids and emergency
communication systems. These investments are necessary not only
to help maintain world leadership in science and engineering
and strengthen U.S. competitiveness, but they also grow the
economy through the creation of NIT jobs and enhance national
security.
For instance, cybersecurity is one of the biggest security
challenges facing our Nation today. It permeates through all of
our federal agencies and even into our private computer
systems. This is just one area that the NITRD Program helps to
coordinate our federal research and development. It indicates
how imperative it is that we continue to support critical and
collaborative research efforts such as this.
Today, our witnesses will share with us their insights on
the current state of the program and future priorities. It has
been several years since the NITRD program was last reviewed by
this Subcommittee. The program was reauthorized by the House in
the last Congress on two occasions, only to languish in the
Senate. Hopefully, input from our experts today will help
inform this subcommittee's current work and bring to light new
advances and challenges for the NIT R&D since the last bill's
introduction.
Part of this Subcommittee's role is to ensure that federal
dollars are being spent on the best research and development.
At a time when American competitiveness and national security
are at risk, it is important that we maintain our lead in the
development of these crucial technologies.
I look forward to hearing from each of our witnesses on
this important topic. Thank you for joining us.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Brooks follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Mo Brooks
Good morning, and welcome to each of our witnesses. Today, we are
presented with the opportunity to review the Networking and Information
Technology Research and Development Program (NITRD) and to discuss
priorities for the future.
The NITRD program is the main federal R&D investment portfolio in
unclassified networking, computing, software, cybersecurity, and
related information technologies. It also serves as the mechanism for
interagency coordination of this R&D. Fourteen member agencies,
including the National Science Foundation, NASA, the Department of
Energy, NOAA, and the Department of Homeland Security provide budgets
for NIT research and development. Numerous other federal agencies are
also actively engaged in the coordination.
Networking and information technology includes an array of
technologies from smart phones to cloud computing. Multidisciplinary
innovations include computational decoding of the human genome,
modeling and simulation of complex physical systems for aircraft,
automobiles, power grids and pharmaceuticals; near-real-time weather
forecasts and climate models; and unmanned aerial vehicles and search-
and-rescue robots. Among its many goals, NIT research and development
in this field works to minimize and prevent disruptions to critical
infrastructures like power grids and emergency communication systems.
These investments are necessary not only to help maintain world
leadership in science and engineering and strengthen U.S.
competitiveness, but they also grow the economy through the creation of
NIT jobs and enhance national security.
For instance, cybersecurity is one of the biggest security
challenges facing our nation today. It permeates through all of our
federal agencies and even into our private computer systems. This is
just one area that the NITRD program helps to coordinate our federal
R&D, but it indicates how imperative it is that we continue to support
critical and collaborative research efforts such as this.
Today, our witnesses will share with us their insights on the
current state of the program and future priorities. It has been several
years since the NITRD program was last reviewed by this Subcommittee.
The program was reauthorized by the House in the last Congress on two
occasions, only to languish in the Senate. Hopefully, input from our
experts today will help inform this Subcommittee's current work and
bring to light new advances and challenges for NIT R&D since the last
bill's introduction.
Part of this Subcommittee's role is to ensure that federal dollars
are being spent on the best research and development. At a time when
American competitiveness and national security are at risk, it is
important that we maintain our lead in the development of these crucial
technologies.
I look forward to hearing from each of our witnesses on this
important topic. Thank you for joining us.

Chairman Brooks. At this time I defer to the Ranking Member
on the Democrat side, Mr. Lipinski, for his remarks.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Chairman Brooks. As the Chairman
noted it has been more than two years since this Committee
developed and passed bipartisan legislation to reauthorize and
update the NITRD Program. I was a co-sponsor of Chairman
Gordon's bill in 2009, and as the Chairman said, the Senate
never acted on it, of course, that is not the first time it has
been said in this Subcommittee. It seems like almost every
hearing. I am hoping that this hearing is the first step
towards action in this Congress.
Networking and information technologies are developing
quickly. In the last two years not only has the NIT landscape
changed but a committee of experts, PCAST, has delivered a new
set of recommendations and priorities to Congress. The previous
PCAST report was very helpful in developing our last bill, so I
am looking forward to hearing from the witnesses about what has
changed in the last two years and how that bill can be updated
and improved.
The NITRD Program evolved from a federal program
established under the High Performance Computing Act of 1991.
That act provided the funding that led to the development of
Mosaic in 1993, the Worldwide Web browser that made the
Internet user-friendly and led to its explosion in the 1990s. I
am proud to note that Mosaic was created by a team of
programmers at the federally funded National Center for Super
Computing Applications at the University of Illinois.
Netscape founder Mark Andreesen, who was the leader of the
Illinois team before launching his own company, was quoted as
saying, ``If it had been left to private industry, it wouldn't
have happened. At least not until years later.''
It was an unfortunately worded reference to the High-
Performance Computing Act of 1991, by its author and champion
Al Gore, which turned into the punch line that Al Gore invented
the Internet. But it is without question that the act did set
the stage for coordinated federal R&D and investment strategy
that has underpinned U.S. leadership in networking and
information technology over the past two decades.
Today we find ourselves in a different world in which U.S.
leadership in NIT can no longer be taken for granted, and we
need to think carefully about how we set priorities under
difficult budget conditions. PCAST recommended three areas for
priority investments; NIT for health, NIT for energy and
transportation, and cybersecurity. This third area,
cybersecurity, has been one of my highest priorities this
Congress, and I joined Mr. McCaul in introducing the
Cybersecurity Enhancement Act earlier this year.
I look forward to hearing from witnesses about priorities
and future directions of NITRD's cybersecurity component.
Finally, I want to say a few words about NIT education and
workforce issues. In 2009, SRI International produced a report
on NIT workforce at the request of the NITRD Program office. In
that report the analysts at SRI found that the NIT landscape is
more complicated than just the ``more jobs than skilled
workers'' mantra we sometimes hear. The supply and demand curve
really depends on the sector within NIT and the level of
education skills that we are talking about. I watch with
growing concern as some of our leading IT companies have
outsourced increasing numbers of jobs, following a disturbing
pattern that has decimated manufacturing in our country.
Over the past decade since, IBM's domestic workforce has
suddenly shrunk while its overseas workforce has grown. As of
last year it was down to one-quarter of the total, and for the
first time ever, the company stopped providing breakouts of the
number of employees that it has in the U.S. While the company's
Project Match Program is offered to help workers laid off from
domestic sites obtain travel and visa assistance for jobs in
countries like India, China, and Brazil, and even though IBM
has withdrawn its patent application for a ``Method and System
for Strategic Global Resource Sourcing,'' I am worried that we
could be training students for jobs that end up having the jobs
being outsourced.
At the same time I know that we have a real need for
cybersecurity professionals who can help protect our most
sensitive networks, informaticians who can discover new ways to
deal with the exponentially growing amount of data we produce.
So I want to hear from the witnesses today about how we can
be confident we are training students for jobs that will be
available here in the U.S. and how we can focus education and
training resources within NITRD on those job skills.
I thank the witnesses again for taking the time to appear
before us and to help educate us about the NITRD Program, and I
look forward to your testimony.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lipinski follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski
Thank you, Chairman Brooks. [As the Chairman noted] It has been
more than two years since this Committee developed and passed
bipartisan legislation to reauthorize and update the NITRD program. I
was a cosponsor of Chairman Gordon's bill in 2009, and while the Senate
never acted on it, I hope that this hearing is the first step towards
action in this Congress.
Networking and Information Technology are developing quickly, and
in the last two years not only has the NIT landscape changed, but a
committee of experts, PCAST, has delivered a new set of recommendations
and priorities to Congress. The previous PCAST report was very helpful
in developing our last bill, so I am looking forward to hearing from
the witnesses about what's changed in the last two years and how that
bill could be updated and improved.
The NITRD program evolved from a federal program established under
the High Performance Computing Act of 1991. That Act provided the
funding that led to the development of Mosaic in 1993, the World Wide
Web browser that made the Internet user-friendly and led to its
explosion in the 1990s. I am proud to note that Mosaic was created by a
team of programmers at the federally funded National Center for
Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois. Netscape
founder Marc Andreeson, who was a leader of the Illinois team before
launching his company, was quoted as saying, ``If it had been left to
private industry, it wouldn't have happened, at least, not until years
later.''
It was an unfortunately worded reference to the High Performance
Computing Act of 1991 by its author and champion, Al Gore, which turned
into the punchline that Al Gore invented the Internet. But it is
without question that that Act set the stage for a coordinated federal
R&D and investment strategy that has underpinned U.S. leadership in
networking and information technology over the past two decades, But
today we find ourselves in a different world, in which U.S. leadership
in NIT can no longer be taken for granted, and we need to think
carefully about how we set priorities under difficult budget
conditions. PCAST recommended three areas for priority investments: NIT
for health, NIT for energy and transportation, and cybersecurity. This
third area, cybersecurity, has been one of my highest priorities this
Congress, and I joined Mr. McCaul in introducing the Cybersecurity
Enhancement Act earlier this year. I look forward to hearing from
witnesses about priorities and future directions of NITRD's
cybersecurity component.
Finally, I want to say a few words about NIT education and
workforce issues. In 2009, SRI International produced a report on the
NIT workforce at the request of the NITRD program office. In that
report, the analysts at SRI found that the NIT landscape is more
complicated than just the ``more jobs than skilled workers'' mantra we
sometimes hear. The supply and demand curve really depends on the
sector within NIT, and the level of education and skills that we are
talking about.
I have watched with growing concern as some of our leading IT
companies have outsourced increasing numbers of jobs, following the
disturbing pattern that has decimated manufacturing in this country.
Over the past decade, for instance, IBM's domestic workforce has
steadily shrunk while its overseas workforce has grown. As of last year
it was down to one quarter of the total, and for the first time ever
the company stopped providing breakouts of the number of employees it
has in the U.S.
While the company's ``Project Match'' program has offered to help
workers laid off from domestic sites obtain travel and visa assistance
for jobs in countries like India, China, and Brazil, and even though
IBM has withdrawn its patent application for a ``Method and System for
Strategic Global Resource Sourcing,'' I worry that we could be training
students for jobs that end up being outsourced. At the same time, I
know that we have a real need for cybersecurity professionals who can
help protect our most sensitive networks and informaticians who can
discover new ways to deal with the exponentially growing amount of data
we produce.So I want to hear from the witnesses today about how we can
be confident we are training students for jobs that will be available
here in the U.S., and how we can focus education and training resources
within NITRD on those job skills. Thank you again for taking the time
to appear before us today to help educate us about the NITRD program,
and I look forward to your testimony.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
If there are Members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time I would like to introduce our witnesses for
today's panel. First we have Dr. George Strawn. He is the
director of the National Coordination Office for the Networking
and Information Technology Research and Development Program.
Prior to his appointment as Director of NITRD Dr. Strawn served
as the Chief Information Officer at the National Science
Foundation. Dr. Strawn holds a Bachelor of Arts in mathematics
and physics from Cornell College and a Doctorate in mathematics
from Iowa State University.
Next we have Dr. Edward Lazowska. He holds the Bill and
Melinda Gates Chair in Computer Science and Engineering at the
University of Washington and is the Founding Director of the
University of Washington eScience Institute. He also serves as
a board member or technical advisor to a number of high-tech
companies and venture firms. Dr. Lazowska holds a Bachelor of
Arts from Brown University and a Doctorate from the University
of Toronto.
Dr. Robert Sproull recently retired as Vice President,
Director of Oracle Labs. He is a member of the National Academy
of Engineering, a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences, and had served on the United States Air Force
Scientific Advisory Board. Dr. Sproull holds a Bachelor of Arts
in physics from Harvard and a Doctorate in computer sciences
from Stanford.
Dr. Robert Schnabel is the Dean of the School of
Informatics at Indiana University. From August 2009 to July
2010, he served as Interim Vice President for Research for
Indiana University. Dr. Schnabel holds a Bachelor of Arts in
mathematics from Dartmouth College and a Master of Science and
a Doctorate from Cornell University, both in computer science.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes, after which the Members of the Committee will
have five minutes each to ask questions.
At this point I recognize our first witness, Dr. George
Strawn. Dr. Strawn, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. GEORGE STRAWN, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL COORDINATION
OFFICE, NETWORKING AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

Dr. Strawn. Good afternoon. As you have noted, I am George
Strawn, the Director of the National Coordination Office for
the NITRD Program, and along with Farnam, Dr. Farnam Jahanian
of NSF, I also co-chair the NITRD Interagency Committee. I
would like to thank Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski,
and Members of the Subcommittee for the opportunity to discuss
the role of the NITRD Program in helping the United States
maintain its leadership in networking and information
technology.
The NITRD Program provides for the coordination of the
government's portfolio of unclassified investments in research
and development in NIT. The National Coordination Office hosted
at NSF facilitates the various activities of the NITRD Program.
My written testimony describes NITRD in some detail, and I will
now highlight three of the topics discussed there: first, some
of our newest activities; second, why federal investment in NIT
R&D remains crucial; and third, one of the reasons why NITRD
collaboration is successful.
First, our newest NITRD activities include five new
coordination groups, one in NIT education, a second in
cybersecurity, and in fact, it is our second coordination group
in cybersecurity, one in health IT, one in wireless spectrum
efficiency, and one in what we are calling big data.
Cybersecurity is important enough that this subcommittee held a
separate hearing on it last May. Given my time limits I will
just say a word about big data as one of our new activities.
Federal agencies in the NITRD Program are generating
exabytes of research data annually. An exabyte is a billion,
billion bytes, and society at large is generating a similar
amount. Our ability to create and store data has greatly
outpaced our ability to preserve, manage, access, and make
effective use of it. The agencies participating in our big data
group have identified four initial focus areas; core
technologies research, big data projects, education and
training for big data scientists, and competitions and prizes
to stimulate general activity in the area.
I anticipate important advances in the science and practice
of big data.
Next, the importance of federal NIT investments is
illustrated by the many federally-supported projects that
helped spawn the information age, going all the way back to the
19th century. The U.S. Congress supported Samuel F.B. Morse's
development of the telegraph, for example. The U.S. Census
Bureau supported the development of an innovative punch-card
technology to store and process census data, which became the
IBM Corporation. More recent examples include the U.S. Army's
development of the electronic digital computer, DARPA's
development of the ARPAnet followed by NSF's development of the
NSFnet, followed by the Internet industry. And as previously
mentioned, NSF's support for the research that led to the first
Web browser and then to the Google search engine.
The multiplier effects of federal NIT R&D investments is
widely documented, perhaps most famously in the National
Research Council's tire tracks diagram, which shows the
interplay of federal and private sector investments that has
turned many NIT research projects into billion dollar markets.
Finally, one reason for the effectiveness of NITRD
collaboration model is that it involves both mission agencies
and agencies who are focused on the use of IT and agencies
focused on the theory of IT. As political scientist Donald
Stokes showed in his 1997 book, ``Pasteur's Quadrant,'' R&D is
better described as a two-dimensional activity rather than the
usual linear description where research always precedes
development.
His dimensions were use value and theory value, and his
point was high-use value can be concurrent with or even
occasionally precede high-theory value. For example, the Army's
need for and development of the digital computer preceded the
development of most computing science theory. NIT R&D can be
especially fruitful when high use and high-theory value are
brought together, and that is exactly what the NITRD Program
seeks to accomplish.
Thank you, again, for the opportunity to provide this
testimony, and I would be happy to answer any questions you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Strawn follows:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF DR. GEORGE STRAWN,
DIRECTOR, NATIONAL COORDINATION OFFICE,
NETWORKING AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
I am George Strawn, Director of the National Coordination Office
(NCO) for the Networking and Information Technology Research and
Development Program (NITRD). With my colleague, Dr. Farnam Jahanian of
the National Science Foundation (NSF), I co-chair the NITRD
Subcommittee of the National Science and Technology Council's Committee
on Technology. I want to thank Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member
Lipinski, and Members of the Subcommittee for the opportunity to come
before you today to discuss the role of the NITRD Program in helping
the United States maintain leadership in networking and information
technology (NIT).
Prior to coming to the NCO for NITRD in 2009, I was at the National
Science Foundation (NSF) and had taken part in NITRD activities as an
NSF staff member since 1995. The positive impression I formed about
NITRD during those years led me to apply for my current position and
adds to my appreciation of this opportunity to testify before you
today.

NITRD Overview

The NITRD Program has been authorized under three legislative acts.
The first, the High Performance Computing Act of 1991 (Public Law 102-
194), established the Program, setting forth a framework that combined
research goals with specific provisions for interagency cooperation,
collaboration, and partnerships with industry and academia. Two
additional acts-- the Next Generation Internet Research Act of 1998
(Public Law 105-305) and the America COMPETES Act of 2007 (Public Law
110-69)--reauthorized the Program and extended its scope in various
ways.
As the NITRD Program this year celebrates its 20th anniversary, I
hope the Members of this Subcommittee and its parent Committee share
the NITRD community's pride that our multi-agency framework has truly
met the test of time. Over the course of two decades, the authorizing
legislation has enabled the NITRD enterprise to evolve and expand to
address increasingly rapid technological shifts and new
responsibilities.
The framework of the NITRD Program provides for coordination across
the government's portfolio of unclassified investments in fundamental,
long-term research and development (R&D) in advanced networking and
information technology (NIT). NITRD research supports both the missions
of our federal agencies and the Nation's broader goals such as homeland
and national security, economic competitiveness, energy independence,
environmental stewardship, affordable health care, and science and
engineering leadership.
All of the research reported in the NITRD portfolio is managed,
selected, and funded by one or more of the 18 NITRD member agencies
(listed on page 14) under their own individual authorizations and
appropriations. The Program's major research areas (termed Program
Component Areas [PCAs] in the 1998 reauthorization legislation)
currently include:

1. Cyber security and information assurance;

2. High-confidence software and systems;

3. High-end computing;

4. Human-computer interaction and information management;

5. Large-scale networking;

6. Social, economic, workforce implications of IT and
workforce development;

7. Software design and productivity.

We have also launched some exciting new ventures that are
highlighted below.
NITRD research is performed in universities, federal research
centers and laboratories, federally funded R&D centers, private
companies, and nonprofit organizations across the country. The synergy
exhibited by the NITRD member and participating agencies (listed on
page 15)--is accomplished through interaction across the government,
academic, commercial, and international sectors using cooperation,
coordination, information sharing, and joint planning. Collaborative
activities are focused on selected areas where the agencies can
identify technical challenges that multiple agencies face and address
them together to leverage each other's activities. These targeted
collaborations enable the agencies to maximize resource sharing,
minimize duplication of effort, and partner in investments to pursue
higher-level goals.

Structure of NITRD Coordination

The Subcommittee on Networking and Information Technology Research
and Development of the National Science and Technology Council's (NSTC)
Committee on Technology (CoT) serves as the internal deliberative
organization for NITRD policy, program, and budget guidance and
direction within the Executive Branch. The NITRD Subcommittee interacts
with federal agencies that need advanced networking or information
technology to identify networking and information technology research
and development needs. Its high-level goals are to help assure
continued U.S. leadership in networking and IT, satisfy the needs of
the federal government for advanced IT capabilities, and accelerate
development and deployment of new technologies. Subcommittee members
include senior R&D managers from each of the member agencies and
representatives from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), Office
of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), and the NCO. The Subcommittee
interacts with Congress, OMB, OSTP, the NSTC, the CoT, other Federal
agencies, and private-sector and international organizations on behalf
of the NITRD Program.
The NCO facilitates the activities of the NITRD Program (see list
immediately below), and the office serves as the hub of public
information about the Program. The NCO's technical, administrative, NIT
services, and administrative support staff provide program and
financial management services; technical and subject-matter expertise
in facilitation, strategic planning, technical writing, networking and
IT services; and administrative staff support for the NITRD
Subcommittee and the IWGs, CGs, SSGs, Teams, and other NITRD subgroups.
The cost of operating the NCO is shared by the NITRD member agencies in
proportion to their NITRD budgets. The NCO also supports the
President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST),
under Executive Order 13539. The NCO Director reports to OSTP, works
closely with OSTP and OMB, and attends OSTP technical-staff meetings.
NSF serves as the host agency for the NCO. The NCO maintains the NITRD
Web site (www.nitrd.gov) and prepares and archives NITRD publications.
Supported by the NCO's staff and services, the NITRD Program uses
the following general mechanisms to pursue its coordination mission:

Monthly meetings of its Interagency Working Groups
(IWGs), Senior Steering Groups (SSGs), Coordinating Groups (CGs),
Teams, and Subgroups (SGs). These regular interactions among
representatives from many agencies enable participants to exchange
information and collaborate on research plans and activities such as
standards development, testbeds, research workshops, cooperative
solicitations, and sharing operational best practices for federal NIT,
such as in the annual DOE High Performance Computing (HPC) Best
Practices Workshop. \1\ Also as a result of these exchanges, NITRD
representatives frequently serve on grant review panels and participate
in principal investigator meetings of other agencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  http://www.nersc.gov/events/hpc-workshops/

Formation of new coordination activities as needed to
address national priorities. These are described under "New NITRD
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ventures" below.

Workshops, which typically include academic and industry
participants from across the country as well as federal
representatives.

Formal reports, including the annual NITRD Supplement to
the President's Budget, strategic planning documents, and workshop
reports. These documents all play an important role in helping set
national agendas in research areas of critical interest.

Support for external studies and assessments.

Outreach to the federal and private sectors.

New NITRD Ventures

Cybersecurity SSG

In 2008, as part of a mandate to improve coordination of federal
cybersecurity R&D under the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity
Initiative (CNCI), the NITRD agencies developed a plan calling for the
establishment of a new kind of coordinating group under NITRD. An
interagency Senior Steering Group (SSG) for cybersecurity R&D was
established whose members included federal managers with budgetary
responsibilities. This group was in addition to our cybersecurity PCA.
A key goal of the SSG concept was to facilitate moving strategic
cybersecurity R&D approaches developed by the NITRD agencies into
programmatic activities. The Cybersecurity SSG has proven effective and
we have adopted the same model to establish other NITRD SSGs.
Like the Cybersecurity SSG, the new SSGs enable NITRD to broaden
its focus from established NIT R&D categories to ones that address new
opportunities and critical national priorities for the United States.
These SSGs, and a new venture in the education arena, are described in
the following sections. The participating agencies for each of the SSGs
can be found on pages 16-17.

Big Data SSG

Most of the world's information is now ``born digital,'' and legacy
texts, images, sounds, videos, and films as well are being digitized
around the clock. Typical estimates put the amount of digital data
generated annually at many orders of magnitude greater than the total
amount of information in all the books ever written, and the total is
expected to continue growing exponentially. In the sciences alone--a
central concern of our federal science agencies --the proliferation of
ultra-powerful and distributed data-collection instruments and
experimental facilities has turned the conduct of leading-edge research
into a global-scale, data-intensive enterprise. Together, the federal
agencies in the NITRD Program generate exabytes of research data
annually. Financial, commercial, communications, and Web-based
enterprises likewise generate vast amounts of new digital information
on a moment-by-moment basis. However, our capacity to create electronic
data is outpacing advances in the technologies needed to enable us to
preserve, manage, access, and make effective use of society's data
resources--the highly complex, ultra-large-scale data sets that we in
NITRD refer to as ``big data.''
NITRD has a PCA for human-computer interaction and information
management, but big data offers new possibilities and new challenges.
Responding to a request from OSTP, NITRD formed the Big Data Senior
Steering Group in January 2011. The Big Data SSG is charged with
identifying current big data R&D activities across the Federal
Government, offering opportunities for coordination and collaboration,
and considering what national initiatives on big data would be most
useful. The science of big data begins with issues of scale,
complexity, and heterogeneity encompasses the many significant
challenges in turning data into knowledge, including search, discovery,
mining and visualization of ultra-scale data; interoperability; and
semantics. In their first months, the agencies participating in the Big
Data SSG have identified four focus areas for their initial activities:
core technologies, data projects, training, and competitions.

Health IT R&D SSG

The formation of NITRD's Health IT R&D SSG is our response to the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5),
which called on NITRD to ``have programs in Health IT R&D.'' We have
always had mission agency members, but this is the first time that a
formal NITRD activity is devoted to a mission programmatic goal--
improving health and health care. Health IT R&D includes fundamental
research, applied R&D, technology development and engineering,
demonstrations, testing and evaluation, technology transfer, and
education and training.
The Health IT R&D SSG was launched in January 2010 after an initial
NITRD planning activity on the topic. The agencies participating in the
group are working towards a next-generation health information
infrastructure that will provide universal, interoperable information
systems for U.S. health care. R&D challenges include, to name just a
few: universal data exchange language; security, privacy, and identity
management; interoperable electronic health records (EHRs); personal
health records (PHRs); devices/sensors; and further empowering of ``e-
patients.'' The SSG's interests also encompass: coordination of
standards, implementation specifications, and certification criteria;
maintaining frequent communication with, and serving as the liaison
among, the SSG agencies, academia, and industry; and responding to U.S.
national goals for health IT R&D and the health IT recommendations of
PCAST in its 2010 report Realizing the Full Potential of Health
Information Technology to Improve Healthcare for Americans: The Path
Forward. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/
pcast-health-it-report.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Health IT R&D SSG is developing a health information technology
recommendations document that provides research directions for health
IT R&D. In addition, the SSG has formed the Health Information
Technology Innovation and Development Environments (HITIDE) subgroup,
which is working on policy and governance issues for experimental
testbed activities. Testbeds will enable our agencies to try out new
health technology prototypes in realistic, real-time environments.

Wireless Spectrum R&D (WSRD) SSG

The Wireless Spectrum R&D SSG was established in November 2010 to
coordinate spectrum-related research and development activities across
the Federal Government. WSRD's purpose is: to help coordinate and
inform ongoing activities across federal agencies; and to facilitate
the identification of gaps in the government's R&D portfolio with
respect to technologies that allow a more efficient use of spectrum.
These activities are consistent with the guiding principles of WSRD,
which are transparency, smart investment, and the expansion of
opportunities for technology transfer across and beyond the Federal
Government.
The WSRD members have developed a preliminary inventory of some 670
federal wireless spectrum R&D activities and are preparing a gap
analysis from the inventory and recommendations on federal research
that could advance the goals of the June 28, 2010, Presidential
Memorandum: ``Unleashing the Wireless Broadband Revolution,'' Section
3. In addition, WSRD will work with academia and the private sector to
develop priorities, encourage private investment, and develop public/
private partnerships when appropriate.

Cyber-Physical Systems

H.R. 2020 calls out cyber-physical systems (CPS) as a new area of
national priority for NITRD activity. Cyber-physical systems are real-
time, networked computing systems--interconnected software,
microprocessors, sensors, and actuators--deeply integrated within
engineered physical systems to monitor and control capabilities and
behaviors of the physical system as a whole. Such systems have become
increasingly important to our society and are essential to the
effective operation of: U.S. defense and intelligence systems; critical
civilian infrastructures (e.g., air traffic control, power grid, and
water supply systems), industrial-process control systems, and other
large-scale civilian systems; as well as to smaller-scale systems that
are vital for U.S. economic competitiveness (e.g., in airplanes, cars,
robotic devices, and medical instruments and devices).
Much of the work of NITRD's High Confidence Software and Systems
(HCSS) PCA over the past decade has been focused on CPS research and
building a national CPS research community that engages multiple
sectors and disciplines. Currently, we are considering augmenting this
work with an SSG devoted specifically to CPS R&D. In addition to H.R.
2020, the last two PCAST reviews of our Program (Leadership Under
Challenge: Information Technology R&D in a Competitive World, \3\
August 2007, and Designing a Digital Future: Federally Funded Research
and Development in Networking and Information Technology, \4\ December
2010) concluded that improving the quality, capabilities, and
trustworthiness of our life- and safety-critical information
technologies, including cyber-physical systems, should be a key focus
of federal research.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/
pcast-07-nitrd-review.pdf
\4\  http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/
pcast-nitrd-report-2010.pdf

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Education and Workforce Activities

As employers with needs for all kinds of highly skilled scientific
and technical NIT personnel, the NITRD agencies are acutely aware of
some of the problems in our formal education system that limit the
number of graduates adequately prepared to become part of the NIT
workforce. To underscore their concern, in the draft strategic plan for
NITRD the agencies highlight development of a ``cyber-capable'' U.S.
population as one of three critical foundations for a bright national
future. One immediate outcome of the strategic planning discussions has
been the establishment of a new Team (called SEW-Education) under the
auspices of NITRD's Social, Economic, and Workforce Implications of IT
and IT Workforce Development (SEW) Program Component Area.
The SEW-Education team is seeking ways to promote the integration
of instruction about the science of computing throughout the K-12
curriculum. Indeed, the former co-Chair of the NITRD Subcommittee, Dr.
Jeannette Wing (now back at the computer science department at
Carnegie-Mellon University), introduced the concept of ``computational
thinking for everyone.'' She spearheaded NSF initiatives to support
development of innovative ways to familiarize students at all levels
with the fundamental concepts of computation, such as algorithms, and
how they can be applied to solve problems in every domain--just as
students now learn fundamental concepts in mathematics and other
sciences in grade-appropriate curricula starting at the elementary
level.
In national public forums we held in 2008 and 2009 to inform NITRD
strategic planning, academic computer scientists and K-12 educators
told us that few, if any, K-12 schools had a curriculum in computer
science (CS). According to these experts, computer science teaching was
limited to an introductory high school course in programming, offered
by only 65 percent of high schools in 2009 and taken by a small
percentage of students. In lower grades, they said, teachers informally
helped students use computer applications but there was virtually no
instruction about the science of computation. In a society increasingly
dependent on complex digital systems, the NITRD agencies believe, the
gaps in K-12 students' knowledge and experience, and in the
availability of skilled CS teachers, are worrisome and need to be
addressed through grade-appropriate computer science curricula.
At the same time, the demand for NIT workers is growing. A 2009
study conducted for NITRD by SRI&otes that two NIT-related
occupations--network systems and data communications analyst, and
computer applications software engineer--are among the five fastest-
growing in the U.S. economy, and are the only two of the five to
require a college degree. 1A\5\ According to U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics projections in 2010, there were 7.6 million STEM workers in
the United States, representing about one in 18 workers. STEM
occupations are projected to grow by 17.0 percent from 2008 to 2018,
compared to 9.8 percent growth for non-STEM occupations. STEM workers
command high wages, earning 26 percent more than their non-STEM
counterparts, more than two-thirds of STEM workers have a least a
college degree, compared to less than one-third of the non-STEM
workers, and STEM degree holders enjoy high earnings, regardless of
whether they work in STEM or non-STEM occupations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  Commissioned by the NITRD Subcommittee in response to
Recommendation 2.1 (page 23) of Leadership Under Challenge, the 2007
PCAST report on its review of the NITRD Program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Furthermore, labor-market projections for the NIT workforce do not
capture the reality that a very broad range of occupations increasingly
involves applications that require NIT knowledge and skills. Nor can
statistical projections serve as a guide for assessing the adequacy of
the educational system to prepare a workforce that leads the world in
advanced innovation. The managers of the NSF programs targeting the K-
12 problem participate in the SEW-Education group and are helping
develop its action plan. The first NSF effort, Computing Education for
the 21st Century (CE21), is focusing special attention on the middle
school through early college levels, with the goals of: increasing the
number and diversity of students and teachers who develop and practice
computational competencies in a variety of contexts; and increasing the
number and diversity of postsecondary students who are engaged and have
the background in computing necessary to successfully pursue degrees in
computing-related and computationally intensive fields of study. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  http://www.nsf.gov/funding/
pgm
-
summ.jsp?pims
-
id=503582
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The second NSF activity, CS 10K (which stands for 10,000 Computer
Science teachers in 10,000 high schools), aims to increase the
effectiveness of computing education in high school through the
introduction of an entirely new curriculum (based on a proposed, new
Advanced Placement course) concomitant with the preparation of teachers
prepared to teach it by 2015. \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\  http://www.computingportal.org/cs10k
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A three-year, $14.2 million effort initiated in 2010 by SEW-
Education participant and NITRD member DARPA is also directed to the
middle- and high-school levels of the K-12 system. Citing the decline
in CS college graduates and the growing need for computer scientists
and engineers, the agency's solicitation asked for innovative proposals
to: combat young people's misperception that the ``dot.com'' bust
eliminated all CS jobs; excite middle- and high-school students about
CS and STEM careers; provide means of retaining the excitement of
extracurricular activities, such as NASA's Space Camp, in the regular
curriculum; and offer plans for institutionalizing the new approaches
over the long term. \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

\8\ http://www.darpa.mil/Our
-
Work/I2O/Programs/
Computer
-
Science
-
in
-
Science
-

Technology
-
Engineering
-
and
-
Mathematics
-

Education
-
(CS-STEM).aspx
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These efforts are complemented by the National Initiative for
Cybersecurity Education (NICE) led by NIST. This comprehensive program,
to which many NITRD agencies are contributing, includes activities in
four component areas: national cybersecurity awareness; formal
cybersecurity education; cybersecurity workforce structure; and
cybersecurity workforce training and professional development. \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\  http://csrc.nist.gov/nice/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SEW-Education also plans to coordinate its efforts with those of
the new NSTC Committee on Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math
Education (CoSTEM). The COMPETES Act of 2010 directed OSTP to set up
this committee, which is co-chaired by OSTP and NSF, and gave it the
following responsibilities:

Coordinate the STEM education activities and programs of
the federal agencies;

Coordinate STEM education activities and programs with
the Office of Management and Budget;

Encourage the teaching of innovation and entrepreneurship
as part of STEM education activities;

Review STEM education activities and programs to ensure
they are not duplicative of similar efforts within the federal
government;

Develop, implement through the participating agencies,
and update once every five years a five-year STEM education strategic
plan.

Other Recent NITRD Highlights

In addition to the recent NITRD developments described above, I am
pleased to report that we have welcomed four new agencies as members of
the NITRD Program. Last spring, the Office of the National Coordinator
(ONC) for Health Information Technology of the Department of Health and
Human Services became a NITRD member. The ONC representative also
serves as a co-chair of the Health IT R&D Senior Steering Group. We are
also delighted that the Department of Defense's Service research
organizations--the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), the Army
Research Laboratory (ARL), and the Office of Naval Research (ONR) have
come onboard as NITRD member agencies. The Service labs have long been
active participants in the Program's research groups, so it is
gratifying to have the benefit of their contributions as Subcommittee
members as well.
I want also to note briefly that the National Coordination Office
is working on a prototype R&D dashboard that will provide greater
access to NITRD funding data, enabling the public to explore the
Program's research activities in greater depth. You can find our
initial conceptual dashboard on the NITRD Web site. \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\  http://itdashboard.nitrd.gov/

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Maintaining U.S. Leadership in Networking and Information Technology

Networking and information technology--computers, wired and
wireless digital networks, electronic data and information, IT devices
and systems, and software applications--today provide the indispensable
infrastructure for activities across all facets of our society and our
economy. Throughout the IT revolution, the United States has led the
world in the invention and applications of these technologies. For well
over six decades, ongoing federal research and development to supply
advanced IT capabilities for government missions has fueled the
creation of new ideas, innovators, and innovations addressing key
national priorities, such as those cited above and repeated here for
emphasis: homeland and national security, economic competitiveness,
energy independence, environmental stewardship, affordable health care,
and science and engineering leadership. In fact, the 2010 PCAST review
of NITRD noted that ``the federal investment in NIT research and
development is without question one of the best investments our Nation
has ever made.''
There is no doubt that the historic U.S. supremacy in NIT is under
global challenge from aggressive competitors. We no longer manufacture
all the components for the NIT products we use, and that pipeline is
something we need to monitor carefully. However, we need to be mindful
that the U.S. companies that so successfully built our country's
multibillion-dollar NIT commercial marketplace are also becoming global
enterprises. I believe that we remain the world's NIT leader, but
continued innovation leadership is required to maintain our position.
I come to the NIT leadership question with the perspective of a
computer scientist who has for many years been a student of the history
of U.S. information technologies. Technology innovation proceeds in
extended cycles. Big--usually unexpected--scientific discoveries come
first, followed by long periods of incremental innovations and
commercialization of products developed out of the initial fundamental
advances. In the field of networking and information technology in
particular, the Federal Government has historically been the sponsor of
the fundamental scientific breakthroughs that spawned the information
revolution. This history dates back to the 1800s. In the 1830s, the
U.S. government supported Samuel F.B. Morse's development of the
telegraph. In the 1890s, the U.S. Census Bureau supported the work of
its employee, Herman Hollerith, in developing an innovative punch-card
technology to record and store census data. Several decades later, the
company Hollerith subsequently started became the International
Business Machines Corporation (IBM). More recent examples include the
Army-supported development of the electronic computer; DARPA's support
for the ARPAnet followed by NSF's support for the NSFnet, which became
the Internet; and NSF's support for the research that brought us the
first Web browser and the Google Web search engine.
The NITRD Program sustains this historic federal role in discovery,
in the 21st century's far more complicated global technological and
economic environment. As noted above, our collaborative multi-agency
framework has enabled the NITRD agencies to keep evolving their NIT
activities to keep pace with the increasing pace of emerging
technologies and applications. The portfolio of research and
development activities sponsored by the NITRD agencies grows ever
broader. I would argue that this portfolio is an invaluable resource
for maintaining U.S. leadership in NIT because it is the Nation's only
full-spectrum NIT R&D enterprise.
Thus the NITRD portfolio serves a unique purpose in what many term
``the U.S. innovation ecosystem.'' Over the decades, the United States
has developed a fluid, information-rich research and innovation
environment that stretches from federal programs and laboratories,
across university campuses and research centers, to industrial R&D
facilities and small business start-ups. As the National Academies and
others have noted, \11\ there are innumerable feedback loops in this
ecosystem through which ideas and concepts travel, get transformed,
fuel new directions, turn student experimenters into skilled
technologists and keen entrepreneurs, and ultimately produce path-
breaking innovations. The NITRD research performed in universities,
federal research centers and laboratories, federally funded R&D
centers, and in partnerships with private companies and nonprofit
organizations across the country generates continuous interaction,
information exchange, and feedback in the ecosystem, providing new
perspectives and insights to both federal and private-sector
stakeholders. Through its broad reach across the ecosystem, NITRD
funding also supports the education and training of the Nation's next
generations of NIT researchers, technical experts, entrepreneurs, and
IT industry leaders.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\  See, for example, Evolving the High Performance Computing and
Communications Initiative to Support the Nation's Information
Infrastructure, the National Research Council, National Academy Press,
Washington DC, 1995; and Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the
Information Technology R&D Ecosystem, National Research Council, 2009.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The NITRD Program thus supports not only the vitality of the
innovation ecosystem as a whole but the national NIT talent pool it
nurtures. We are pleased that the PCAST, in its 2010 review of the
Program, concluded that NITRD is widely and correctly viewed as
``successful and valuable,'' and we are working, as noted throughout
this testimony, to address PCAST recommendations for ways to improve
our efforts.
I will now turn to the other questions the Subcommittee posed that
I have not yet addressed.

NITRD Objectives and Critical R&D Issues

While maintaining their mission focus, the NITRD agencies make
every effort through their NITRD Program activities to grapple with the
most critical NIT R&D problems. Although the NITRD collaborative
umbrella enables only coordination--not prioritization--of agencies'
mission activities, each agency faces and responds to the challenge of
pushing the cutting edge of technological change. To cite just a few
areas, the NITRD agencies individually and together are investigating
the implications of cloud computing for data-intensive science and
high-end computation. Our agencies are also leading the government's
major research effort to change the balance of power in cyberspace, so
that legitimate uses are secure and malefactors can no longer attack at
will. NITRD members are working on critical technical challenges at the
upper limits of computing power and speed, such as energy conservation,
nanoscale materials and techniques, and software architectures and
applications for machines with hundreds of thousands of processors. The
agencies are also pressing forward with improving software engineering
for the long-lived, ultra-scale software-based systems that are the
work horses providing many of the Nation's most vital capabilities
across all sectors.
Amid the relentlessly accelerating rate of technological change of
recent years, we in NITRD are also learning how to be more adept in
adjusting our coordination emphases to be more responsive. The new
ventures described above were created and became productive in record
time for NITRD. Each of these is addressing significant national issues
that require intellectual contributions from the NIT research community
and advances in NIT R&D. The new SSGs and subgroups represent a
different, more flexible model for NITRD collaboration--one in which
collaborative groups are quickly formed to focus on emerging issues, do
their work, and then may disband as their topical tasks conclude and
new issues arise that need attention. NITRD's underlying PCAs will
continue to exist, because they provide continuity in budget reporting
over time. But shifting opportunities for short-term coordination
activities are likely to be the new NITRD norm. These shifts align with
the recommendations in the 2010 PCAST review of NITRD.
In my view, the value of the collaboration model in the NITRD
Program, which involves both mission agencies focused on the ``use
value'' of their missions and science agencies focused on ``theory
value,'' is illustrated by the political scientist Donald Stokes in his
1997 book Pasteur's Quadrant. Stokes defined a two-dimensional array of
four types of R&D. His dimensions were ``use value'' and ``theory
value,'' and his point in making four quadrants was that high use value
does not need to imply low theory value. And that high use-value
science can generate high theory-value science, just as high theory-
value science can generate high use-value science. Stokes pointed to
the French scientist Louis Pasteur's groundbreaking work on causes and
prevention of diseases as having high use value and high theory value
(such research is said to lie in Pasteur's quadrant).
Stokes's concept usefully describes the essentially
multidimensional nature of activities such as NIT research. That is,
NIT R&D properly involves high use and high theory value. Computer
science theory can arise from applied science, just as science research
can arise from computer science research results; it is the constant
interplay between the pure and the applied R&D sectors that generates
many of the innovations that astonish us. We need pure research (such
as computational complexity) and we need use-inspired research (such as
arises when a mission agency seeks solutions to its science problems).

Research Opportunities and Academic and Industry Inputs

The research communities in academia and industry contribute to
NITRD activities in a variety of forms. For example, in the past 12
months the NITRD agencies have finished their work on two major
strategic plans--a five-year strategic plan for NITRD and a strategic
plan for game-changing R&D to secure cyberspace. We are pleased that
our cybersecurity R&D strategic plan, Trustworthy Cyberspace: Strategic
Plan for the Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Program
will soon be released to the public and the NITRD plan is under review.
Throughout both development activities, the NITRD agencies reached out
extensively to engage the private sector in workshops, Requests for
Input, wikis, and other forums.
One of the results in moving to include flexible, topic-focused
coordination groups is that the NITRD Program can more conveniently
draw upon academic and private-sector expertise across disciplines,
sectors, and research and engineering domains in order to turn research
results into practical applications.
A different form of outreach to the private sector takes place
under NITRD member DOE/SC's Innovative and Novel Computational Impact
on Theory and Experiment (INCITE) program. Since 2003, INCITE has
promoted transformational advances in science and technology by
competitively awarding large allocations of time on the agency's most
powerful computing platforms (``leadership class'' systems), as well as
supporting resources and data storage, to industrial, federal, and
academic researchers nationwide who lack access to such resources. For
2011, 57 INCITE awardees received a total of 1.7 billion processor
hours. \12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ http://www.doeleadershipcomputing.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/
07/INCITE
-
IR
-
FINAL
-
7-19-11.pdf

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Importance of Federal NIT Investments

As discussed above, the history of NIT development has demonstrated
the crucial role of federal investments. The results of these
investments have spawned a myriad of technological innovations, novel
products and communications capabilities, and an entirely new,
multibillion-dollar economic sector in NIT that has been responsible
for significant expansion in well-paying job opportunities. The
multiplier effects of Federal NIT R&D--on both innovation and
employment--are widely documented, perhaps most famously in the
National Research Council's ``tire tracks'' graphic illustrating how
the feedback loops mentioned above operate over time to move research
discoveries into the marketplace. \13\ There is little doubt that our
country and the world are moving rapidly into an increasingly digital
future. We in NITRD concur with PCAST that federal research leadership
will continue to be an imperative if we are to sustain our preeminence
in the networking and information technologies that we invented and
developed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\  In 2003, the National Research Council's Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board (CSTB) updated the original 1995 tire tracks
figure from the Evolving the High Performance Computing and
Communications report in a new report, Innovation in Information
Technology that summarized eight prior CSTB studies on the subject.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Comments on H.R. 2020

The NITRD Program has benefited for 20 years from Congressional
authorization and we look forward to this reauthorization. I believe
that this draft legislation from the last Congress is well focused and
will continue to aid our activities. Two small changes would, I
believe, increase its value and focus.

A. The draft legislation currently calls for a three-year
cycle for updating the NITRD strategic plan and a two-year cycle for
advisory committee review. I respectfully suggest that if both
activities were put on a three-year cycle, there would be better
linkage between them. The same might be true of a two-year cycle, but
the 50% increase in reporting activity would not, in my opinion, be
offset by gains in value to the program.

B. A new section in the current draft legislation
highlights cyber-physical systems and information management. As
discussed above, we affirm the emphasis on cyber-physical systems. We
respectfully suggest that, as also discussed above, ``big data'' is a
better phrase than ``information management'' to characterize the
advances required at this time.

These comments, I believe, are consistent with the findings of
PCAST's 2010 review of NITRD.
Thank you very much for affording me the opportunity to provide
testimony before the Subcommittee on Research and Science Education of
the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. I will be happy
to answer any questions you may have.

NITRD MEMBER AGENCIES

The following federal agencies, which conduct or support R&D in
advanced networking and information technologies, report their IT
research budgets in the NITRD crosscut and provide support for program
coordination:

Department of Commerce (DOC)

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),

Department of Defense (DoD),

Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA),

National Security Agency (NSA),

Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) and Service
Research Organizations:

Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL),

Army Research Laboratory (ARL),

Office of Naval Research (ONR).

Department of Energy (DOE)

National Nuclear Security Administration (DOE/NNSA),

Office of Science (DOE/SC).

Department of Homeland Security (DHS)

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ),

National Institutes of Health (NIH),

Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information
Technology (ONC).

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)

National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)

NITRD PARTICIPATING AGENCIES

Representatives of the following agencies with mission interests
involving networking and IT R&D and applications also participate in
NITRD activities:

Department of Commerce (DOC)

National Telecommunications and Information
Administration (NTIA)

Department of Defense (DoD)

Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA)

Department of Energy (DOE)

Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability
(DOE/OE)

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)

Food and Drug Administration (FDA)

Department of Interior

U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)

Department of Justice (DOJ)

Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)

Department of State (State)

Department of Transportation (DOT)

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)

Federal Highway Administration (FHWA)

Department of the Treasury (Treasury)

Department of Veterans Affairs

Director of National Intelligence (DNI)

Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Agency (IARPA)

National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)

Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC)

U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)

NITRD SSGs Participating Agencies

Cybersecurity

Department of Commerce (DOC)

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)

Department of Defense (DoD)

National Security Agency (NSA)

Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD)

Department of Homeland Security (DHS)

Director of National Intelligence (DNI)

Executive Office of the President

Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP)

National Science Foundation (NSF)

Big Data

Department of Commerce (DOC)

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)

Department of Defense (DoD)

Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)

National Security Agency (NSA)

Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) and Service
Research Organizations

Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL)

Army Research Laboratory (ARL)

Office of Naval Research (ONR)

Department of Energy (DOE)

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)

National Institutes of Health (NIH)

Director of National Intelligence (DNI)

Executive Office of the President

Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP)

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)

National Science Foundation (NSF)

Health IT

Department of Commerce (DOC)

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)

Department of Defense (DoD)

Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center
(TATRC)

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)

Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR)

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)

Food and Drug Administration (FDA)

Indian Health Service (IHS)

National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of the
National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC)

Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)

National Science Foundation (NSF)

Executive Office of the President

Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP)

Wireless Spectrum Technologies

Department of Commerce (DOC)

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)

National Telecommunications and Information
Administration (NTIA)

Department of Defense (DoD)

Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)

National Security Agency (NSA)

Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) and Service
Research Organizations

Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL)

Army Research Laboratory (ARL)

Office of Naval Research (ONR)

Department of Energy (DOE)

Idaho National Laboratory (INL)

Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)

Department of Homeland Security (DHS)

Department of Justice (DOJ)

Department of Transportation (DOT)

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)

Executive Office of the President

National Economic Council (NEC)

Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP)

Federal Communications Commission (FCC)

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)

National Science Foundation (NSF)

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Strawn.
We next recognize Dr. Lazowska for his five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. EDWARD LAZOWSKA,

DIRECTOR, ESCIENCE INSTITUTE, BILL AND MELINDA GATES CHAIR

Dr. Lazowska. Thank you, Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member
Lipinski, the other Members of the Subcommittee for the
opportunity to speak with you today. My name is Ed Lazowska. I
am a long-time faculty member at the University of Washington.
I recently co-chaired the working group of the President's
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, charged with
reviewing the NITRD Program, but I am speaking today as an
individual and endorsed by the Computing Research Association.
So I have 10 points that I would like to make in 30 seconds
apiece, and here they are. First, information technology R&D is
something that changes the world, and you see this in your own
lives. You shop through Amazon, you get your movies from
Netflix, you get books on your Kindle, you get the world of the
Internet on your iPhone, you learn from Khan Academy, you have
maps and directions and navigation and routing from Google and
GPS, you have a Roomba robot vacuum cleaner, you have adaptive
cruise control on your car. We all benefit from national
security through information superiority. We all benefit. Your
committee focuses on dramatic advances in science and
engineering discovery that are enabled by information
technology.
All of these are the results of IT R&D. I just spent the
previous hour up the hall at a session called ``Deconstructing
the IPad,'' and it involved computer scientists, physicists,
device engineers talking about the role of federal research and
development in all of the technologies that underlie the IPad.
Apple has done some amazing engineering to produce this
miraculous device, but every piece of it, the GPS chip, the
touch screen interface, the CPU, every aspect of that device
can trace its roots to federally-funded research, and that is
what your committee is focused on.
Second, information technology R&D drives our prosperity.
It is not just the information technology industry. It is
productivity gains in other sectors because of the use of IT.
Economists agree that information technology has boosted U.S.
productivity more than any other set of factors in the recent
past.
Third, IT is the dominant factor in American science and
technology employment. I hope we'll talk later about workforce
issues, and offshoring is certainly a significant issue, but
accounting for that, the Bureau of Labor Statistics projects
that 60 percent of all new jobs in all fields of science and
engineering in this decade will be for computing specialists.
That's in this country. All right. So more than all the
physical sciences, all of the life sciences, all of the social
sciences, and all other fields of engineering combined. That's
what they project for computer specialists in the next decade.
Fourth, federal support is a key part of this, and you
heard from Dr. Strawn about this. You will hear more from
others. Every major sector of the IT industry traces its roots
to the federally-sponsored fundamental research program. It's
the role of federally-sponsored research to take the long view.
Industry R&D is the vast majority of it focused appropriately
on the engineering of the next release for product.
Fifth, there's huge potential and huge need for further
breakthroughs. I will defer talking about the specifics of
that.
Sixth, many areas of IT R&D are crucial to national
priorities and national competitiveness, and I am going to give
you two local examples. Yesterday my young University of
Washington colleague, Shwetak Patel, won a MacArthur genius
award for work using machine learning to tell you exactly which
devices in your home are consuming exactly how much electric
power from a single device that you plug into a wall outlet
anywhere in your house. Okay. It is just sort of miraculous in
terms of incenting better use of energy, better energy
efficiency.
A few years ago another young University of Washington
colleague, Yoky Matsuoka, won a MacArthur genius award for work
on prosthetics that couple directly to the nervous system. So
this gives new hope to thousands of returning veterans who are
impaired, disabled in various ways.
If you want breakthroughs in energy, in national security,
in health care, in scientific discovery, in transportation,
then you need breakthroughs in computer science. That's what
powers those other examples. There is a set of federal agencies
that understands this well, and there is a set that needs a
better appreciation of it, and that is part of Dr. Strawn's job
in the NCO--to bring those agencies together and cause them to
pull together.
Seventh, the Nation is investing far less in IT R&D than is
shown in the federal budget. Many agencies report the
acquisition of computer technology to support research in other
disciplines as part of their NITRD crosscut. This is a
completely appropriate research expenditure, but it's not IT
R&D, and we need to improve the reporting so that we know how
much we are actually spending on this field.
Eighth, PCAST urged and I personally urge that the Federal
Government needs a high-level, sustained expert strategic
advisory committee for information technology R&D, something
perhaps analogous to the former President's Information
Technology Advisory Committee.
Ninth, computer science must be viewed as an essential
component in STEM education. Every child and every adult needs
fluency in computing and what we call computational thinking.
Finally, last, no other field comes close. Here is what
PCAST said. ``As a field of inquiry, Networking and Information
Technology has a rich intellectual agenda, as rich of that as
any other field. In addition, NIT is arguably unique among all
fields of science and engineering in the breadth of its
impact.'' That's why your work matters.
Thanks for the opportunity to share my view, and I, too,
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lazowska follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Edward Lazowska, Director,
Escience Institute, Bill and Melinda Gates Chair
Thank you, Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski, and the other
Members of the Subcommittee, for this opportunity to discuss the
Federal Government's Networking and Information Technology Research and
Development program. I am pleased to add my perspective on the
Committee's questions, drawn from nearly 40 years in academia as a
member of the computing research community, my experience as the
current Chair of the Computing Research Association's (CRA) Computing
Community Consortium (CCC), and as a member and chair of many federal
IT advisory committees--including, most recently, as the co-Chair of
the Working Group of the President's Council of Advisors on Science and
Technology (PCAST) to review the NITRD program. However, I present this
testimony as an informed individual and not as a representative of any
particular organization, although my comments have the endorsement of
the Computing Research Association.

Information Technology R&D Changes the World

The importance of this hearing's topic is hard to overstate.
Advances in information technology are transforming all aspects of our
lives. Virtually every human endeavor today has been touched by IT,
including commerce, education, employment, health care, energy,
manufacturing, governance, national security, communications, the
environment, entertainment, science and engineering. We have the
world's products available to us with the click of a mouse, instruction
tailored to individual students and delivered from hundreds or
thousands of miles away, the ability to be productive and connected
regardless of location, doctors empowered by virtual agents that can
help navigate subtle drug interactions or diagnose with data rather
than gut feelings, an emerging intelligent power grid working together
with smart structures to more effciently utilize power resources,
advanced robotics that will enable the nation to retain a competitive
manufacturing sector, government that works more transparently, a
military that achieves dominance through information superiority, a
network of friends reachable instantly anywhere around the globe, a
planet wired with sensors feeding us real-time information about its
health, movies and music and games that engage all our senses and take
us to places no previous generation has ever seen, and a science and
engineering enterprise primed with all the tools and data to enable
discovery at a pace never before seen--all because of advances in
computing systems, tools and services enabled by information technology
research and development.

Information Technology R&D Drives Our Prosperity

Advances in information technology are also driving our economy--
both directly, in the growth of the IT sector itself, and indirectly,
in the productivity gains that all other sectors achieve from the
application of IT. IT R&D creates new industries that create new jobs,
and transforms existing industries in ways that increase their
productivity and make them more competitive. In fact, it is this latter
effect that has had the most profound impact on the economy and the
Nation's competitiveness. Across every sector of the economy,
businesses large and small have used IT systems, tools, and services to
improve their productivity, boost their effciency, and increase their
economic output to an unprecedented extent. Large companies like
Walmart and United Parcel Service have used advanced IT tools to track
and manage inventory on a minute-by-minute basis. Companies like Boeing
and Procter & Gamble use high-performance computing in applications
ranging from designing super-effcient airframes to modeling the airflow
over potato chips on a production line to minimize breakage and loss.
Small manufacturers use IT to do virtual prototyping, avoiding costly
prototype construction and allowing them to compete with much larger
firms for lucrative manufacturing contracts. And sites like Etsy and
eBay allow individual artists or entrepreneurs to set up virtual
storefronts and sell to the world. Advances in IT empower U.S.
businesses, augment their competencies, and enable them to compete in
an increasingly global economy. The development and application of IT-
related systems, services, tools and methodologies have boosted U.S.
labor productivity more than any other set of forces in recent decades.

Information Technology Is the Dominant Factor in American S&T
Employment

Given information technology's influence in so many sectors of our
lives, it should not be surprising that demand for IT workers is
strong. Indeed, as the PCAST review of the NITRD program released last
year noted, ``All indicators--all historical data, and all
projections--argue that [Networking and Information Technology (NIT)]
is the dominant factor in America's science and technology employment,
and that the gap between the demand for NIT talent and the supply of
that talent is and will remain large.'' \1\ Bureau of Labor Statistics
projections indicate that more than 60% of all new jobs in all fields
of science and engineering in the current decade will be for computer
specialists. Increasing the number of graduates in IT fields at all
levels should be a national priority; the NITRD program should increase
its focus on computer science education, from kindergarten through
higher education, as one way to help meet that goal.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Designing a Digital Future: Federally Funded Research and
Development in Networking and Information Technology. Report to the
President and Congress, President's Council of Advisors on Science and
Technology, December 2010.

Federal Support Is a Key Part of the Vibrant Ecosystem that Drives IT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Innovation

The advances in IT that have had such a profound effect on every
aspect of our lives are driven by innovation that itself is the product
of a vibrant research ecosystem--an ecosystem comprised of university
research in academic departments, industrial research facilities,
federal research labs, industrial development organizations, and the
people and ideas that flow between them. The National Research Council
has called this ``an extraordinarily productive interplay'' and the
President's Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC)
emphasized the ``spectacular return'' on the federal investment made as
part of this ecosystem. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Information Technology Research: Investing in Our Future.
Report to the President, President's Information Technology Advisory
Committee, February 1999.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The federal role in this system is largely limited to investments
in long-term, early stage scientific research, typically at U.S.
universities. This research often occurs many years,or even decades,
before a product is developed for the marketplace.
The great majority of industry-based research and development is of
a fundamentally different character than university-based research.
Industry-based research and development is, by necessity, much shorter
term than the early-stage research performed in universities. It tends
to be focused on product and process development, areas which will have
more immediate impact on business profitability. Industry generally
avoids long-term research because it entails risk in several
unappealing ways. First, it is hard to predict the outcome of
fundamental research. The value of the research may surface in
unanticipated areas. Second, fundamental research, because it is
published openly, provides broad value to all players in the
marketplace. It is difficult for any one company to ``protect'' the
fundamental knowledge gleaned from long-term research and capitalize on
it without everyone in the marketplace having a chance to incorporate
the new knowledge into their thinking. Those companies that do make
significant fundamental research investments tend to be the largest
companies in the sector. Their dominant position in the market
increases the likelihood that they benefit from any market-wide
improvement in technology basic research might bring. For example, IBM
and Microsoft are among the companies that invest the largest
proportion of their R&D expenditures on research looking out more than
one product cycle, but at Microsoft, as reported by PCAST, it is
estimated that this still constitutes less than 5% of total R&D. At
most other companies, it is far less. University research does not
supplant industry research, or vice versa.
An example might be instructive here. Apple's IPad is a seemingly
miraculous little machine. Available for about $500, it's a sleek, thin
little slab of glass and metal that sits darkly in a purse or a pocket,
then comes to life with a button push and a swipe of a finger, quickly
figures out where it is, and then connects itself to the largest
collection of humanity's knowledge ever assembled. It's a remarkable
confluence of technologies--processing capability powerful enough to
have appeared on the list of the world's fastest supercomputers as
recently as 1994, a sensor suite (global positioning system, compass,
accelerometer, microphone, camera, light sensor) robust enough to allow
it to know where it is and what it's looking at, and an interface
revolutionary in its ease of use. These technologies have enabled some
truly game-changing capabilities--applications that allow turn-by-turn
directions, or the ability to translate signs in a foreign language
just by pointing its camera at them, or truly high-speed, ubiquitous
connectivity to the power of the Internet, instantly, almost anywhere
in the world.
What Apple has managed to do to bring these technologies together
and meld them in a seamless way to enable these applications has been
nothing short of remarkable. Without exception, however, all these
technologies have their roots in early-stage scientific research, and
all bear the stamp of federal government support.
Take, for example, the revolutionary multi-touch IPad interface--
the pinch-to-shrink, swipe-to-scroll, twist-to-rotate gestures that
make a tablet like the IPad intuitive and very easy to use. All were
born out of university research, largely funded by the Federal
Government, conducted as early as the late 1960s and early 1970s. In
fact, in 1998, researchers at the University of Delaware, whose work
had earlier been enabled by research funding from the National Science
Foundation, established a company called FingerWorks to market an early
touch-screen keyboard based on their research. In 2005, Apple bought
the company and its technology, then spent over two years adapting it
for the first iPhone.
A similar case can be made for the processor--the brain of the
device--which has its roots in the design of the original integrated
circuit back in 1958, by a young Texas Instruments engineer named Jack
Kilby. But it's a far cry from that original design to the modern chip
that powers the IPad. Industry research at TI and Fairchild, and later
at IBM, Intel and others was obviously important in moving development
along, but just as important was research at U.S. universities, on
Reduced Instruction Set Computing (RISC) and Microprocessor without
Interlocked Pipeline Stages (MIPS) technologies, as well as Very-Large-
Scale Integration (the process of creating integrated circuits by
combining thousands of transistors into a single chip)--technology that
put computer design in the hands of computer system architects (and
graduate students) rather than only in the hands of engineers and
technicians in costly chip fabrication plants. Federal investment in
research (through DARPA and increasingly NSF) and government-industrial
partnerships like SEMATECH were crucial in catalyzing research across
institutions, accelerating the pace of innovation--and work at
universities in particular helped generate the people and ideas that
fueled industry's advancements.
It is possible to draw similar timelines for all the other key
technologies in the IPad. This is not to diminish the accomplishment of
Apple--on the contrary, what Apple has done has been to blend these
technologies into a harmonious whole in a way that maybe only Apple
could do. But it highlights the crucial role of early-stage research,
in many cases supported by the Federal Government (and often only by
the Federal Government), in enabling world-changing innovation. And it
shows that federal support for early stage research is truly an
investment--an investment that has a history of demonstrating
extraordinary payoff in the explosion of new technologies that have
touched nearly every aspect of our lives, and in economic terms--in the
creation of new industries and literally millions of new jobs.

There Is Tremendous Potential--and Tremendous Need--for Further
Breakthroughs

The history of innovation in computing is impressive, but the
future opportunities are even more compelling. Research in the future
of networking, revolutionizing transportation, personalizing education,
powering the smart grid, empowering the developing world, improving
health care, enabling advanced manufacturing and driving advances in
all fields of science and engineering are all compelling challenges
well suited to advancements in IT. Indeed, without continued progress
in computing research, our ability to address key national and global
priorities in energy and transportation, education and life-long
learning, health care, and national and homeland security will be
seriously constrained.

Many Areas of IT R&D Are Crucial to National Priorities and National
Competitiveness

In its 2010 report Designing a Digital Future, PCAST identified
three areas of research that the Council felt were ``particularly
timely and important.'' I support the Council's recommendations. They
called for:

A national, long-term, multi-agency research initiative
on NIT for health that goes well beyond the current national program to
adopt electronic health records.

A national, long-term, multi-agency, multi-faceted
research initiative on NIT for energy and transportation.

A national, long-term, multi-agency research initiative
on NIT that assures both the security and the robustness of cyber-
infrastructure.

In addition, the Council identified a broader set of research
frontiers of the field that require increased focus from NITRD
agencies, including:

A broad multi-agency research program on the fundamentals
of privacy protection and protected disclosure of confidential data.

A collaborative research program that augments the study
of individual human-computer interaction with a comprehensive
investigation to understand and advance human-machine and social
collaboration and problem-solving in a networked, on-line environment.

Fundamental research in data collection, storage,
management, and automated large-scale analysis based on modeling and
machine learning.

Research in advanced domain-specific sensors, integration
of NIT into physical systems, and innovative robotics in order to
enhance NIT-enabled interaction with the physical world.

It is critical to recognize that many areas of IT are now equal in
importance to high performance computing (HPC) as measures of our
nation's competitiveness. Twenty years ago, at the time of passage of
the High Performance Computing and Communications Act of 1991 (which
established the modern NITRD program), it was appropriate that much of
the focus of the federal effort in computing was on the importance of
HPC to scientific discovery and national security. Today, many other
aspects of IT have risen to comparable levels of importance. Among
these are the interactions of people with computing systems and
devices; the interactions between IT and the physical world (e.g.,
robotics); large-scale data capture, management and analysis (critical,
today, to scientific discovery and national security); systems that
protect personal privacy and sensitive confidential information;
scalable systems and networking; software creation and evolution; and
critical infrastructure protection (e.g., the financial system, the
power grid, the air traffic control network). World leadership in all
of these areas is crucial to our nation's security and prosperity.

The Nation Is Investing Far Less on IT R&D than Is Shown in the Federal
Budget

One of the difficulties of assessing the adequacy of the federal
investment in various areas of IT R&D is the ambiguity of the data
about IT R&D investments reported by the various agencies participating
in NITRD. PCAST found that much of what gets reported by NITRD agencies
represents spending on IT that supports research in other fields--such
as computing clusters for scientists in other fields--and not spending
on researchin information technology. In some cases, the discrepancy in
reporting leads to a dramatic over-reporting of IT R&D investments by
the agencies: at one major NITRD agency, PCAST estimated that only
between 2 percent and 11 percent of reported NITRD expenditures truly
represented investments in IT R&D. I share PCAST's concern that ``by
leading policymakers to believe that we are spending much more on such
activities than is actually the case, this discrepancy contributes to a
substantial, systematic underinvestment in an area that is critical to
our national and economic security.''

The Federal Government Needs High-Level, Sustained, Expert Strategic
Advice on ITR&D

Another key recommendation contained in the PCAST report with which
I concur is the call for the establishment of a ``high-level standing
committee of academic scientists, engineers, and industry leaders
dedicated to providing sustained strategic advice in NIT.'' Given the
pace of innovation and change within the field, the challenge of its
multi-disciplinary, problem-driven research, and the size and scope of
the federal investment, having sustained guidance from a free-standing,
independent advisory committee seems crucial to NITRD's success. I was
pleased to see recognition of this in H.R. 2020, and I feel it is
imperative that the recommendation of the PCAST report be implemented.

Computer Science Must Be Viewed as an Essential Component of Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Education

As I noted above, the workforce needs of the IT fields going
forward demand a sustained effort to increase the number of students
going into computing fields. National security needs will require that
a large number of those students be American citizens. In addition,
participants in many other workforce fields will need IT knowledge and
skills. Making progress on this effort will require reversing trends
not just in computing, but across the STEM disciplines. I am pleased
that PCAST has called for the National Science and Technology Council's
Committee on STEM Education to exercise strong leadership to bring
about fundamental changes in K-12 STEM education in the U.S. Among
these changes has to be the incorporation of computer science as an
essential STEM component. As they note, ``fluency with NIT skills,
concepts and capabilities; facility in computational thinking; and an
understanding of the basic concepts of computer science must be an
essential part of K-12 STEM education.'' Groups like ACM's Education
Policy Committee have expended great effort to get computer science
recognized as a key part of the K-12 curriculum, but must be met with
more acceptance if we are to meet the needs of our information-driven
economy now and in the future.

In Some Areas, H.R. 2020 Did Not Go Far Enough

As co-Chair of the Computing Research Association's Government
Affairs Committee back in 2009, I joined in endorsing the passage of
H.R. 2020, the Networking and Information Technology Research and
Development Act of 2009. I believe the Act would make the NITRD program
stronger by enacting several of the recommendations of PCAST. In
particular, I was pleased that the NITRD Act included a requirement
that the NITRD program undergo periodic review and assessment of the
program contents and funding, as well as develop and periodically
update a strategic plan--both necessary in helping ensure the
significant federal investment in IT R&D is used as effectively as
possible. This review and assessment is best done by an independent
standing advisory committee composed of experts from academia, industry
and government. As noted earlier, the creation of such a committee is
essential.
I do not believe the Act went far enough in addressing the nation's
IT workforce and education needs. As CRA noted in a joint letter with
the Association for Computing Machinery and the National Center for
Women and Information Technology back in March 2009, we felt it is
critical that federal efforts to educate young people in computer
science improve, and that investments recognize that all racial, gender
and socioeconomic groups are crucial to the continued health of and
future innovations in the computing field. The three organizations made
four specific recommendations for the bill, which I support:

Promote computing education, particularly at the K-12
level, and increased exposure to computing education and research
opportunities for women and minorities as core elements of the NITRD
programs;

Require the NITRD program to address education and
diversity programs in its strategic planning and road-mapping process;

Expand efforts at NSF to focus on computer science
education, particularly at the K-12 level through broadening the Math
Science Partnership program; and

Enlist the Department of Education and its resources and
reach in addressing computer science education issues.

Conclusion: Federal Investment in Information Technology R&D Has
Yielded, and Will Continue to Yield, Extraordinary Payoff

Computing research--networking and information technology R&D--
changes our world, drives our prosperity, and enables advances in all
other fields.
The Federal Government has played an essential role in fostering
these breathtaking advances. The federal investment in computing
research is without question one of the best investments our Nation has
ever made. The payoff has been an explosion of new technologies that
have touched nearly every aspect of our lives, and the creation of new
industries and literally millions of new jobs.
The future is bright. There is tremendous opportunity--and
tremendous need--for further breakthroughs. The Federal Government's
essential role in fostering these advances--in supporting fundamental
research in computing and other engineering fields--must continue.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Lazowska.
Our next witness is Dr. Sproull.

STATEMENT OF DR. ROBERT SPROULL, DIRECTOR OF ORACLE LABS

Dr. Sproull. Good afternoon. I am Robert Sproull, recently
retired as Director of Oracle Labs. I want to thank Chairman
Brooks and Ranking Member Lipinski and Members of the
Subcommittee for an opportunity to appear before you today to
offer an industrial perspective. While I do not represent any
specific company, most of my career has been doing research or
managing research with industrial labs; Xerox Palo Alto
Research Center, Sun Microsystems Labs, and most recently
Oracle. But I have also been a university researcher on
federally-funded projects, an advisor to high-tech venture
capital investors, and a researcher in a federal laboratory.
My main point is that industrial research and innovation
alone will not sustain the extraordinary advances of the IT
economy that the two preceding witnesses have described. This
growth and advance over the last 50 years have depended on
high-risk, high-reward, long-term research, mostly performed in
academia and funded by the U.S. Government. Industry works
closely with academic research so as to harness their findings
and expertise as essential ingredients in its offerings.
The NIT economy is a complex ecosystem in which government,
industry, and academia interact closely. Industry excels at
developing and producing complex products, incremental
innovations, compelling product designs such as the IPad, and
global markets. Academia excels at high-risk research on
fundamental problems with uncertain economic payoffs, and
venture capital funding propels to market product-ready
technologies that might be ignored or even fought by large
companies. The biggest payoffs emerge from interactions among
all of these groups.
The ecosystem has produced extraordinary results. Its
complex behavior is sketched in the tire tracks diagram that
Dr. Strawn referred to, and I will present it to you for your
enjoyment. This is a slide that explains how to interpret it.
Time will go from left to right. This is the portable
communication technology characterized by cell phones.
University research activity is depicted with a red horizontal
line. Industrial research activity is shown with blue lines,
and notice interactions between them. You will see even more
interactions in a moment, depicted by the black arrows. And
emerging products are depicted with dashed black lines, and
when product streams reach a billion dollars, they are shown by
solid green lines.
So there are 19 sectors of the IT economy. This was
published in the diagram that was produced in 2003. Each of
these sectors yields revenues of over a billion dollars each.
We have a new update underway to illustrate even more recent
successes such as Internet search and others in social
networking.
Please note that the path to a billion dollar business is
not a simple progression from fundamental research to applied
research to development to delivery. Nor does a single idea or
breakthrough suffice to build an industry. Rather, dramatically
new capabilities build on an accumulation of many varied
research and innovation results. It may take 15 years or more
to develop the technologies and markets of a billion dollar
business.
The ecosystem depends on research, especially long-term
fundamental research. This research is high risk and
unpredictable. It is impossible to predict the degree of impact
of a research result or how it ultimately may be used in
products. The long diagonal lines in the diagram show only some
of the cases where work in one area became essential in another
area.
Government-funded long-term fundamental research has played
an essential role in each of the trajectories depicted in this
diagram. For example, ARPA in the '60s recognized that
information technology could address many defense problems and
undertook programs of long-term research to improve its
effectiveness, and they are responsible for many, especially on
the left-hand side, of the early technologies.
Today, solutions to many more problems facing the
government will depend critically on NITRD techniques. National
priorities in energy, transportation, health, and cybersecurity
all depend on NIT and will benefit from long-term research.
These priorities will also require short and medium-term
investments, as well as a great deal of routine IT, but we must
not let these components undercut long-term investments. As
ARPA and other agencies have shown, it's the long-term research
that leads to extraordinary advances.
As recommended in the PCAST report, the NITRD Program
should be expanded as necessary to match the broadening scope
of NITRD investments made by the Federal Government. Although
the program was started to coordinate high-performance
computing investments, the newer priorities dramatically
increase the scope of federal NRD, NITRD investments and
coordination requirements.
I have been extremely fortunate to have been part of the
research community of the NITRD ecosystem. It's been exciting
and rewarding, and it remains so. The fact that we have come so
far does not reduce the challenge or potential impact of
research problems we face today.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Sproull follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Robert Sproull, Director of Oracle Labs

Thank you, Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski, and the other
Members of the Subcommittee for this opportunity to discuss the Federal
Government's Networking and Information Technology Research and
Development program. I am pleased to offer my perspective on your
questions based on more than 40 years of experience doing or managing
computing research in academia and industry and also advising high-
technology venture capital investors. Among other roles, I currently
serve as the Chair of the National Research Council's Computer Science
and Telecommunication Board (CSTB), and recently retired from Oracle as
the Director of Oracle Labs. This is an applied research laboratory
first started by Sun Microsystems in 1990 and retained by Oracle when
they acquired Sun in 2010. I present today's testimony as an informed
individual and not as a representative of any particular organization.

Introduction

Extraordinary economic and societal benefits have exploded from the
U.S. NITRD ecosystem, which is a complex interplay of government,
academia, and industry that dates back more than 40 years. Some of the
technologies themselves have improved extraordinarily, such as the
price/performance of microprocessors; equally, new markets have grown
explosively as networking infrastructure and low-cost electronics have
enabled innovative products and businesses. I will describe below some
of the aspects of this ecosystem, especially the importance of
fundamental research and the interplay of government, academic, and
industrial roles.
I wish to stress at the outset, however, that this ecosystem would
not have been born, nor would it be successful today, without a
vigorous, thoughtful strategy of federal investment in fundamental
research in NIT. Especially important in the early days were programs
of long-term research sponsored by NSF and ARPA. An important milestone
was the High Performance Computing Act of 1991, which recognized the
importance of high-performance computing to federal missions,
especially those of Defense and Energy. But as IT technology itself
became more pervasive in the U.S., signaled most vividly by the
blossoming of the World Wide Web in 1993, a wide class of NIT
technologies became critical to short- and long-term requirements of
many more federal agencies. The Act and its research coordination role
were appropriately extended to address the expanded set of challenges.
This extension in scope must continue: today, NIT's role in national
security, national competitiveness, and national priorities is far
broader than high-performance computing alone.

NITRD Goals

The nation has identified advances in energy, transportation,
health, and cybersecurity as important national priorities. I concur
with the PCAST NITRD Working Group, on which I served, that these are
important drivers where NIT research and innovation can make enormous
contributions, and with the PCAST report recommendation to expand
NITRD's purview as necessary to address these areas. H.R. 2020 is an
excellent first step, identifying cyberphysical systems in particular
for more attention. The recently announced National Robotics Initiative
is a concrete example of investing in cyberphysical systems research.
But there is an even wider need for cyberphysical systems in achieving
national priorities, for example as part of controllers and systems
that achieve efficiencies in energy and transportation, and for
monitoring patient health. Indeed, the national priorities show a broad
panorama of areas, including high-performance computing, in which NITRD
investments will be essential.

Sun Microsystems' Research Lab, an Industrial Contributor to the NITRD
Ecosystem

Sun Microsystems was founded in 1982 to build advanced computer
workstations, based on results of research conducted primarily at
Stanford, Berkeley, and Bell Laboratories. In 1990, Sun created a
research laboratory. I was a founding member and eventually became its
director. When Oracle acquired Sun in 2010, they retained the lab as a
way to start Oracle Labs. I retired from Oracle earlier this year.
I characterize the lab as an ``applied research lab,'' in that most
of its research projects, though risky, have medium-term objectives
(e.g., less than three years) that, if successful, would have a
significant impact on a Sun product or product line. Our job is to
selectively explore risky ideas and reduce their risk to a level that
would be acceptable to an engineering team. Ideally, our research team
would then transfer to the engineering organization, carrying its ideas
and insights into a larger engineering team. We like to say that
``technology transfer is a contact sport,'' meaning that the most
effective transfers from research to engineering are those that
transfer people.
The lab was deliberately kept small, with a budget of about 2% of
Sun's total R&D budget. SunLabs hires mostly Ph.D.s in computer science
and engineering fields, but also high caliber college graduates in
those fields. When the lab started, our CEO, ScottMcNealy, explicitly
asked us to be ``eyes and ears'' for Sun, to participate in the global
IT research community, to learn from it, and to contribute to it. Our
researchers are nationally and internationally known, attending and
presenting papers at international conferences.
SunLabs does very little fundamental or long-term research. An
applied research project might develop broadly applicable results, but
that is not its principal objective. In order to import a broad range
of fundamental new ideas, we pay careful attention to academic
researchers and their results, as McNealy requested.
Sun evolved a system of ``collaborative research'' with academic
partners. We would contribute money or equipment to an established
university research project that we judged might be able to contribute
to Sun's technologies. Then our researchers would interact closely with
those in the university. We encouraged academic researchers and
graduate students to work with us at Sun, as consultants or student
interns, to learn from their ideas--again through people. For example,
Sun's embracing of Reduced Instruction Set (RISC) processor
technology--a technology behind most computer processors in use today--
was accelerated by collaborating with the RISC research group at U.C.
Berkeley and by consulting help from its principal investigator, Prof.
David Patterson. This model served Sun well, and helped us sustain
innovation at a time of rapid technological change. These collaborative
interactions with academia also allowed us to present challenging Sun
problems to academics and thus influence academic research agendas.
Though Sun Labs managed almost all the research projects at Sun, it
was responsible for only a fraction of Sun's innovations. The product
engineering organizations, developing both hardware and software,
routinely innovate. For example, Sun is famous for introducing in 1984
the ``network file system'' (NFS), which allowed computers to share
files over a computer network. Though innovative, its development was
not the direct result of research.
Incidentally, I dislike the word ``breakthrough,'' because it is
too often assumed that breakthroughs are the only objective of research
and stem only from research, especially fundamental research. To the
contrary, high-impact innovations can emerge in many ways, and
sometimes the principal reason for the high impact--and thus perhaps
the perception of a ``breakthrough''--may simply be a sharply lower
price or rapid market penetration. But these dramatic advances usually
depend on much varied research, much incremental, perhaps some
revolutionary, and often far earlier than the apparent
``breakthrough.''

The NITRD Ecosystem--The Big Picture

As part of an early assessment of the High-Performance Computing
Act of 1991, a study by the National Research Council developed a
graphic presentation known as ``the tiretracks diagram'' to illustrate
some of the features of the complex interactions among government,
academic, and industrial players that lead from early research to
several billion-dollar subsectors of the IT economy. The graphic is
attached below.
The graphic charts the development of technologies from their
origins in industrial and federally-supported university R&D, to the
introduction of the first commercial products, through to the creation
of billion-dollar industries and markets. The principal features of the
NITRD ecosystem that this diagram illustrates are:

Contributions are made by universities (usually federally
funded) and industry, in varied orders and magnitudes. Ideas and people
often contribute to different paths; there are frequent flows from
academia to industry and vice versa. There is no direct path from
research to impact.

Initial research often takes a long time to pay off; 15
years is typical.

Research often pays off in unanticipated ways:
developments in one sector often enable advances in another, often
serendipitously.

Innovations occur at all points along technology
trajectories, not only in research settings.

University and industry research are different:
university research favors long-term fundamental problems, while
industry generally focuses on the next product cycle or two (at most a
few years). Results of university research are public and available to
all, creating a challenge for industry uptake.

The original diagram produced by the NRC in 1995 identifies nine
billion-dollar sectors. The updated diagram produced in 2005 shows 19
billion-dollar subsectors of the IT economy, each of which bears the
clear stamp of federal investment, usually in high-risk research with
uncertain commercial application or payoff. The Council is at work now
producing the next version of the chart, and they are likely to
identify several new billion-dollar subsectors--search and social
networking, for example--that have emerged just since 2003.

The NITRD Ecosystem--a Java Example

In the late 1990s, Sun Microsystems introduced the new Java
programming language. Although new programming languages are rarely
adopted widely, Java became popular because of its ability to run
robustly on many different computer types and because of its modern
design, especially features that reduced some of the tedious chores of
programming; that is, it increased programmer productivity. Many IT
staffs and product developers embraced Java to program their products
and services. Today, Java is often taught to high school students as
their first programming language. One of the reasons Oracle acquired
Sun is that much of Oracle's product suite had come to depend on Java.
Java was designed by James Gosling in 1991 as part of a research
project exploring ways to use graphical point-and-click user interfaces
to control televisions, set-top boxes, kitchen appliances, and other
consumer gear. This product objective did not succeed, but Java found a
foothold in the mid `90s as a way to program Web browsers to create
animated and interactive experiences. Early releases for this purpose
reached a large number of programmers, the language became quite
popular, and Sun went on to develop versions for conventional computer
systems (as opposed to browsers).
Java's design and implementations draw heavily on preceding
research in many areas. Object-oriented programming languages had long
been studied by industry and academia. Especially important was the
SmallTalk language, developed by Xerox researchers in the 1970s,
inspired by a language named Simula, developed by Norwegian researchers
in the 1960s. Research to speed up execution of SmallTalk programs
became a popular focus of university research on a wide range of
fundamental language implementation problems. For example, a graduate
student at Stanford, Urs Holzle, developed a revolutionary way to
generate fast code for the Self language, a close kin of SmallTalk. He
and others founded a startup, Animorphic, to exploit this technology in
a commercial SmallTalk system to compete with other SmallTalk offerings
from a small group of startups (none of which survive today).
When Java became popular, the Animorphic team quickly retargeted
their work to a Java implementation, judging that it would have greater
commercial value than SmallTalk. Sun, looking for ways to speed up its
own Java implementations, bought Animorphic, and the team incorporated
their technology into Sun offerings, where it became known as ``HotSpot
technology.''
This is but one of many threads from research to product that
contributed essential components to Java technology.
This detailed glimpse of one of Java's technology paths shows the
NITRD ecosystem at work. The players are global; there are complex
interactions among industry andacademic researchers; people and ideas
flow rapidly; startups play an important role whether or not they
ultimately succeed as standalone businesses; fundamental innovations
may take a long time to reach mainstream products; a commercial success
will track back to countless research projects and results, many of
them funded by the Federal Government. The ecosystem collapses without
federal support of fundamental research.

Characteristics of the Ecosystem

Using the term ``ecosystem'' to describe the complex interactions
among participants in NITRD activities may seem a stretch, but the term
is apt. There are many distinct players, with varied but blurry roles,
and complex dependencies. As we've seen, an IT product depends on other
NITRD activities in complex ways akin to the dependencies in a
biological system. Different players perform complementary roles. Long-
term academic research provides new results whose impact cannot be
predicted at the time. Industry amplifies these results through its own
applied research and product development processes. The overall health
of the system depends both on funding from government and from revenues
received for products and services offered by healthy IT businesses.
Like a biological ecosystem, the NITRD ecosystem could be disrupted
or damaged inadvertently. The NRC report Assessing the Impacts of
Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem addressed exactly
this concern in 2009. It concludes that federal investment in research
is essential and dangerously thin. It points to the importance of
venture funding. It also points out that the ecosystem includes
customers: ``The most dynamic IT sector is likely to be in the country
with the most demanding IT customers and consumers.'' Thus, for
example, improving U.S. broadband networking is essential to creating
the demand to develop world-class innovative services.
The most dangerous and least visible threat to the ecosystem is
that we all focus on short-term research and payoffs, thus
underinvesting in the long-term research that may lead to extraordinary
technical advances and returns.
Investing in fundamental research is risky, and the amount and
character of payoff cannot be predicted. But federal sponsors have an
excellent record of directing fundamental research, in concert with the
research community itself. DARPA, for example, pursues military needs,
and its long-term vision and investments have resulted in fundamental
and high-payoff results, such as interactive computing, networking, and
RISC microprocessors. NSF's recognition that digital libraries would
become important led to high payoff in search engines, which can be
seen in today's search offerings from Google, Yahoo, and Microsoft. The
wisdom of long-term federal research investments is evident in the
productive ecosystem they have spawned.
As I remarked in my introduction, the national goals in energy,
transportation, health, and cybersecurity are excellent guides for
today's NITRD research investments. Who knows what billion-dollar NIT
industries may emerge from research toward these goals?

The Research Workforce

I want to offer a few comments on the workforce available to
industrial research groups. Note that this is a small subset of the
overall IT workforce. I offer these comments to emphasize the varied
nature of skills and training in the workforce.
At SunLabs, we hired mostly Ph.D.s, many fresh out of graduate
school. Candidates come from all over the world. In most cases we know
of students finishing their degrees because we have ongoing
collaborations with their professors or the students themselves. In all
cases, we seek candidates who have demonstrated research skills in
areas aligned with the research project we are staffing. For example, a
project to explore new ideas in building Java ``virtual machines''
seeks candidates who have built virtual machines, garbage collectors,
or other programming-language artifacts as part of their academic
research. Consistent with our objective of transferring technology by
transferring people, we seek researchers adept at building systems and
willing to join engineering teams.
Although we expect staff to work from one of our two lab locations
in the U.S., this is not always possible. Some candidates have family
constraints that prevent a move. Some foreign nationals cannot obtain
visas, or must work from abroad until a visa can be obtained. The
international Internet makes remote work (``dispersed R&D'') possible,
but not preferable. Location still matters, but as networking improves,
it matters less.

Understanding Federal Research Investments

The PCAST Working Group that examined the NITRD program had trouble
determining the levels of research investment in different areas
because of difficulties in labeling and measuring expenditures. In
industry, we make clear distinctions between different kinds of
investment in IT, in part so that the investments can be balanced
appropriately.
First, support of fundamental and applied research. The goals of
this work are too risky to depend on results to meet customer or market
needs.
Second, investments to develop new IT products and services, some
for sale and some for internal use. These developments may be routine
or highly innovative, but the development itself is not very risky:
schedules, milestones, tests, and periodic releases characterize the
work.
Finally, investments in NIT infrastructure that support all parts
of the business, including the two items mentioned above, NIT research
and NIT development. These investments are usually the least risky and
innovative of all, and are usually driven by estimates of computing and
networking capacity needed. As NIT infrastructure becomes necessary to
support almost all business activities, these expenses are similar to
those for space and utilities, and are accounted as an overhead for the
activities they support.
Federal budget reporting makes it difficult to distinguish these
three classes of investment. Infrastructure, in particular, should not
be characterized as an NIT R&D investment unless it supports NIT R&D
itself. For example, a Web server that provides citizen access to an
agency's database is not an NITRD investment, though it is a use of
NIT. While distinctions between research and development (the first two
categories) are sometimes blurry, the appropriate measure is one of
risk and reward. It is the risky but potentially broadly valuable
investments that should be classified as research.
NITRD program coordination would be improved if the participating
NITRD agencies were required to report their R&D expenditures more
clearly. To coordinate research activities, actual research investments
must be reported. Either better categories such as the ones I've
outlined or more thorough line-item reporting would help. This is an
area where a bill such as H.R. 2020 could contribute.

Conclusion

The NITRD program has demonstrated an ability to coordinate federal
investments in essential research, starting with high-performance
computing and now extending to a broader set of national goals. The
challenge now, for sponsors and researchers alike, is to make the case
to an increasingly broad set of NITRD mission agencies that long-term
investments in fundamental NITRD research lead to large rewards for
their missions and for the nation.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Sproull.
Next our final witness is Dr. Robert Schnabel.

STATEMENT OF DR. ROBERT SCHNABEL,

DEAN, SCHOOL OF INFORMATICS,

INDIANA UNIVERSITY, SCHOOL OF INFORMATICS

Dr. Schnabel. Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank you so much
for the opportunity to speak with you today. I'm Bobby
Schnabel. I'm Dean of the School of the Informatics at Indiana
University. In this testimony I'll represent both my university
role and also my national roles in computing education with ACM
and with the industry non-profit coalition Computing in the
Core.
I will speak primarily to the education and workforce
issues that have been mentioned and which are essential to
keeping our Nation's innovation and economy strong.
My fundamental points are these. The workforce demand in
computing and IT is high, it is growing, and it greatly exceeds
our current and projected capacity. To meet that demand we will
need to educate both a greater number and a greater--more
diverse set of people in computer science and IT disciplines.
And to reach the required enrollments at the university levels
we really need to bolster computer science education at the K-
12 level, where, unfortunately, the current delivery of
computer science education is meager and actually diminishing.
I strongly support the inclusion that you have made of
workforce education and diversity issues in the NITRD
legislation and urge you to assure that NITRD agencies are
accountable to report back what they are doing to improve K-12
education and diversity.
And finally, I strongly encourage you bringing the
Department of Education back into the NITRD Program.
Now, I could stop there and possibly set the record for
brevity, but I will elaborate a little bit. First, I want to
express my sincere appreciation for your work on the NITRD
legislation overall. NITRD is at the core of what we do in
computing research at U.S. universities and has been spoken by
many here, the research advances under the NITRD Programs have
been the lifeblood that have fueled much of our Nation's
economic growth.
As the scope of computing continues its marvelous
expansion, it's crucial that the scope of the NITRD Programs
expand as well. A particularly important area in my estimation
is health IT.
Now, returning to workforce, as the SRI study that has been
alluded to validated, the demand for IT professionals is much
greater than the supply, both in total and in almost all of the
subcategories of IT. Universities have actually done a very
good job of evolving with the times in turning out graduates
that industry really values. They are simply not turning out
nearly enough of them, and when you look at the reason for
that, a good part of the problem is the lack of rigorous
computer science at the K-12 level.
A recent report called, ``Running on Empty,'' that was
issued by the ACM and the Computer Science Teachers'
Association showed that computer science at K-12 really faces a
triple whammy. It is the lack of computer science standards
that have been implemented by the states, the lack of rigorous
computer science courses that count as core graduation
requirements, and the lack of computer science teachers. An
explanation I sometimes get for that is rather simple. Computer
science wasn't around 50 years ago when much of this curriculum
got solidified, and since then there has simply been no room at
the end.
So for states to strengthen computer science K-12
education, I believe that the encouragement and support at the
federal level is essential, and NITRD can help significantly
with this. In my written testimony I discuss a number of
helpful steps.
One important example of that is support for the very
exciting new computer science advanced placement course that is
being developed and the accompanying CS 10K Project, which is
attempting to train 10,000 new teachers to be able to deliver
that course.
Another simple but really key component is just assuring,
as has been said, that all federal STEM legislation clearly and
explicitly state that computer science is part of the scope of
that legislation.
So to conclude and to come back to the comments about
workforce, if this hearing had been held yesterday, it would
have been difficult for me to attend. Our School of Informatics
was holding its annual career fair where we had 80 companies in
the largest space that our campus can accommodate, interviewing
our students. The message that we got from those companies is
the same one that I hear every year, and that is that the three
to four hundred students who will graduate this year is a
fraction of what they would like to hire from us.
As I look to my colleagues and they are nodding, that
message could be repeated at virtually every university in this
country. I really appreciate your dedication to helping our
Nation solve that problem and will look forward to responding
to your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Schnabel follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Robert Schnabel,
Dean, School of Informatics,
Indiana University, School of Informatics
On behalf of Indiana University, its School of Informatics, the
Association for Computing Machinery, its Education Policy Committee,
the members of the Computing in the Core Coalition and myself, thank
you, Chairman Brooks, Ranking Member Lipinski, and Members of the
Subcommittee, for the opportunity to share comments on the Networking
and Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD) program
with you.
I have been involved in computing and the computing community for
nearly 40 years. Prior to assuming my current dean position in 2007,
this includes 30 years at the University of Colorado at Boulder as a
professor of computer science, and service as chair of Computer
Science, associate dean for academic affairs in the College of
Engineering and Applied Science, Vice Provost for Academic and Campus
Technology and CIO, and founding director of the Alliance for
Technology, Learning and Society (ATLAS) Institute. I also am a co-
founder and executive team member of the National Center for Women &
Information Technology.
Computing is transforming our world--driving innovation in numerous
fields, leading to entirely new multi-billion dollar industries
creating thousands of new jobs, and transforming how we live, work, and
socialize. Fueling this engine of innovation are the investments that
various agencies have made in the computing research enterprise and the
workforce that supports it. The Networking and Information Technology
Research and Development program (NITRD) plays a key role in
coordinating and focusing these federal programs.

Summary of Recommendations Concerning Education and Workforce

H.R. 2020, as passed the House in the 111th Congress, proposes
enactment of the President's Council of Advisors for Science and
Technology (PCAST) recommendations for assessment and strategic
planning by the NITRD program. These elements will strengthen the
overall NITRD program. We particularly appreciate and strongly support
the committee's inclusion in H.R. 2020 that NITRD address both
education and workforce issues, including the diversity of the IT
student and workforce population, as part of its strategic planning
process.
If we are to continue to discover and develop the innovations that
have created new industries and transformed others, we need to ensure a
healthy IT workforce that is skilled and large enough to meet the
nation's growing IT needs, and reflects the gender and racial diversity
of our nation. While university computing and IT education and research
programs have done a good job of changing with the times to meet
current needs, the education pipeline feeding our workforce is not
producing enough graduates in IT fields to meet the growing needs of
the computing industry, let alone the other industries that rely on
computing and the public agencies that need computing professionals. In
addition, women and many minority groups are greatly underrepresented
among computing and IT students and in the IT workforce, depriving the
nation both of potential skilled workers and of the innovation that
results from diverse teams.
A key element of this pipeline is in crisis and is directly related
to the insufficient number of students in university computing and IT
programs: K-12 computer science education. If we do not address the
issues in K-12 computer science education, students will have few
opportunities to experience this critical discipline or its concepts
before higher education and our computing pipeline will continue to
suffer. NITRD and the National Coordinating Office (NCO) can play a key
role in addressing obstacles standing in the way of strengthening K-12
computer science education. As the committee works toward considering a
new NITRD reauthorization, we recommend Congress add additional
provisions for NITRD programs to specifically address the systemic
issues facing K-12 computer science education, namely:

NITRD programs should report to NCO what steps they are
taking to address K-12 computer science education reform.

Include the Department of Education in the NITRD program.

Include and clearly define computer science in federal
education programs.

Create state planning and implementation grants for
computer science K-12 curriculum and build national networks of support
for K-12 computer science education.

Create pre-service and professional development
opportunities for K-12 computer science teachers.

The remainder of this testimony expands upon the preceding points.

NITRD's Important Role in Sustaining Innovation

Information technology, driven by public and private research
funding, has transformed our society and our economy. As amazing as the
progress of the last 20 years is in this regard, the future can be even
more amazing, if public and private players sustain our IT research
ecosystem. Historically, the diversity of our NITRD agencies has been a
major strength, fostering multiple approaches to complex problems. The
Internet began as a Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
project, grew with National Science Foundation (NSF) support and
blossomed with commercial funding. The Human Genome Project was a
triumph of biomedicine and IT, building on National Institutes of
Health, DARPA, NSF and Department of Energy research and birthing
personalized medicine.
A key element of the NITRD program involves fostering communication
and coordination across 13 federal agencies where IT is relevant. This
creates a rich ecosystem for information technology research and
development, spanning many programs. The legislation proposed in the
111th Congress strengthens the program by addressing several key
recommendations forwarded in 2007 by the President's Council of
Advisors on Science and Technology.
As the National Coordinating Office (NCO) begins to develop
strategic plans for computing research, it also should consider how
agencies are meeting the ongoing challenge of supporting the continual
broadening of the field of computing and information technology. I am
closely acquainted with this broadening as the Dean of the School of
Informatics at Indiana University, which offers a variety of
undergraduate and graduate degrees in both computer science and
informatics to meet the growing needs of the NIT workforce. These
programs include research ranging from the foundational aspects of
computer science to a wide range of applications and human and societal
implications of computing and IT. It is important that NITRD programs
embrace this breadth of research areas, as well as the growing
diversity of university departments and schools that are part of the
computing and IT field.
One area of particularly great and increasing national importance
in both research and education is health IT. The challenges that this
area addresses range from assuring that the federal government and the
country's health care system meets the needs of modernizing and
standardizing health records, to providing powerful and easy-to-use
information technology systems that support health care providers, to
creating tools and systems that allow individuals to monitor and
improve their own health independently. It is clear there are
tremendous needs and opportunities in Health IT, and this area should
be considered as a strategic focus for NITRD.

Addressing Our Workforce and Education Needs

While everyone is talking about jobs these days--where to find
them, how to create them--the computing industry is clamoring for the
talent it needs to fill thousands of vacancies. The U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistic projects that the computing sector will have 1.5
million job openings over the next 10 years, making this one of the
fastest growing economic fields. There are many pathways into these
jobs, but a deeper look at the fastest growing occupations within this
field (such as computer software engineers or computer and network
systems analysts) shows they either will require a computer science or
related degree or greatly benefit from the knowledge and skills
imparted by computer science courses. It is gratifying to see that the
report "Networking and Information Technology: Workforce Study"
presented to NITRD in May 2009 by SRI, corroborated these widely used
workforce projections.
Further, CNN's Money and PayScale.com ranked the ``Best Jobs in
America,`` and the number one job is Software Architect. Other computer
science career paths also were high on the list, including Database
Administrator at number 7, Information Systems Security Engineer at 17,
Software Engineer at 18, and at least 10 other computing careers
ranking in the top 50. I commonly forward articles about the jobs that
are most in demand to our school's career services office; computing
and IT jobs are virtually always on these lists.
During the past several decades, computing and IT has grown to
address these needs. We have moved from a field focused on the
foundational systems that make computers run (e.g., operating systems,
programming languages) and applications in scientific computing and
business data processing, to also encompass a wide array of general
purpose computer applications (e.g., databases, computer graphics,
robotics, computer security, graphical user interfaces) and discipline-
oriented applications (e.g., bioinformatics, health informatics).
Higher education has adapted both by greatly broadening the scope of
computer science at many universities to embrace this breadth and by
adding new schools of computing, informatics and information that
enlarge or complement them.
In general, the students that are being produced by university
computing and IT programs are meeting the needs of the IT workforce
well; there are just far too few of them. Despite the tremendous job
opportunities that computer science knowledge offers:

Participation in AP Computer Science has been flat for a
decade; \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Growth in AP Computer Science tests taken has remained flat
for the past decade while AP tests in other STEM fields have grown
rapidly; see http://www.acm.org/public-policy/AP.jpg.

Interest in majoring in computer science among incoming
freshman is at an all-time low; \2\ and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Source: UCLA Higher Education Research Institute Survey of
Incoming Freshmen.

here is little ethnic and gender diversity among those
who take computer science courses. \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  According to the National Center for Women and Information
Technology, computer science education has significant equity barriers.
In 2008, only 17 percent of Advance Placement (AP) computer science
test takers were women, and only 4 percent (784 students) were African
American.

This relates to insufficient exposure to computer science in K-12.
We regard this as a fundamental issue that federal, state and local
governments need to address to achieve its workforce needs.
ACM has been on the forefront of efforts to strengthen K-12
computer science education for years. Last year it spearheaded the
formation of the Computing in the Core coalition to raise the national
profile of K-12 computer science education. The founding members of
this coalition are major stakeholders in the field of computing ranging
from industry--Microsoft, Google, and SAS--to non-profit organizations,
including the Association for Computing Machinery, Computer Science
Teachers Association, National Center for Women and Information
Technology, Computing Research Association, and Anita Borg Institute.
Recently, the Coalition has grown to include the College Board, the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics and the National Science
Teachers Association. Computing in the Core is united in our commitment
to improving computer science education, which we strongly believe is
marginalized in K-12 classrooms nationwide today.The marginalization of
K-12 computer science education is a result of numerous federal, state
and local education policies that do not make room for K-12 computer
science education, coupled with deep confusion about what computer
science education is in elementary, middle and secondary schools. A
recent study, Running On Empty: The Failure to Teach K-12 Computer
Science in the Digital Age, \4\ revealed K-12 computer science
education is currently focused on basic skills, which teach students
how to consume technology, versus acquiring deeper knowledge and skills
which teach them to create new technologies. Further, only nine states
``count'' computer science courses toward a core academic graduation
credit. Finally, few states have robust teacher certification programs
for K-12 computer science teachers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\  This study can be found at http://www.acm.org/runningonempty.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The systemic absence of rigorous and engaging computer science in
K-12 education starts at the local level, but there is a set of
recurring policy issues that the Federal Government and the NITRD
program can take strides to address:

There are few states that have standards for computer
science education and there are virtually no assessments for computer
science education.

Professional development for computer science teachers is
limited as resources are focused away from this area.

Computer science courses typically do not count toward a
student's core graduation credit requirements.

While decisions on these issues are often vested at the state and
local level, NITRD and the NCO can address obstacles in federal STEM
education and workforce-related programs computer science faces to help
creating breathing room for state-led reforms of K-12 computer science
education. We make the following specific recommendations for the
committee to consider:

NITRD programs should report to the NCO what steps they
are taking to address K-12 computer science education reform.

NITRD has a Program Component Area (PCA) that includes
education activities and specifically mentions the 21st Century
workforce and K-12 education as strategic priorities. However, there is
little specific attention to these issues within the PCA or
prioritization within the NITRD program in general. Most education
funding within the NITRD program is from the National Science
Foundation (NSF), while the Department of Education does not
participate in the NITRD program at all. Of the NSF activities, there
appears to be little to no involvement with some of the key programs
within NSF's Education and Human Resources Directorate focused on
strengthening K-12 science, technology, engineering and mathematics
education, including the Math Science Partnership program. We encourage
greater ties with these programs, particularly MSP.

We note that the CE-21 program within the Computing and
Information Science and Engineering Directorate at NSF is one program
focused on addressing K-12 computer science education. It has invested
in the development of a new AP Computer Science: Principles \5\ course
intended to be broadly engaging and appealing to students, as well as
other initiatives focused on reviving K-12 computer science education.
The effort also rightly focuses on inclusion--making sure that the AP
test and the computer science discipline appeal to a population of
students diverse in race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status and gender.
We support this program and point to it as model for addressing some of
the key challenges in K-12 computer science education.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  See http://www.collegeboard.com/html/computerscience/
index.html.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Include the Department of Education in the NITRD program

As previously mentioned, the Department of Education is
not one of the agencies currently participating in the NITRD program.
Considering the key linkage between education and workforce, it is
difficult, if not impossible, to address the workforce needs and the K-
12 education issues, without having the Department of Education at the
table. We urge you to ask the agency to return to NITRD.

Include and clearly define computer science in federal
education programs.

Computer science means the study of computers and
algorithmic processes, including their principles, their hardware and
software designs, their applications, and their impact on society.
Computer science education includes the following elements: design
(both software and hardware), creation of digital artifacts,
abstraction, logic, algorithm development and implementation,
programming paradigms and languages, theoretical foundations, networks,
graphics, databases and information retrieval, information security and
privacy, artificial intelligence, the relationship between computing
and mathematics, the limits of computation, applications in information
technology and information systems, and social impacts of computing.
\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  ACM and CSTA have a four-part, grade-appropriate framework
describing the standards for computer science education in K-12; see
http//www.csta.acm.org/Curriculum/sub/ACMK12CSModel.html.

As schools have increasingly stepped up the integration,
use, and teaching of information technology as tools that support
learning, distinctions between these areas that involve the use of
computing and IT as learning tools, and genuine computer science
education have blurred. Educators and policy makers consistently
confuse the use of technology and teaching of technology literacy with
teaching computer science as a core academic discipline within the STEM
fields. PCAST recognized this issue in their 2010 report, Prepare and
Inspire: K-12 Education in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(STEM) for America's Future:

``Computer-related courses should aim not just for
technological literacy, which includes such utilitarian skills as
keyboarding and the use of commercial software packages and the
Internet, but for a deeper understanding of the essential concepts,
methods and wide-ranging applications of computer science. Students
should gain hands-on exposure to the process of algorithmic thinking
and its realization in the form of a computer program, to the use of
computational techniques for real-world problem solving, and to such
pervasive computational themes as modeling and abstraction, modularity
and reusability, computational efficiency, testing and debugging, and
the management of complexity.''

Federal programs exacerbate this confusion with vague
terminology, as well as simply including ``STEM'' as eligible subjects.
This often does not translate into computer science programs being
included in the scope of the programs when they are implemented at the
state and local levels. Relying on ``STEM'' as the foundational
definition can inadvertently set up barriers for computer science. For
example, NSF's Math and Science Partnership program specifically states
that it is open to all ``STEM'' proposals; however, a closer review
shows that grants must focus on improving ``math and science'' scores.
Any proposal focused on computer science must show gains in math and
science, not actually on computer science.

For these reasons, it is crucially important that
federal STEM workforce and education programs explicitly state that
they include computer science. This recommendation is consistent with a
recent report on PCAST that said computer science must be part of STEM
education programs. As a coordinating body, NITRD should work with
participating agencies to explicit include computer science as an
eligible discipline within STEM education programs.

Create state planning and implementation grants for
computer science K-12 curriculum and build national networks of support
for K-12 computer science education

States should be developing specific, thorough plans to
improve computer science education. Few states are deliberately
integrating computer science into their K-12 offerings at elementary
schools or ensuring its place in the high school curriculum. A broader
capacity initiative focused on improving curriculum, outreach and
evaluation would build support for the goals and efforts of state
planning and implementation of grants.

As we previously recommended, bringing the Department of
Education back into the NITRD program could create additional resources
for such plans, but other NITRD agencies (such as the Department of
Defense, NSF and the Department of Energy, which all house formal and
informal education programs) should work directly with States to ensure
state workforce and education needs are met. Establishing these plans
or pilots for reforms within the States is a step toward addressing the
deeper policy issues in K-12 computer science education.

Create pre-service and professional development
opportunities for K-12 computer science teachers

Very few schools of education are focused on preparing
computer science teachers, and because of a focus on ``core'' courses,
there is limited professional development funding for computer science
teachers. Federal agencies have numerous professional development and
pre-service programs; however, we have consistently found little
support for K-12 computer science education teachers within them. As
course offerings in computer science grow, particularly with the new
Advanced Placement Computer Science Principles course being introduced
into schools, a program that specifically addresses the shortage of
certified computer science teachers at the K-12 level is imperative, as
are investments in professional development for those already teaching.
Again, NITRD can play a role in raising this issue within agencies that
have STEM or general education professional development or pre-service
teacher programs.

The Computer Science Education Act

Provisions of the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) have also
contributed to computer science's marginalization. Because of NCLB's
accountability provisions and its definition of ``core'' disciplines,
states have put resources toward investments in curriculum, pedagogy
and professional development related to ``core'' courses. Furthermore,
high school graduation requirements are tied to core courses. There are
countless stories of teachers being pulled out of computer science
courses to support the mathematics proficiency goals of NCLB. While you
and your colleagues consider the future of NITRD, the House Education
and the Workforce Committee is considering reauthorization of the
Elementary and Secondary Education Act. Computing in the Core is
working to ensure that a revised education law accommodates computer
science in its provisions related to STEM education and ensures that
computer science educators have access to the professional development
and supports their colleagues do. The Computer Science Education Act
from the 111th Congress represents our priorities related to programs
administered by the Department of Education.

Conclusion

The NITRD program plays a crucial role in the development and
health of the country's networking and information technology
capabilities, and we strongly support the program. To meet the large
and growing needs of this industry, the nation will require a much
larger and more diverse array of computer science and IT professionals
than it currently is producing. We welcome and applaud the inclusion of
workforce, education and diversity issues in the NITRD program. We
particularly encourage the NITRD program to play an active role in
strengthening K-12 computer science education, as this is the
foundational issue that needs to be address to bolster the population
of students focusing on computing and IT at the university level, and
entering the IT workforce.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before the
Subcommittee today and for your attention. The groups I represent today
stand ready to work with the committee to address our recommendations
as NITRD reauthorization moves forward in this Congress. I'll be
pleased to address any questions you have.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Schnabel, and thank you the
other panel members for your testimony.
Reminding Members of the Committee that Committee rules
limit questioning to five minutes.
The Chair at this point will open the round of questions,
and the Chair recognizes himself for five minutes.
This question is with respect to each of the witnesses.
Each of you discuss the importance of federal investments in
networking and information technology research and development,
I am sure you are all also aware of the budget and deficit
decisions facing the United States Congress. In looking at the
FY 12 budget and what is already a finite amount for federal
investment and will likely be even smaller next year, how would
you prioritize federal NITRD investments?
Whoever wishes to go first.
Dr. Strawn. Chairman Brooks, I will speak from the NITRD
Coordination Program, for example. We certainly will have
discussions with our agencies asking them how they prioritize
their individual activities and then we will seek to mold that
into a unified whole, looking for gaps that might have occurred
as people prioritize away important activities.
So our goal of coordination may help in that activity.
Chairman Brooks. Will you please report your results to
this committee, submit a written report?
Dr. Strawn. Yes, sir.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you.
Dr. Lazowska. Mr. Chairman, I think that America needs to
decide in which areas of R&D it absolutely must be the world
leader, and it needs to make extra investments in those fields.
And I think this is the number one field in which America has
to be the world leader. It has to be the world leader because
this enables advances in all other fields because it drives our
economy forward, because it is the largest source of science
and technology employment, because it is essential to our
national security and because if you want advances in areas
like energy and transportation and health, then you need
advances in this field. This is really the cornerstone of our
economic success, our national security, and our discovery in
all other fields.
So I honestly think that the question you need to ask is
how to make very difficult choices among fields of
prioritization, and I want to emphasize that the NITRD crosscut
budget dramatically overstates the amount of funding that the
Federal Government is actually spending on NIT R&D because of
the categorization issues I addressed before.
The one other thing I would like to add is it is often
tempting to confuse industry R&D for research that looks out a
long way, and in truth the Federal Government is by far the
most significant investor in research that looks out more than
one product cycle. I am from Seattle. Microsoft is one of the
computing companies that has a significant investment in
research that looks out more than one product cycle. That is
called Microsoft Research. It is about 900 people around the
world, most of them in the United States, and it represents
about four percent of Microsoft's R&D budget. The rest is very
talented engineers producing, in caricature, the next version
of Office and Windows. All right. It is R&D, but it is not what
is going to lead to the next generation of breakthroughs. That
is our job.
Dr. Sproull. Mr. Chairman, not surprisingly, my counsel
would be to be sure that the long-term investment remains as
healthy as it can. Indeed, perhaps the entire investments need
to be modulated, but I think we have shown that it is the
long--as Dr. Lazowska was saying, the long-term has huge payoff
and may lead to a brighter economy for all of us in that long-
term.
And the cliche, I am afraid, is apt, which is let us not
let the urgent drive out the important.
Dr. Schnabel. Mr. Chairman, I will just add briefly. I
think a strategy always has to be a combination of things that
are focused and things that are general. We have heard about
some focused priorities in areas as health, energy, and
security, but as we travel around the world, and all of us do
that, one still hears in the countries that we now see as our
growing competitors a great envy for the culture of innovation
in this Nation that none of them can replicate. And to be able
to sustain that we also have to leave room for things that are
not as focused but will lead to that next round of innovation
or otherwise we will be killing the goose that lays the golden
egg.
Chairman Brooks. Well, if I could just add a comment,
Chairman's prerogative for a second, most everywhere I have
been in Congress this year, everybody I talk to says their
program is number one, and obviously, we can't fund everyone's
program at number one given the financial circumstances we face
unless we want to risk the Federal Government's solvency and
bankruptcy, in which case every program would be last because
we wouldn't have enough.
To give an example of the severity of the problem, last
Thursday the Chairman of the House Armed Service Committee gave
us a briefing on information he had received on the impact of
some of these potential cuts on a national defense. We were
looking at hundreds of thousands of military uniformed
personnel, DOD civilian personnel, support contractors in the
private sector that are going to be laid off or the positions
will no longer exist. Talking about mothballing one carrier
battle group, two nuclear submarines, 10 percent of our fighter
aircraft and strategic bomber aircraft.
So if you can share with us any insight at some point in
the future by submitting in writing to this committee a
supplemental statement in which you share with us what you
think your priorities for funding ought to be within NITRD,
that would help us. If we have the amount of funding we have
right now and we can fund everything at the same level, well,
then that is fine. We don't have to get into that
prioritization process.
But this is an opportunity for you to share with us your
expertise about where the money ought to be spent if we are
forced to deal with less overall. Otherwise, thank you for your
comments.
Next I recognize Mr. Lipinski.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This past Monday I was speaking to a group of constituents,
and I was going through a job--five-point jobs plan I had put
out a couple of months ago, and I said in there we need to
invest in education, invest in innovation, and I think that is
what you are talking about here.
And I think all of your testimony sort of really supports
what I said why we have to do that is not only do we grow the
jobs here in the United States, but you look at the 1990s, and
we were able to grow out of the budget deficit to a budget
surplus. You know, some of that came because we were able to
grow, and you know, certainly was connected up with the really
the explosion of the World Wide Web.
And so I think everything that all of you had said really
supports that idea, and I think it is really critical as we do
prioritize what really is--what really are good investments. I
think the Chairman is correct. We really need to prioritize,
but here I think that we are in the right place in terms of
prioritizing this research.
I want--I was going to ask a question of workforce, but I
think I am going to go instead because something Dr. Lazowska
had said prompted me to go in a--to my second question first,
and this is a question for everybody.
One of PCAST's recommendations, which Dr. Sproull in
particular reiterated in his testimony, is for the NITRD
Program to better account for the part of its budget that
supports actual NIT R&D as opposed to NIT infrastructure that
enables R&D and other science and engineering fields.
Should we be removing the budget for such infrastructure
from the NITRD Program altogether? Are there downsides in
narrowing the scope of the NITRD Program in this way? And
finally, do we have a good estimate of what we are actually
spending in NIT R&D if the NITRD budget is currently
overcounting what we are spending?
Who wants to start on that? Dr. Lazowska.
Dr. Lazowska. I will begin, and I am sure Dr. Strawn will
have something to add. I want to say that I am speaking for
myself and not for PCAST, and it is important to understand
that.
My view and I think the view of our working group on the
report at least was that it is entirely appropriate to continue
to include those funds as part of the NITRD crosscut, simply to
categorize them more carefully. There are already parts of the
NITRD crosscut budget that account for infrastructure. For
example, the acquisition of high-performance computing
equipment.
But suppose that the National Institutes of Health, for
example, spends substantial amounts of funding on databases for
biomedical research. All right. Those are very, very important
expenditures. They are crucial to driving biomedical research
forward, they are IT, they belong in the NIH research budget,
it is fine to have them as part of the NITRD Program, but they
should be identified as the use of advanced information
technology infrastructure to drive biomedical research forward.
As you perhaps know from reading the report, we asked an
independent organization to look at several agencies, and the
accuracy of the categorization varies widely across agencies,
and I want to emphasize that no one is actively misreporting.
What is needed is simply a more accurate characterization. Dr.
Strawn and the National Coordinating Office have already taken
steps in that direction, and I want to emphasize that this is a
coordinating process that works.
And two quick examples. The previous PCAST report
recommended increased emphasis on cyber physical systems, and a
crosscutting program across multiple agencies was launched very
quickly. The most recent PCAST report said increase the
emphasis on large-scale data analysis, which is necessary for
commerce, for scientific discovery, for national security, and
we already have a big data senior steering group.
So it is really a very responsive coordinating process.
Mr. Lipinski. Who wants to go next? Dr. Strawn.
Dr. Strawn. Yes, sir. Let me just say--thank you. The only
thing I would refer back to is my use of the ``Pasteur's
Quadrant,'' book reference in my oral testimony about R&D being
a two-dimensional structure, and it is--that sort of means it
is not always clear what will produce the most important long-
term research.
The project orientation, which has been effectively used by
ARPA and DARPA and now by energy and by information and so
forth where we have advanced research projects, may look like
development or even look like infrastructure, but, in fact, if
something entirely new comes out of it, it can spawn whole new
research areas as well as whole new areas of activity.
As Dr. Lazowska mentioned, in one of our coordinating areas
on high-performance computing, we have two sub-areas that we
report separately, high-performance computing R&D and high-
performance computing infrastructure and applications. This has
been our largest area because there has been a large federal
investment in high-performance computing, so we thought it was
appropriate some time ago to break out those two distinctions.
And it is certainly conceivable that we can break out in some
of our other coordinating areas of similar situation, and I
only caution that we shouldn't look for a sharp line between
what is information science and supportive science and what is
information science theory.
Dr. Lazowska. Could I add a comment? Through the wonder of
information technology, I was able to learn that the Navy's
newest submarine is going to cost $13 billion, a $4 billion
budget overrun. Just a news post on my iPhone. I want to
emphasize that the National Science Foundation Computer
Information Science and Engineering annual budget is in the
order of half a billion dollars per year, and the corresponding
DARPA Information Technology Investment is on the order of half
a billion dollars per year.
These are very significant amounts of money, but they are
rounding errors in terms of the federal budget, in terms of the
cost overrun of a single submarine, and they are what power our
Nation forward. Okay. It is those NSF and DARPA investments in
information technology that make possible the prosperity we
enjoy today.
So it is important to keep in perspective the relatively
small amount of money that the Federal Government is investing
in this field and the billion dollar industries, the many
billion dollar industries that it creates.
Dr. Strawn. We like to think our leverage factor or our
multiplier factor is very great compared to many other federal
investments.
Mr. Lipinski. It would be wonderful to see what you can--
what can be shown as much as you can, that is not easy to do,
but always getting back to, you know, what the Chairman
emphasizes is, you know, prioritizing and anything that you can
do to show the results is--would be very helpful.
So thank you. I yield back. Thank you for the extra time.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski, and members of
the panel, I would like to echo some of your comments. It would
be wonderful if we would implement economic policies that will
deal with some of the structural issues that have inhibited our
country's economic growth. That is the best way to get out of
this, and we all understand the pivotal role your sector has
played in the economic growth that we have enjoyed in past
years. Let's just pray that Congress and the White House
collectively will do the right thing.
Next the Chair recognizes Mr. Bucshon of Indiana.
Mr. Bucshon. I thank everyone for attending, and mine is
going to be more focused on--less on budget and more on what
type of research that we can be doing.
I am in health care. I was a heart surgeon before this. As
you know there is a big push nationally, and this may not be as
important as some of our national security issues, but it is
important to our country, there is a big push, of course, for
electronic medical records and patient--there is more and more
patient data being stored permanently not on, for example, X-
rays that are not on actual film but that are on hard drives
around the country and around the world.
And from a medical standpoint right now, we have a system,
as you probably know, which is a hodge podge of a multitude of
different electronic systems, most of which are proprietary and
don't communicate between each other, which just to give you an
example in my hometown, Evansville, Indiana, we have two
hospitals, and they both have different systems, completely
different systems, no way to communicate. My medical practice
had a system of electronic medical records with all kinds of
data, no way to communicate with either hospital, and then a
couple of the other practices now are putting in their own
systems.
So I guess my question would be to the panel, you know,
from a medical standpoint what type of, you know, what--is
there anything going on out there to try to figure out how to
coordinate this type of information, which is, you know, which
is private medical information to make it more accessible to
medical professionals, to make it more easy for the public to
maybe even gain access to their own data? And because my view
is if unless we can solve the security issues and the
communication issues, actually electronic medical records are
going to cost us money, not save us money. That is my view.
So I would be interested in anyone's comments.
Dr. Strawn. Thank you for the question, Mr. Bucshon. In
response to a Congressional legislation in the Auto Program,
the NITRD Program stood up a senior steering group in health IT
research and development. We have been working for
approximately--more than a year now. We have attracted pure
computing folks such as those at NSF and NIST, and we attracted
many of the applied computing folks across HHS and DOD and
other areas. We have a large senior steering group that has a--
is looking at a large portfolio of possibilities and certainly
electronic health records is one of those items.
We are moving toward focusing on, again, long-term issues,
the creation of a health information infrastructure. Then the
next step is how do we turn that information infrastructure
into knowledge and action, how--while we are doing all this how
do we empower the patient, the physician, everybody involved
with access to that information turned into knowledge, and the
devices, whether it is robotics or assistive devices in homes
or electronic communication.
Those are at least four of the areas that we are looking at
as we initially begin our dialogue with the health IT
community, and my understanding is that there are more than 600
existing EHR systems, which just shows the size of the problem
that you have alluded to.
One potentially small step in that direction is a high-
level agreement that I understand has been reached between VA
and DOD to interoperate their two electronic health systems.
Our goal is to make that a prototype for something that will
produce interoperability hopefully among all systems.
We certainly think that interoperability is more of a way
to go than forcing one single standard. Just like the Internet
itself was sort of a software network based that interconnected
many networks that operated at a hardware level.
Mr. Bucshon. Okay. Thank you.
Dr. Lazowska. I was just going to add that this is clearly
a place where the government can play a role, that is nudging
industry to adopt standards and interoperability. There was a
PCAST report in the past year on health IT that focused on
precisely this issue; this is separate from the PCAST NITRD
report.
You are absolutely right about the privacy and security
issues, and that is something that really underpins all
civilian, and of course, military use of information
technology. It is an area where every federal agency needs more
than we have today. We have not focused enough on long-range
approaches to privacy and security. Our approach has been Band-
aids rather than something that is going to get us out of this
sort of rat race in which we are trying to keep ahead of the
bad guys, and it is really going to impede adoption of this
important technology.
The final thing I want to mention is that there are aspects
of information technology and health that go beyond electronic
medical records and will be in the future as important. The
question I always ask is why my body is so less well
instrumented than my automobile. You know, I bring the
automobile into the dealership, and the mechanic sticks a jack
in under the dash and reads out the last six months of data and
tells me what the problem is, and when I go to see my
physician, she hits me on the knee and says, ``Where does it
hurt?'' to first approximation.
Okay. This has got to change, and there are many other
areas where we will see change. For example, the genotype,
phenotype correlation that is going to use big data to
transform medicine in the future. So we need to invest in that
entire spectrum.
Mr. Bucshon. All right. Thank you. I think one more comment
from a fellow Hoosier.
Dr. Schnabel. Yeah, and if I may, too, just briefly. First,
to reinforce your point, in fact, the Executive Associate Dean
of our medical school made the comment that he can go to India,
put his bank card in an ATM machine, and it works, but if he
walks across the street to a new medical provider, he can't get
his records to follow him.
And we heard some comments about that, and it is a huge
problem, but I do want to reinforce. I think it is really
important for this subcommittee as we hear about health IT from
each witness to realize the breadth of that field and that it
includes clinical things which are much more than medical
records themselves, also many things that assist physicians and
doctors. It includes a whole consumer space of devices that we
can use as individuals outside of medical care and even a
population space of modeling of influenza and other things.
So it is a very rich space of research.
Mr. Bucshon. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you. What we are going to try to do
is get the next two Congressmen in. If we have time before
votes are called, apparently there are some issues counting up
the right totals, giving us a little bit more time; we might
have a second round of questions.
But with that, Mr. Bartlett from Maryland, you are
recognized.
Mr. Bartlett. Thank you very much. We clearly are the most
creative, innovative society in the world. We lead the world in
computers and information technology. We can't even turn out
people fast enough to fill the jobs available in these areas.
And in spite of that every 12 hours we have another billion
dollar trade deficit. I am told that only three things
ultimately produce wealth: mining, manufacturing, and farming.
Now, a lot of people have gotten very wealthy with
computers and information technology, but, you know, you can't
eat those electrons. They won't keep the rain off your head,
they won't take you anywhere. Ultimately, at the end of the
day, aren't these technologies simply enablers that help us to
do other things better, that really create wealth? It isn't
somebody else doing most of these other things better. To the
extent that we continue to develop these technologies, aren't
we just enabling our competitors?
What do we have to do so that we start doing the things
that ultimately really create wealth, because are not these
things simply tools that help us do these other things better
and now somebody else in another part of the world is doing all
these things better. What do we have to do so that we are
encouraging the technologies that ultimately create wealth so
that this billion dollars every 12 hours doesn't continue,
because that is not sustainable?
Dr. Strawn. Mr. Bartlett, I think you are certainly
correct, and I think that is one of the reasons that one of the
current focuses is on advanced manufacturing, which I interpret
to mean the continual inclusion of additional IT services and
capabilities into the manufacturing process. Farming, I might
also say, I was last weekend at my brother-in-law's farm in
Illinois where he is now farming by the foot with GPS
technologies and so forth, so I think that we are beginning to
use these advanced technologies in important ways and
applications.
And my view is certainly these applications are the end
result. It also turns out that the more theory we have the more
applications we can serve. So both a balance between the theory
and the application seems to me to be the most efficacious in
terms of the long-term focus.
Dr. Lazowska. I think our standard of living depends on our
workers being more productive than workers anywhere else in the
world, and information technology contributes enormously to
that productivity in all sectors. Dr. Strawn addressed farming,
and that is an important one. One hundred fifty years ago, if I
recall correctly, something like 98 percent of employed
Americans worked on the farm, and 100 years ago it was perhaps
50 percent, and now I believe it is 1-1/2 percent, and they
produce enough food to feed our Nation and much of the world,
and there are, of course, many contributors to that, including
new crops and new fertilizers, but GPS and information
technology plays an important role. That is why our service
sector is more effective. Again, it is these productivity gains
in the economy.
So our standard of living depends on us being more
productive and more efficient, and that is what information
technology brings to us.
Mr. Bartlett. But we still have that billion dollars every
12 hours of trade deficit, and my question is being preeminent
in these technologies, which I think are simply tools to help
us do those things better that would free us from this
dependence on foreign goods, how do we get from where we are
with our clear superiority in computers and information
technology area to where we are manufacturing, mining, the
kinds of things that will free us from this intolerable trade
deficit?
Dr. Sproull. Sir, I would suspect that a lot of your
billion dollars a day is energy costs, and all of the new
energy sources, renewables and so forth, depend heavily on NIT
for control, for production. As an enabler surely, yes, of the
control system for both generating the power, distributing it,
and improving the technologies as they go forward.
For example, one of the reasons high-performance computing
was initially focused on--and the Act of 1991--was as a design
aid to be able to model complex energy-producing technologies
more accurately so that they would be more efficient. It has
been used, for example, in things like how you burn coal more
efficiently.
So that all goes to, it seems to me, helping reduce your
deficit.
Mr. Bartlett. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Brooks. The Chair next recognizes Mr. Hultgren of
Illinois.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize. It is
kind of a crazy afternoon, so we are kind of coming in and out,
have a couple different meetings at the same time but really do
appreciate so much you being here. Chairman, thank you for
hosting this meeting as well.
I do have a question. I had an interesting lunch today. We
pulled a group of people together talking about the iPad,
something that is very important in me getting through my day
as far as keeping my calendar and information and things, but
talking about the technology that led to the iPad and how so
much of that was really started by basic scientific research
and a commitment to physics and even the GPS. It was so
interesting to hear how we got--and the requirement of the
ultimate precision clocks that we have got that really allow
for GPS to work as it does. It was amazing, so interesting.
But I just want to follow up, and I will start with Dr.
Sproull if this is all right, in the testimony for today's
hearing I know you all have talked about key technology
advances, JAVA being one, iPad being one. Having been part of
an industry applied research laboratory for over 20 years, what
would you say are the three most critical and interesting
changes or advances in the NIT industry since the early 1990s,
and how did federal investment play a role in those advances
that you would say?
Dr. Sproull. Thank you. So the dominant one has to be the
explosion of the World Wide Web, and the reason that exploded,
the idea, as you know, came from a physics researcher in
Europe, but the reason it exploded and the reason it exploded
in the U.S. is the Internet was already there, and the basic
communication protocols were in place, the switches were being
built, things were starting to be deployed. It had migrated
from a Defense Department prototype into the National Science
Foundation where it was spread to wider academics, and then
became available for commercial use at about the same time that
the Web was invented, if you will.
And then--that is right, but what happened--but you asked
what the development was. The explosion came because a usable
browser was developed, and that was developed here as was
discussed in your meeting this afternoon on your turf.
Mr. Hultgren. Yes.
Dr. Sproull. And moreover, the U.S. venture community
figured out a way to form a company to capitalize on it, it
became very valuable, at least on paper very quickly, because
the market exploded. And that transforms so many other things.
The other witnesses here today have pointed out how important
infrastructure capabilities enable still other developments,
not just new end products or new specific services but further
developments. So we are doing things with the Internet today
that Andreessen didn't dream of even in 1993.
So I have to say that that is one, two, and three, and the
two and three if you really need two and three are things that
came from one.
Mr. Hultgren. Good. How about the rest of you? Are there--
would you agree with that? Are there other things that you have
seen very specifically that you would say, hey, this is--we
need help in telling the story of how, what we are doing is
vital, and our failure for basic scientific research for really
what we talk about on this subcommittee and this committee in
this Congress is it is not a zero sum game. If we don't do it,
somebody else will, and I think Congressman Bartlett talked
about that as well, and, you know, some of the care that we
have to take in this.
But I would just be interested in hearing from the rest of
you of what you have seen in your experience that maybe is most
startling or most influential as far as advances.
Mr. Strawn. Well, Dr. Sproull mentioned the Internet and
things that derive from it. One of the things I believe that is
deriving from it right now and is at early stages but may turn
out to be of considerable importance is cloud computing. Cloud
computing is in some sense a recentralization of computing
where all of your software and your data are on centralized
servers rather than on your own PC.
Now, obviously there are tremendous security and privacy
issues associated with that, but some people have described
this as the industrialization of computing, and it may turn out
to be of extreme importance, and it derives directly from the
availability of the Internet.
Dr. Lazowska. Let me mention a few things that are entirely
different today than they were 10 years ago, and I will mention
a couple of civilian things and some military things.
One Dr. Strawn just touched on and that is the way we build
these extremely large-scale systems. It is just totally
different, totally different. What we do now is use unreliable
hardware components because you can't possibly build systems as
large as we need with reliable hardware. You couldn't afford
to. You couldn't physically do it. So we use algorithms to make
them reliable. That is a total change.
Second, search. Ten years ago you used to actually file
stuff away. Now you just search for it, you know, and I can't
remember the last time I put something in an electronic folder.
A third is mobility, the fact that you carry your whole
life around with you, and again, all of these technologies
trace themselves right back to the fundamental research
program.
A fourth one is digital media. The fact that photographs
and videos and audio, all of that material today is created and
edited and consumed in a digital world rather than an analog
world. You know, when was the last time you saw 35 millimeter
film as an example, but, you know, I don't even have CDs and
DVDs anymore. My music is on my Mac Mini, and my movies come
over Netflix, over the Internet.
So these are things that have changed our lives and are
totally different now than they were just 10 years ago, and you
can trace every one of them back to the research program.
If you look at America's military situation today in
logistics, our ability to deploy troops appropriately around
the world, in robotics, the drone aircraft, for example, that
are used around the globe, large and small, the small-scale
robots for investigating areas, search and rescue, exploration
where you can't send individuals. Even things like natural
language translation, the military for a number of years now
has used artificial intelligence systems to simply determine
which five percent of the documents in foreign languages are
worth having some human look at, which is a 20-to-one reduction
in the number of translators you need.
So, you know, our military competitiveness today really
depends on information technology in every imaginable way.
Dr. Schnabel. And if I may, I will just remind us that the
visual that Dr. Sproull used, that tire tracks diagram is,
indeed, an answer to this question, because it actually traces
back nearly 20 industries in most cases to university NITRD-
sponsored research groups.
Mr. Hultgren. That is great. Well, again, thank you all.
Appreciate the work that you have done. It is interesting, I
think, even with my own kids, I kid them sometimes when they
are playing with our family camera and just say, don't waste
the film, because I remember my mom always saying that. Mom and
dad, don't waste the film. Now you don't even think about that,
but I also think back to my high-computing days in college of
having a Commodore 64, and that was cutting edge. So it is
amazing how far we have come.
So, anyhow, thank you all so much. Appreciate it and yield
back, Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Hultgren.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Lipinski of Illinois for a brief
period.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just wanted to--
I'm going to put this question for the record. I just want to
throw it out there and sort of give you a heads up. I think the
question of we come back to jobs, and we have the issue here--I
think there are two things that make a career in NIT
particularly difficult in the private sector.
First, the fields move so quickly that it takes constant
education and training to stay in the game, and second, some of
the jobs are very easily outsourced. You can move almost
anywhere if you have a computer and you have the network
connection.
So we don't have time to go into the--an answer, so I am
just--but I think that is an issue. I am just--would like to
have a--if we get a written response following up on, you know,
what we can do to address this problem, what can we do to avoid
training people for jobs that might not exist, is it something
we can do, are there specific areas or programs that we should
focus on, what is the best way for us to try to address this?
But like I said, I don't think we have time here. I will
formally give that as a question for a written response. I want
to thank all of you for your testimony here today, and this is
something that I am hopeful that we can have legislation on in
this Congress.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the hearing.
Chairman Brooks. I would like to thank the witness panel
for the insight that you have shared with us. Quite frankly I
think both Mr. Lipinski and I wish we had more time for follow-
up, but as you have heard the bells and buzzers go off in this
place, that means that we have got to get on the House Floor
shortly to vote.
With that having been said, the Members of the Subcommittee
may have additional questions for the witnesses, and we will
ask you to respond to those in writing. The record will remain
open for two weeks for additional comments from the Members.
The witnesses are excused, and this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:13 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. George Strawn, Director, National Coordination
Office,Networking and Information Technology Research and
Development (NITRD) Program

Questions submitted by Chairman Mo Brooks

Q1.  As discussed at the hearing, Congress recognizes the value and
importance of networking and information technology (NIT) research and
development (R&D) funding; however, our existing budget constraints
make prioritizing a requirement. Please detail how you would prioritize
federal NIT R&D funding, what the top priorities would be, and how
savings can be achived within the NITRD portfolio.

;A1.  As noted in my written testimony, all of the research reported in
the NITRD portfolio is managed, selected, and funded by one or more of
the 18 NITRD member agencies under their own individual authorizations
and appropriations. Each NITRD agency engages in ongoing internal
strategic planning and research prioritization activities to focus
funding resources on those efforts most essential to carrying out its
federal mission. NITRD agencies' published strategic plans typically
identify their priority objectives in NIT R&D--the technical advances
they need to meet mission needs. \1\ These research objectives are
refined and adjusted in the annual discussions within the Executive
Branch and then with the Congress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  For example: NSF 2011-2016 Strategic Plan, http://www.nsf.gov/
news/strategicplan/
nsfstrategicplan
-
2011
-
2016.pdf; DOE 2011
Strategic Plan, http://science.energy.gov//media/bes/pdf/
DOE
-
Strategic
-
Plan
-
2011.pdf; DoD
Information Enterprise Strategic Plan 2010-2012; http://cio-
nii.defense.gov/docs/DodIESP-r16.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since the NITRD Program serves as a coordinating organization, it
does not manage the portfolio of federal NIT investments; each agency
manages its own NIT R&D investments. However, the NITRD Program's
research framework represents the agencies' shared mission R&D
priorities, as well as broad federal priorities and basic research to
support the longer-term goals of the Federal Government and to develop
technologies that promote U.S. economic, scientific, and technological
leadership. By collaborating on NIT R&D where it makes sense-- such as
in sharing high-end computing resources and codes for weather
prediction--the agencies reap economies of scale and effort. As
reported to Congress annually in the NITRD Supplement to the
President's Budget, the NITRD research budget crosscut reports the
agencies' NIT R&D spending and priorities. These priorities often also
respond to directives of Congress and recommendations of the
President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) on
technologies and capabilities deemed critical to the national interests
of the United States. Examples include high-efficiency, ``smart'' power
distribution systems; technologies to improve the quality, efficiency,
and effectiveness of the U.S. health care system; next-generation tools
for maintaining and working with ``big data''; radio spectrum
efficiency and broadband access; fundamental advances in cyberphysical
systems in such domains as industrial process control, transportation,
and medical devices: and advances in cybersecurity with Domain Name
System Security Extensions (DNSSEC) to secure key aspects of the
Internet's infrastructure.
In their NITRD Program activities, agencies identify shared high-
priority technical challenges and address them together to leverage
each other's research efforts. For example: NITRD's networking agencies
collaborate to maintain a unified high-speed network infrastructure for
federally sponsored scientific research; and the high-end computing
agencies cooperate in a single benchmarking activity to evaluate new
supercomputer systems--a labor-intensive, time-consuming effort
previously conducted by each agency. By joining together to tackle key
R&D issues they face in common, the NITRD agencies are able to leverage
resources, minimize duplication of effort, and partner in investments
to pursue shared goals. I would also note here that the unique and
single most significant result of NITRD coordination is broadly
applicable technologies and capabilities--NITRD advances often yield
new, open technologies that can be adopted across the commercial
landscape. A current example is PerfSONAR, a suite of network-
monitoring tools developed by the NITRD agencies that enables managers
for the first time to analyze network performance across multiple
links; the tools are now being adopted by international research
networks and the private sector.
To summarize, I believe the NITRD portfolio appropriately reflects
current Federal NIT R&D priorities and budget constraints, and will
continue to reflect that balance in the future.

Q2.  In your testimony you mentioned four specific component areas for
the National Initiative for Cybersecruity Education (NICE): awareness,
education, workforce structure, and workforce training and professional
development. Are all NICE-funded activities captured under the agency
budgets for NITRD? How much are we investing in NICE activities in
total and in each component area?

A2.  The NITRD Program is not tasked with tracking investments in NICE
activities, either as a whole or by component area. NICE is an
interagency effort led by NIST in which agencies identify common goals
and milestones, commit their own resources toward achieving those
goals, and align their respective implementation plans and activities.
Implementation details for the goals and objectives outlined in the
NICE strategic plan are currently under development and will be shared
based on the policies of the agencies responsible for the execution of
those details. NICE was formed under CNCI initiative 8, and budget
figures are maintained by the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence's Coordinate & Monitor team in the Office of National
Intelligence Manager for Cyber.

Q3.  A primary objective of the NITRD program is to support
foundational computing research to drive innovation, productivity, and
ultimately, economic growth. With that in mind, do (or should) agencies
evaluate the degree to which a research proposal considered under NITRD
may be connected to actual innovation and economic growth, as opposed
to discovery science or climate science? Put another way, how does (or
how should) the reality of limited federal support for computing R&D
impact cross-discipline prioritization and project selection?

A3.  The portfolio of research and development activities sponsored by
the NITRD agencies constitutes this country's primary full-spectrum NIT
R&D enterprise. I mean this in several senses:

The member agencies of NITRD constitute the only U.S.
research endeavor that funds investigations across the broad range of
networking and information technologies. The Program's breadth is a
vital characteristic because NIT technologies are uniquely
interdependent and are developed from an inherently multidisciplinary
basis in the sciences and in engineering. Collaboration among the NITRD
agencies models the multidisciplinary nature of NIT challenges, and
NITRD-funded projects often require multidisciplinary collaboration
among performers.

NITRD research is performed throughout the Nation--in
universities, federal research centers and laboratories, federally
funded R&D centers, private companies, and nonprofit organizations
across the country. As noted in my testimony, the broad reach of NITRD
activities generates continuous interaction, information exchange, and
feedback, which provides new perspectives and insights to federal and
private-sector stakeholders alike.

Through its national scope, NITRD funding is the primary
source of support for the education and training of the Nation's next
generations of NIT researchers, technical experts, entrepreneurs, and
NIT industry leaders.

NITRD investments also span the NIT research spectrum,
from fundamental inquiry to applied development. The balance varies
from agency to agency, with NSF and DOE/SC emphasizing foundational
research and agencies such as DARPA and DHS leaning more toward applied
development. As noted in my testimony, research in networking and
information technologies requires both theoretical investigations and
``use-focused'' applied engineering--and NIT innovations depend on the
back-and-forth flow of ideas between the theoretical and the practical.

Although not reported in the NITRD crosscut, NITRD
agencies are increasingly focusing on the transition from laboratory to
marketplace, using Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) grants to speed the transition to
practice of NITRD-developed technologies. This important stage of
advanced development also is explicitly addressed in ``Trustworthy
Cyberspace,'' the forthcoming strategic plan for R&D in cybersecurity
developed by NITRD's Cyber Security and Information Assurance (CSIA)
agencies. Transition to practice is also a focus of such new efforts as
DHS cybersecurity R&D solicitations and NSF's Innovation Corps. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  http://www.nsf.gov/news/
news
-
summ.jsp?cntn
-
id=121879.

In combination, these characteristics make the NITRD Program a key
national resource for seeding U.S. innovation of all kinds. If NITRD
did not exist, today we would be inventing it. Per my response to your
first question, I believe that the NITRD enterprise reflects
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
substantial prioritization of federal efforts.

Q4.  Given that participation in AP Computer Science has been flat for
a decade, as we heard during the hearing, please explain how a new AP
Computer Science curriculum will be any different. How will it not only
increase the number of college Computer Science majors, but also
promote greater ethnic and gender diversity?

A4.  The new AP course--Computer Science (CS) Principles--has been
designed from the beginning to be engaging, challenging, inspiring, and
relevant for all students. It is better than the existing CS AP course,
which had been designed to mimic what colleges had been doing in their
first course for CS majors. (Many colleges are rethinking their
introductory sequences, especially their introductory courses for non-
majors, and a number are looking at teaching CS principles.)
The number of academic computing courses taken by U.S. high school
students is very low: The percentage of U.S. students taking science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) courses has increased
over the last 20 years for all STEM disciplines except computer
science, where participation dropped from 25% to 19%. \3\ High school
computer science teachers report teaching 8% fewer CS advanced
placement (AP) courses in 2009 than just two years earlier. \4\ In most
high schools in the U.S., there is no academic computing course that
carries college preparatory credit. (Often the only courses offered
focus on keyboarding or application proficiency in Microsoft Word or
PowerPoint, for example.) As a result, most U.S. students arrive at
college with little or no understanding of what computing is as a
scientific discipline; they know what chemistry is and what physics and
math are, but they have no idea about computing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  2009 NAEP High School Transcript Study; http://
www.nationsreportcard.gov/hsts
-
2009.
\4\  2009 Teacher Survey, Computer Science Teachers Association;
http://csta.acm.org/Research/sub/HighSchoolSurveys.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The lack of high school experience in computing differentially
affects women and minorities. Women have few female role models to
counter the popular images of computing as a singularly male-oriented
endeavor. Minorities are affected because they are more likely to be at
low-resourced schools that provide fewer opportunities to study
computer science.
How can we get more academic computing courses into our high
schools? One key has to be Advanced Placement. AP classes--regardless
of area--carry college preparatory credit in most schools. In addition,
AP is rigorous, has fidelity of replication (all students must be
readied for the same test), and is popular with students, their
parents, school administrators, and college admissions offices. Thus,
AP provides a single point of leverage to begin curricular change.
Why hasn't the current AP CS course succeeded in attracting
students? The current course is a year of Java programming. Students,
especially those with no prior experience with computers, see little
reason to take it. It is a low-level, detailed introduction to
programming. What students need, I believe, is a course that is
engaging, rigorous, and inspiring. They should learn to program, but
the course should not be programming-centric. Instead, it should cover
the design of algorithms, the potentially transformative role of
technology, the breadth of its applications, its role in enhancing
creativity and augmenting human capabilities, the uses of big data,
issues of complexity and computability, and societal impact and ethical
considerations. In short, the course should be challenging but also
exciting and relevant to students' lives, no matter whether they end up
in a NIT career or not.
CS Principles has been designed to meet these criteria. Its initial
reception has been positive. It was piloted last year at five
universities and this year is being taught in roughly 20 universities/
colleges (including some of the top CS departments in the country) and
40 high schools. More than 200 high schools vied to be part of the
official College Board pilot, which was restricted to 10 schools.
In addition to CS Principles, a pre-AP course, called Exploring
Computer Science (ECS), has been developed with NSF funding and uses a
similar philosophy. Both CS Principles and ECS appear to be successful
in attracting women and underrepresented minorities. \5\ For example,
in four years within the Los Angeles Unified School District, ECS
enrollment has jumped 553% and now tops 2,000 students, 80% of whom are
African American or Latino, and 40% are female. In the CS Principles
course taught at the University of California at Berkeley in the fall
of 2010, 60% of the best-performing students were female (including the
top student); in a predecessor course the year before, women had been
only 40% of the most successful students.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  From reports of Principal Investigators to Program Officers of
NSF's CE21 Program.

Q5.  The U.S. Department of Education is not currently a member of
NITRD. Why are they no longer participating in the program, and why
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
should they be at the table?

A5.  The Department of Education has not been a formal participant in
the NITRD Program for well over a decade, although ED representatives
now and again join in NITRD activities. The NITRD Program would welcome
the Department's re-engagement, and we have sent a formal letter of
invitation to the Department inviting their participation.

Questions submitted by Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski

Q1.  As I mentioned during the hearing, the fast-moving nature of the
fields and the ease with which some jobs can be outsourced can add
uncertainty to careers in NIT, especially in the private sector.

Do you see the outsourcing of NIT jobs as a problem, and
if not, why?

Are there things we can do to avoid training people for
jobs that might not exist?

Are there specific areas or programs on which the federal
agencies should focus?

A1.  These are difficult issues, about which there are undoubtedly
widely divergent and strongly held viewpoints. I stated in my testimony
that I believe our global leadership in NIT is under challenge from
many competitors. The NITRD agencies are greatly concerned about the
development of the U.S. workforce, given that we are moving at an ever-
increasing pace into a pervasively digital future. Our agencies see the
need to better prepare our population to live and work successfully in
the digital world as a national imperative. The U.S. must maintain the
skilled workforce needed to compete in the global economy. Moreover,
some outsourcing may directly affect national security--for example,
the maintenance of the NIT infrastructure of the U.S. industrial base.
Strengthening the foundations of learning in computer science--
currently woefully inadequate--at every educational level should be a
national priority. The best way to prepare for change is to provide a
broad, fundamental education in this subject, beginning at the
precollegiate level and continuing throughout college. If the education
system provided that kind of foundational academic grounding, follow-on
training and retraining activities would then become relatively easier,
and Americans would be better prepared to adapt to shifting
technologies.
Rather than trying to anticipate where employment opportunities
will lie over the long term (Bureau of Labor Statistics studies \6\ and
others predict that skilled NIT-related jobs will be among the Nation's
fastest-growing over the next five years), I believe we need to make a
commitment as a society to integrate computer science into STEM
education as vigorously as we set about improving math and science
curricula after Sputnik. The generations of scientists and engineers we
produced in that effort are the world's best. We should aim for nothing
less in computer science and engineering. If we educate for NIT
leadership, the challenges you cite will eventually recede in
importance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  http://www.bls.gov/emp/ep
-
table
-
103.htm.

Q2.  The percentage of women obtaining degrees in computer science is
particularly low, and even more troubling, began to decrease around
2001 even as female participation in other STEM fields continues to
slowly increase. The apparent rebound (as of 2009) in the number of
women obtaining computer science Master's degrees appears to be
entirely due to an increase in the number of temporary residents
obtaining such degrees; the number of U.S. citizens and permanent
residents continues to decrease. Do we understand why American women
are turning away from computer sciences in such high numbers? Are there
any data since 2009 to indicate that this trend may be changing? What
additional steps could we take to increase the recruitment and
retention of women in computer sciences? How can federal agencies such
as the National Science Foundation and other NITRD agencies help with
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
these efforts?

A2.  There is no one reason for the low enrollments of women in
computing. The lack of engaging, inspiring, and relevant computing
courses in high schools, as discussed above, is certainly one of them,
but popular culture perpetuates many false, negative images of
computing as well. Women say, for example, that they are not as
interested in computing because it lacks societal impact. \7\ Computer
scientists are often portrayed as quirky loners who work 24-7 with
little human interaction. In addition, the male-dominated environment
often found in computing labs may make women feel unwelcome or
dismissed. Women (and minorities) see very few role models in the world
of NIT.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\  Recent national data on the status of women in computing are
available from the National Center for Women & Information Technology,
http://ncwit.org (e.g., http://ncwit.org/resources.scorecard.html).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The data do not show a substantive change since 2009. \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\  2009-2010 Taulbee Survey, Computing Research Association;
http://www.cra.org/resources/crn-archive-view-detail/
undergraduate
-
cs
-
degree
-
production
-

rises
-
doctoral
-
production
-
steady/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
How do we fix this? There is no one answer. High school, as
discussed above, is certainly key, but more is needed. As a society, we
need to change the popular media's image of computing, and encourage
high school teachers and guidance counselors to avoid perpetuating old
stereotypes. Likewise, new best practices for increasing diversity in
computing at the high school and college levels need to be developed
and assessed, and guidance counselors and computer science educators
need to make more of an effort to deploy solid recruitment and
retention practices--for example, by improving outreach and
communication with the female parents of female students to make them
feel welcome at the CS table. The CS education community also needs to
ensure that the learning environment in our computer science classes
and departments is more welcoming of the contributions of minorities.
Female CS undergraduates need to be provided with research experiences,
internships, and mentoring, and women in NIT-related jobs from all age
groups and professional levels need to be brought together for
networking and mentoring.
How could federal agencies such as NSF help? The Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Directorate at NSF has long
been committed to reducing the underrepresentation of women in
computing. Currently, that effort falls under its Computing Education
for the 21st Century (CE21) Program. CE21 recognizes that efforts to
reform computing education and efforts to broaden participation must go
hand-in-hand: It will not be sufficient to ``fix'' computing education
if we continue to leave out close to 70% of the population (women,
minorities, and persons with disabilities), and it will not be
sufficient to engage women and minorities if we do not also build their
competencies and skills. Both efforts must inform each other.
Currently, CISE funds a number of projects aimed at increasing the
participation of women. Two examples include:

NCWIT (National Center for Women and Technology), which
functions as a clearing house, resource center, and convener of people
and events for the whole community, including in particular its
Academic Alliance (more than 100 university departments), K-12
Alliance, Social Science Network, and Industry Alliance.

CRA-W/CDC (Computing Research Association's Committee on
the Status of Women in Computing Research (CRA-W) and the Coalition to
Diversify Computing (CDC)), which focuses on research experiences and
mentoring for undergraduates, and recruitment and retention for
graduate school and successful early research careers.

Other NSF efforts include the support of the Grace Hopper
Celebration of Women in Computing national and regional conferences
(which bring students and professional women together for technical
talks and mentoring), the support of the Dot Diva website created by
WGBH for girls aged 13-17, and work with the National Girls
Collaborative Project on dissemination of informal education activities
for girls.

Q3.  Does the National Coordination Office intend to implement the
PCAST recommendation that a distinct presidential advisory council on
networking and information technology (NIT), which existed as PITAC
until 2005, be reconstituted as a standing committee? If not, why not?
How do you respond to the specific justifications for this
recommendation that are described in the PCAST report--namely that
federal NIT investments require continuous attention by a focused
committee of experts who can provide predictive rather than reactive
advice?

A3.  This recommendation is under discussion within the Executive
Branch and among the NITRD agencies.

Q4.  In your testimony, you mentioned the National Initiative for
Cybersecurity Education (NICE), which is coordinated by NIST, but you
did not discuss how NICE is coordinated with the education and
workforce development program component area under NITRD. Can you
elaborate on how these programs fit together, and in addition how the
NITRD education programs are coordinated with the broader effort to
coordinate federal STEM programs? What is the rationale for having
parallel coordinating structures for NIT education broadly, and
cybersecurity education specifically? Are there any disadvantages to
folding NICE activities, including coordination activities, into the
NITRD program and coordination activities?

A4.  The NITRD Program's Social, Economic, and Workforce Implications
of IT and IT Workforce Development (SEW) Program Component Area
supports research on the co-evolution of IT and social and economic
systems; innovative applications of IT in education; and the
implications of IT for education and training overall. In recognition
of the importance of the education and training component, the SEW
agencies formed a SEW-Education Team to consider ways to help foster
improved education and training in computer science. These NITRD
activities are closely coordinated with the NICE program at NIST
through the appointment of the NICE Lead as the co-chair of the SEW-
Education Team in NITRD. This is enabling SEW-Education members to
shape broader but complementary activities to help address the systemic
education problems discussed above. The Team is monitoring the start-up
activities of the National Science and Technology Council's new
Committee on Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math Education
(CoSTEM), called for by the America COMPETES Reauthorization Act of
2010, and anticipates working to align its activities with the
directions identified in the CoSTEM five-year strategic plan now under
development.
Thank you again for affording me the opportunity to address the
important questions you raise on a topic so vital to the future of our
country. On behalf of the NITRD Program, I look forward to working with
you to sustain our Nation's leadership in networking and information
technologies in the years to come.
Responses by Dr. Edward Lazowska, Director, eScience Institute, Bill
and Melinda Gates Chair, University of Washington

Questions submitted by Chairman Mo Brooks

Q1.  As discussed at the hearing, Congress recognizes the value and
importance of networking and information technology (NIT) research and
development (R&D) funding; however, our existing budget constraints
make prioritizing a requirement. Please detail how you would prioritize
NIT R&D funding, what the top priorities would be, and how savings can
be achieved within the NITRD portfolio.

A1.  As you know, I co-chaired the Working Group of the President's
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology for the recent PCAST
review of the NITRD program. One of the key recommendations in that
report was a call to establish ``a broad, high-level standing committee
of academic scientists, engineers, and industry leaders dedicated to
providing sustained strategic advice in NIT.'' We view the
establishment of such a group (really, the re-establishment of such a
group--it would be analogous to the President's Information Technology
Advisory Committee which existed under the Clinton and Bush
administrations) as essential. Such a group would be perfectly
positioned to answer the question you have posed, and many other
important questions.
With that said, the PCAST report did attempt to address this
question. The report includes recommendations for research areas of
particular importance to national priorities--health information
technology, energy and transportation, and the security and robustness
of cyber-infrastructure--as well as a call for increased investment in
a number of fundamental NIT research areas that will accelerate
progress across a broader range of priorities, including: privacy and
security; human-computer interaction; data analytics, including data
collection, storage, management, and automated large-scale analysis
based on machine learning and predictive modeling; and computing in the
physical world, through advanced sensor and control networks,
innovative robotics and other means. I personally agree with these
recommendations and would offer them to the committee.
It is, however, difficult to discuss the size of the investments
required, if only because it is very difficult to get an accurate
understanding of the size of the current investment. As I reported at
the hearing, and as PCAST mentioned in its report, agency reporting of
NIT R&D investments is, in places, very questionable. While investments
reported by the National Science Foundation and DARPA are reasonably
accurate portrayals of NIT R&D spending by those agencies, it appears
that much of the spending reported by other agencies is more accurately
characterized as ``NIT investments in support of other areas of
research'' rather than ``NIT research funding.'' In fact, PCAST found
that between 89 and 98 percent of the reported investment in NIT R&D by
the National Institutes of Health was not NIT R&D, but rather the use
of IT in support of other areas of research--for example, public
databases of research-related information. While this is valuable and
appropriate research spending, it's not NIT R&D, and calling it NIT R&D
leads to the belief that we are spending far more on NIT R&D than we
really are.
This leads to another key point that I raised in response to a
question during the hearing. You of course appreciate the role of NIT
R&D in driving our economic competitiveness, in achieving our major
national and global priorities, in accelerating the pace of discovery
in all other fields, and in achieving the goals of open government.
Quoting PCAST, ``As a field of inquiry, NIT has a rich intellectual
agenda--as rich as that of any other field of science or engineering.
In addition, NIT is arguably unique among all fields of science and
engineering in the breadth of its impact.'' Despite this, the federal
investment in NIT R&D is exceedingly modest by any measure. It is
important for the nation to identify those fields of science and
engineering in which we must lead the world. It is impossible to
imagine that any field would have higher priority than NIT. Compare the
federal NIT R&D investment, though, to that of other fields!
A final point: While high performance computing remains a critical
area of focus for the NITRD program: (1) other areas of NIT--for
example, robotics, and large-scale data analysis--have risen to equal
levels of importance as measures of our international competitiveness;
(2) this is true even for applications in national security and
scientific discovery, traditionally the bastion of HPC, where large-
scale data analysis (which requires significantly different
architectures and algorithms) is of great and growing importance; and
(3) even within numerical computing, we need to rely on a better metric
than ``FLoating-point Operations Per Second'' (FLOPs)--the default
measure of supercomputing ``power'' on lists of the world's most
powerful supercomputers--to assess our progress and leadership in the
space; landing at the top of the Top 500 List is exceptionally
expensive and does not necessarily guarantee the nation will build a
machine that's particularly useful; far more valuable a priority is to
invest in research that could allow for a leap frog of current high
performance computing technology.

Q2.  In your testimony, you quoted from the PCAST report, restating
that, ``All indicators --all historical data, and all projections--
argue that NIT is the dominant factor in America's science and
technology (S&T) employment, and that the supply of that talent is and
will remain large.'' When did NIT become the dominant factor in S&T
employment? Are other S&T sectors dwindling, or is this due to the
growth in the NIT field?

A2.  The data on the growth of the IT workforce need comes from
projections developed by the U.S. Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor
Statistics. These are 10-year projections released every two years. For
at least a decade, these projections have shown that employment growth
in the ``computer science and mathematics'' sector will far outstrip
growth in all other science and technology fields combined (and this
growth is almost entirely in the computer science fields). In fact, the
individual formerly in charge of these forecasts for BLS famously once
said ``All other fields of science and engineering are hiding behind
information technology'' by which he meant that the vast majority of
the overall STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics)
workforce gap and job growth was in the computing fields.
My read of the statistics is that this represents the pervasiveness
of NIT throughout the U.S. economy. The growth in employment is not
just due to the growth of the IT sector, though that's certainly an
element, but in the use of NIT across industries, from health care to
banking to transportation to energy and beyond, as a means of improving
productivity and gaining other efficiencies. So it's not that these
other fields have become less important, it's that NIT and NIT workers
have become increasingly important to these other fields.

Q3.  Your testimony stated that ``The workforce needs of the IT fields
going forward demand a sustained effort to increase the number of
students going into computing fields.'' Why aren't students entering
the computing fields today? What can academic institutions and industry
do to encourage student involvement and engagement?

A3.  The good news is that, after a period of declining enrollments
that began at around the time of the "Dot-com bust," data from the
Computing Research Association's Taulbee Survey tracking enrollments
and graduation rates indicates that the trend has reversed and that
student interest in computing majors has increased in each of the last
two years. Anecdotal evidence from my own department and from
colleagues around the country suggests that this year's survey results
will likely show much larger increases in enrollments. At the stronger
programs across the nation, enrollment is booming.
Enrollments in computer science are somewhat cyclical and do
correlate to some degree with the overall state of the IT economy. In
the "Dot-com boom" times, computer science enrollments increased faster
than many university programs could handle. The bust that followed
decreased enrollment, but it appears the highly visible success of many
NIT-related companies like Facebook, Google, and Apple may be
motivating large numbers of new students to pursue computing-related
careers, resulting in the positive numbers we see now.
While enrollments are important, it's also important that we retain
an adequate number of those students interested in research careers
through their Ph.D.s. In those cases, federal support for university
research plays a crucial role in supporting the researchers who will
employ those students as graduate researchers. These graduate
researchers are like the lubrication in the innovation ecosystem,
enabling the transfer of ideas gleaned from fundamental research into
industry and the marketplace. Federal support for research not only
enables that fundamental research, it helps train the students who will
take that fruits of that research into industrial research labs with
them or into their own startup companies, such as Google, which, only a
dozen years after its emergence from Stanford, has a market
capitalization of $190,000,000,000, employs 32,000 people, and is a
verb.

Questions submitted by Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski

Q1.  As I mentioned during the hearing, the fast moving nature of the
fields and the ease with which some jobs can be outsourced can add
uncertainty to careers in NIT, especially in the private sector.

Do you see the outsourcing of NIT jobs as a problem, and
if not, why?

Are there things we can do to avoid training people for
jobs that might not exist?

Are there specific areas or programs on which federal
agencies should focus?

A1.  Let me say at the outset that the Bureau of Labor Statistics
workforce projections cited in my testimony and in response to a
previous question--which indicate that domestic workforce demand in the
computing sector during this decade will far outstrip demand in all
other fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
combined--account (as best BLS can) for offshoring. Computing is a
field of enormous opportunity for well-prepared people in our country,
and will continue to be so.
The issues of outsourcing within the IT sector are complex, and
determining the impact is made difficult by the uneven quantity,
quality and objectivity of the data available. But the computing
community has tried to understand some of the issues involved. In a
report entitled ``Globalization and Offshoring of Software,'' a task
force of the Association for Computing Machinery concluded the
following about potential increases in ``offshoring'' of NIT work:

Globalization of the software industry is likely to
continue to grow.

Both anecdotal evidence and economic theory indicate that
offshoring between developed and developing countries can, as a whole,
benefit both.

Because of the lack of good data, skepticism is warranted
regarding claims about the number of jobs to be offshored and the
projected growth of software industries in developing nations.

Standardized jobs are more easily moved from developed to
developing countries than higher-skill jobs, but competition in higher-
end skill jobs is increasing.

To stay competitive in a global IT environment and
industry, countries must adopt policies that foster innovation.
Policies that improve a country's ability to attract, educate, and
retain the best IT talent are critical. Educational policy and
investment is at the core.

The bottom line is that information technology remains a sector in
which the nation must retain leadership in order to be globally
competitive--competitive economically and technologically superior for
our national defense. The ease with which some aspects of NIT can be
outsourced only heightens the need to ensure that the ecosystem for
research in the U.S. remains strong. As a nation, we can afford to
offshore technical support. We cannot, however, afford to offshore
innovation. There must be a far greater emphasis on Bachelors, Masters,
and Doctoral education at strong institutions which prepare students to
be innovators.

Q2.  The percentage of women obtaining degrees in computer science is
particularly low, and even more troubling, began to decrease around
2001 even as female participation in other STEM fields continues to
slowly increase. The apparent rebound (as of 2009) in the number of
women obtaining computer science Master's degrees appears to be
entirely due to an increase in the number of temporary residents
obtaining such degrees; the number of U.S. citizens and permanent
residents continues to decrease. Do we understand why American women
are turning away from computer sciences in such high numbers? Are there
any data since 2009 to indicate that this trend may be changing? What
additional steps could we take to increase the recruitment and
retention of women in computer sciences? How can federal agencies such
as the National Science Foundation and other NITRD agencies help with
these efforts?

A2.  This is an issue of enormous concern. It is not just a matter of
``equity'' or of ``workforce''--it is an issue of ``quality,'' since
computer systems intended for use by the full breadth of our population
must be designed by individuals who reflect the full breadth of our
population.
This is also an area of intense focus, over many years. This is, in
fact, bad news: The decrease in female computer science enrollment
began in the 1980s, not in 2001, and we have been working to reverse
the trend for many years. The discouraging numbers that you see today
are despite decades of serious effort at assessing and addressing the
problem.
The good news is that recent trends are positive. For example,
between 2009 and 2010, the percentage of computer science Bachelor's
degrees from research universities received by women increased, and the
number of U.S. citizens and permanent residents enrolled in mathematics
and computer science grew faster than the number of temporary
residents.
I personally feel that the greatest problem is persistent
stereotypes (think ``Dilbert'' or ``geek''). The bad news about
stereotypes is that they have at least a grain of truth in them, and
thus they die hard.
What can federal agencies do? Support a greater number of graduate
fellowships for women, because role models (as faculty members and
researchers) are important. Support the Computing Research Association
Committee on the Status of Women in Computing Research (CRA-W), which
runs a number of highly effective programs. Support the National Center
for Women in Information Technology (NCWIT), which also runs a number
of highly effective programs. Support CRA-W and NCWIT so that they can
focus on their work, rather than on their survival. Finally, support
current efforts by the National Science Foundation's CISE Directorate
to revamp the Advanced Placement curriculum in computer science, and to
train 10,000 teachers in the next few years to teach this new
curriculum--the CS 10K effort. All of these efforts are starving.

Q3.  In your opening statement, you said that 60 percent of the new
jobs created in this country over the next decade will be related to
NIT. Could you explain the research or studies behind this figure? Will
traditional courses of study (e.g., computer science) effectively
prepare students for these sorts of careers? Are new pedagogical
approaches needed? Do we need to revisit how we teach other areas, like
engineering?

A3.  The Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics every two
years assembles workforce projections for a broad range of fields over
the next decade. Over the last several cycles--going back more than a
decade--BLS projections have consistently shown that projected
increases in the computing fields completely outstrip all other fields
of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) combined.
From what I can see, this is due primarily to two factors: the growth
of the IT sector--that is, the producers of NIT hardware, software and
services--and the increased use of IT across all other sectors. In
fact, it is the latter factor which undoubtedly accounts for the
largest share of the overall increase. NIT is being used to enable all
other sectors to work more productively--to produce more while using
fewer resources. Each of these sectors will require skilled workers to
incorporate these new technologies effectively, creating literally
millions of new opportunities for NIT professionals.
``Computational thinking'' is transforming all other disciplines,
and they are somewhat slow to respond. We need to integrate
``computational thinking'' into K-12 STEM curricula, and we need to
integrate computation and computational thinking into other fields of
science and engineering. Graduate programs in "eScience" (data-
intensive science) are emerging today, and are an important trend that
should be supported. eScience is the future of all science.
Responses by Dr. Robert Sproull, Director of Oracle Labs, retired

Questions submitted by Chairman Mo Brooks

Q1.  As discussed at the hearing, Congress recognizes the value and
importance of networking and information technology (NIT) research and
development (R&D) funding; however, our existing budget constraints
make prioritizing a requirement. Please detail how you would prioritize
federal NIT R&D funding, what the top priorities would be, and how
savings can be achived within the NITRD portfolio.

A1.  I recommend that long-term research investments be protected, that
is, that they not be reduced more than other spending. True, long-term
NITRD research is risky, but it has consistently produced results with
huge economic benefits to the nation, including growingjobs and federal
tax revenues.

Q2.  As part of the PCAST working group assessing the NITRD program,
you said the group ``had trouble determining the levels of research
investment in different areas beecause of difficulties in labeling and
measuring expenditures.'' You went on to say that industry makes
``clear distinctions between different kinds of investment in IT, in
part so that the investments can be balanced appropriately.'' Why can't
the federal government do the same?

A2.  As I detailed in my written testimony, private sector accounting
distinguishes several categories for IT expenditures: expense of
running IT services (including cost of depreciation of computers and
other capital equipment); expense of development of IT services (e.g.,
software engineers developing ``routine IT''); and expense of NIT
research to explore new and risky innovations in NIT products and
services. These categories clearly distinguish operating, development,
and research expenses.
It would be helpful to distinguish these categories in federal
spending as well. However, federal accounting is different--there is no
equivalent of depreciation, for example. It would be helpful, however,
for the NITRD agencies to report their investments in categories
similar to these, as recommended in the PCAST NITRD report.

Questions submitted by Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski

Q1.  As I mentioned during the hearing, the fast moving nature of the
fields and the ease with which some jobs can be outsourced can add
uncertainty to careers in NIT, especially in the private sector.

Q1a.   Do you see the outsourcing of NIT jobs as a problem, and if not,
why?

A1a.  I distinguish between ``outsourcing,'' in which a firm contracts
with another firm to perform work, generally resulting in fewer jobs in
the first firm and more in the second; and ``offshoring,'' in which a
firm in one country (the U.S.) pays for work performed in another
country, whether using its own employees or those of a contractor. The
principal concern is with offshoring, which shifts jobs out of the
United States.
In my experience working with highly trained and innovative
researchers, we seek people with the best and most appropriate talent,
regardless of their nationality or location. We prefer to attract
researchers to move to a domestically-located laboratory, but if they
cannot we will hire them to work in their preferred location. A clear
step to insure domestic hiring is to have strong graduate education in
the United States and provision for its graduates, of whatever
nationality, to be able to work in the U.S. Easing immigration of
excellent researchers trained abroad so they can work in our domestic
labs is also important.
This same approach of hiring the best wherever they are has caused
foreign firms to open NIT research labs in the United States, where
they employ U.S. citizens.
In NIT research, ``offshoring'' finds the strongest talent. If our
nation can educate and retain the best NIT talent, domestic and foreign
companies both will employ it in the U.S.

Q1b.   Are there things we can do to avoid training people for jobs
that might not exist?

A1b.  Because of the time lag between a student's selection of study
areas or majors and their entry into the workforce, typically after
college, there is an unavoidable possibility of cyclic workforce
surpluses and deficits. Students are quite shrewd in judging future
demand; it seems to me that it would be hard to devise a better scheme.
Short-term training is less problematic: the job market changes
slowly enough that a shrewd student will not embark on fruitless
training.

Q1c.  Are there specific areas or programs on which the federal
agencies should focus?

A1c.  To ensure the best NIT talent is developed in the United States
rather than offshore, we must build strong STEM education programs in
K-12 as well as in colleges. While a STEM background is not absolutely
essential for NIT careers (philosophers who love logic can become
exceptional software engineers!), STEM education must be strong if the
NIT workforce is to be strong.

Q2.  The percentage of women obtaining degrees in computer science is
particularly low, and even more troubling, began to decrease around
2001 even as female participation in other STEM fields continues to
slowly increase. The apparent rebound (as of 2009) in the number of
women obtaining computer science Master's degrees appears to be
entirely due to an increase in the number of temporary residents
obtaining such degrees; the number of U.S. citizens and permanent
residents continues to decrease. Do we understand why American women
are turning away from computer sciences in such high numbers? Are there
any data since 2009 to indicate that this trend may be changing? What
additional steps could we take to increase the recruitment and
retention of women in computer sciences? How can federal agencies such
as the National Science Foundation and other NITRD agencies help with
these efforts?

A2.  I do not feel qualified to answer this question. I defer to my
academic colleagues.
Responses by Dr. Robert Schnabel, Dean, School of Informatics, Indiana
University

Questions submitted by Chairman Mo Brooks

Q1.  As discussed at the hearing, Congress recognizes the value and
importance of networking and information technology (NIT) research and
development (R&D) funding; however, our existing budget constraints
make prioritizing a requirement. Please detail how you would prioritize
federal NIT R&D funding, what the top priorities would be, and how
savings can be achived within the NITRD portfolio.

A1.  I agree that the NITRD program should prioritize funding for
research and development. As I mentioned in my testimony, health IT is
an area of particularly great national importance. The challenges that
this area addresses range from assuring that the Federal Government and
the nation's health care system meets the needs of modernizing and
standardizing health records, to providing powerful and easy-to-use
information technology systems that support health care providers, to
creating tools and systems that allow individuals to monitor and
improve their own health independently. I also agree with the recent
PCAST report that recommended prioritizing funding toward IT
applications in security, energy and transportation.
As Dr. Lazowska noted in his testimony, it is difficult to assess
the overall size of research funding focused on computing since it is
co-mingled with funding for IT infrastructure; therefore, it is
difficult to assess potential savings. Getting a better handle on what
NITRD funding actually is going toward research versus funding for
information technology infrastructure that supports research in other
areas would help better assess where savings could be achieved. The
highest priority of the NITRD portfolio should be funding focused on
high-risk, possibly high-reward IT research.
I also support the recommendation of the recent PCAST report for a
standing committee of networking and IT specialists to oversee the
federal IT research portfolio. This committee could continually review
the program and help drive the establishment of priorities for funding.

Q2.  You indicate that the Federal Government needs to include and
clearly define computer science in federal education programs and
create pre-service and professional develpment opportunities for K-12
computer sceince teachers. Computer science is included in many federal
education programs. Are there any you know of that specifically
prohibit computer science as an eligible field? If so, please describe.

A2.  I am not aware of any programs intended to address K-12
educational needs that explicitly prohibit (by law or regulation)
computer science as an eligible discipline; however, there are many
instances where the additional restrictions of the programs implicitly
rule out or discourage computer science or put computer science
programs at a severe competitive disadvantage. Education programs--such
as the ``STEM'' education programs within the Committee's
jurisdiction--often erect barriers that either bias against or exclude
computer science because of where computer science currently exists
within the U.S. K-12 system. For example, as described further below,
many federal programs expect proposals to build up either a strong
assessment base in the discipline and/or certification of teachers, or
are linked to ``core academic subjects.'' Computer science teachers
face much different issues in the K-12 environment than teachers of
mathematics, and existing programs often do not take this into account.
These conditions create a chicken-and-egg problem that makes it
difficult for computer science to be included.
Because of the accountability provisions in No Child Left Behind
and the focus of States on that Act's ``core'' disciplines in
developing high school graduation requirements, investments in
curriculum, pedagogy and professional development very often are
focused on ``core'' courses. There also has been a pronounced shift
towards presuming that States will adopt the work of the ``Common Core
Standards Initiative'' and its ``college and career ready standards''
in both the competitive grant guidance for the Race to the Top program
and in the President's proposed Fiscal Year 2011 budget. In practice,
this means schools, States and federal programs emphasize mathematics,
reading, and natural sciences. Therefore, well-meaning federal
legislation intended to improve STEM education broadly often does not
include computer science at the state and local levels, since it is not
typically considered part of this ``core.''
This same issue plays out in programs authorized by the COMPETEs
Act and the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, putting K-12
computer science education in a classic ``Catch-22.'' Because computer
science is not part of the core, it does not have the same level of
assessments or teacher support as core programs that education policy
makers seek to improve course offerings, but it is difficult to develop
these without being in the core.
An important example is the NSF's Math and Science Partnership
program. This program has five types of awards, including Targeted
Partnerships intended for ``a specific disciplinary focus in
mathematics or the sciences.'' At a high level, the program is broadly
STEM focused seemingly to be a ``big tent'' for all STEM-related
disciplines. In fact, the COMPETEs Act amended what was then current
law to clarify the scope of the program to include all of the STEM
disciplines. However, guidance to grant applicants asks specifically
for baseline data on how the proposals will improve student achievement
in mathematics and/or science standards. However, the significant
public investments in mathematics and science assessments rarely
address computer science. Therefore, computer science proposals have
difficulty meeting the baseline data requirements. This puts computer
science proposals at a distinct disadvantage relative to mathematics
and science proposals, which deters would-be applicants and creates a
barrier for the computer science field.
This same type of Catch-22 pertains to multiple COMPETEs Act
programs that would require ``highly qualified'' computer science
teachers. For example, the MSP award category Teacher Institutes for
the 21st Century was created by the COMPETEs Act. The scope of the
program is to serve STEM teachers who ``are considered highly
qualified.'' The COMPETEs Act references the underlying definition of
``highly qualified'' in the Elementary and Secondary Education Act
(ESEA). One of the requirements for teachers to be highly qualified is
certification and demonstrated knowledge in the subject area in which
they teach. (Other programs in COMPETEs that rely on the highly
qualified criteria include Teachers for a Competitive Tomorrow and the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program.) Very few States have
certification programs for computer science teachers. Thus, although
these programs do not explicitly prohibit computer science, their
requirements often have the effect of making computer science
ineligible. These same issues appear as barriers for schools
distributing Title II funding under the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act.
In summary, the ``STEM'' designation in numerous federal programs
often does not recognize and account for the reality that the computer
science discipline faces in the schools. Many federal STEM programs are
designed for the core academic structure in schools across the country.
At the state and local level computer science courses can be classified
as mathematics or science courses, but in 35 states it is simply an
elective. Effectively this means that computer science teachers and
courses are treated differently than mathematics and science teachers
and courses. Clearly including computer science in STEM education
programs, and clearly defining that this means the conceptual aspects
of computing (as opposed to basic technology literacy) as the
President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology recommended,
would help address the lack of applicability of federal STEM programs
to computer science in numerous states across the nation.

Q3.  Given that participation in AP Computer Science has been flat for
a decade, as we heard during the hearing, please explain how a new AP
Computer Science curriculum will be any different. How will it not only
increase the number of college Computer Science majors, but also
promote greater ethnic and gender diversity?

A3. The new computer science AP course, Computer Science Principles,
follows the model of several other redesigns of AP courses by focusing
on the fundamental aspects of the field in a way that is engaging,
relevant to the real world and inspiring for all students. It seeks to
show how important computer science is to many areas of our society
while giving a broad introduction to the subject area. Thus, this
largely a ``breadth'' approach. The increased appeal of the course is
tied to this approach.
In contrast, the current AP Computer Science A course is largely a
``depth'' approach that goes deeply into the specifics of the Java
computer programming language and gives little sense of the broad
applicability of computer science. Students without prior programming
knowledge often find the course difficult or unapproachable, and the
course makes no attempt to appeal to students who are attracted more by
the broad societal applicability of computer science than by the
technical material for its own sake. The demographics of the current AP
CS A course are very clear; the AP test data shows that largely white
males take it and in small numbers relative to other AP ``STEM''
disciplines. Teachers often have pointed out that the current course is
not an ideal first course for students new to computer science, and
because computer science courses have little room in the curriculum,
the current AP computer science course may be the only opportunity
students have to get exposure to this field in secondary K-12
education.
Computer Science Principles contains rigorous content and includes
a programming component, but uses programming as a way of exploring the
broader concepts of computer science. Unlike AP CS A, it is more about
learning core computer science concepts and much less about learning
the nuances and syntactical specifics of a particular language.
One reason to expect that this new approach to AP computer science
will attract more students and a more diverse set of student is the
positive results of other ``breadth'' approaches towards teaching
computer science. For example, a new high school level course,
Exploring Computer Science, has also adopted this foundational, problem
solving approach to introducing computer science to great success. The
availability of this NSF-funded course in urban, public schools has led
to rapid and dramatic results. Over the past four years, over 4,000 Los
Angeles public high school students across 25 high schools have taken
this college preparatory course--of which 40 percent of enrolled
students were girls and 80 percent were students of color. This type of
foundational and contextual approach to computing around which the new
AP Computer Science Principles course also is framed holds great
promise in drawing students into computer science, particularly
students who have been historically underrepresented in computer
science.

Q4.  Many of your recommendations fall outside of the jurisdiction of
this Committee and, in some cases, the scope of the Federal Government.
However, I am curious. I understand how you could teach middle and high
school computer science skills like programming, software development,
and the use of algorithms; but exactly how would you teach a first or
second grader computer science beyond basic skills?

A4.  Like all academic disciplines, computer science involves the
development of knowledge and skills that are best introduced and
mastered incrementally as students move through their education
experience. For this reason, the Computer Science Teachers Association
has developed the K-12 Computer Science Standards which provided
learning outcomes keyed to students' intellectual development at
several milestones throughout their schooling experience. These
outcomes are organized into two levels at elementary school, grades K-3
and 3-6. Elementary school students are introduced to foundational
concepts in computer science by integrating basic skills in technology
with simple ideas about computational thinking. For example in grades
K-3, a student begins to develop an understanding of sorting by
beginning to arrange information into a useful order. In grades 3-6
students can begin to develop a simple understanding of an algorithm
that includes sequencing of steps and sorting of information. In Grades
3-6 students can also begin learning the foundations of algorithmic
problem solving starting with breaking down a larger problem into
smaller steps that are easily solved.
To illustrate an even more specific answer to the question, CSTA's
new draft standards for K-12 computer science reference the resources
at Computer Science Unplugged (http://csunplugged.org/), which include
some specific approaches to meeting the learning objectives of sorting
or how computers represent numbers as 1s and 0s in grades K-2.

Questions submitted by Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski

Q1.  As I mentioned during the hearing, the fast moving nature of the
fields and the ease with which some jobs can be outsourced can add
uncertainty to careers in NIT, especially in the private sector.

Q1a.   Do you see the outsourcing of NIT jobs as a problem, and if not,
why?

A1a.  In short, no, this does not appear to be a major problem. We
increasingly operate in a global economy and major firms increasingly
employ a global workforce. As long as trade barriers generally are low,
markets and talent exist in other countries, and our nation's standard
of living and wage scales are higher than those in the developing
world, it will be attractive for firms to locate some jobs overseas,
particularly lower-level jobs. But if in conjunction, the employment
situation in NIT continues to thrive in the United States, which it
does, this is a ramification of a global economy but not a sign of
trouble for the U.S. IT industry.
Every indication, both from government studies and data from
corporations and universities, is that the employment situation in NIT
fields in the U.S. shows a considerably greater demand for workers than
the current supply, and this it will continue this way into the
foreseeable future. The latest Bureau of Labor Statistics projections
for 2008-2018 predict a 22.3% growth in employment in the computing
sector (the ``computer specialists'' category 15-1000 in the report)
with 1,384,600 job openings over this 10-year period out of a projected
4,187,000 total jobs, meaning that 33% of the jobs will need to be
filled with new workers. Those of us who work in computing fields in
academia see this phenomenon up close, as the corporate demand for our
students always exceeds the graduates we can supply. In the last two
years, this situation has heated up even further. There also is
verification of this same excess of NIT jobs vs. supply of workers from
the corporate sector; for example, in July 2011, Microsoft general
counsel Brad Smith reported in testimony before the Senate Judiciary
Subcommittee on Immigration, Refugees and Border Security that as of
May 2011, Microsoft had over 2,600 vacant computer science positions.
In addition, the recent Dice report ``America's Tech Talent Crunch''
identified shortages of information technology talent in virtually all
of the key IT markets in the nation including Silicon Valley, Seattle,
Dallas, Boston, Atlanta, New York, and the DC/Virginia/Baltimore
region.
Finally, it should be emphasized that in general, it is the lower-
level, more commodity computing jobs that go overseas. Of the 10 BLS
subcategories under computer specialists, the only one that shows a
small projected decrease (2.9%) is ``computer programmers,'' but this
is far more than offset by a projected 30.4% increase in ``computer
software engineers, systems software,'' a category that is also
considerably more highly paid. In many ways, a computer software
engineer is an upgraded version of a computer programmer. This
illustrates the general point: as long as we train U.S. citizens for
the higher-level computing jobs, the ones that not only require
technical skills but also applications knowledge and the ability to
work with clients and customers, there will be plentiful job demand for
them.

Q1b.   Are there things we can do to avoid training people for jobs
that might not exist?
A1b.  There definitely are steps that we should take, and that many
U.S. universities are taking, to make sure that the education and
training that students receive prepare them well for the needs of the
U.S. workforce. The main one is consistent with the points mentioned
above: we need to prepare people for the modern, quickly-evolving world
of computing technology where computing is applied in a huge variety of
business, scientific, social and other contexts. Industry increasing
looks for employees who combine technical expertise with the ability to
interface with applications that range from health care to media, and
who have the ability to work on diverse teams and with clients. U.S.
programs in computer science, information technology, informatics and
related fields increasingly are taking this orientation and preparing
students well, although the number of students specializing in these
fields remains insufficient.
The other crucial consideration is to realize that the computing
world evolves so quickly that no training can prepare people
sufficiently for a 10-year career, to say nothing of a 40-year career;
students and workers need to be prepared to constantly learn new areas
and skills. An education that goes beyond the purely technical to
combine the applications knowledge and communication skills mentioned
above also prepares the student well for lifelong learning.
Universities will continue to need to evolve their curricula to meet
the demands of a fast-moving industry, and corporations will need to
compliment this education with more specialized training that keeps
employees current and teaches skills that are particular to that
company.

Q1c.  Are there specific areas or programs on which the federal
agencies should focus?

A1c.  The federal agencies will be best served by supporting computing
education broadly within the U.S. at the K-12 and higher education
levels. The agencies should encourage educational approaches that
increase the quantity and diversity of students who are attracted to
NIT fields. These approaches include imparting not only the technical
content of computing but also a sense of the wide range of applications
and situations where computing leads to a better world. Applications in
fields including health care, media and communications, energy,
transportation, arts and entertainment should be made apparent to the
students.

Q2.  The percentage of women obtaining degrees in computer science is
particularly low, and even more troubling, began to decrease around
2001 even as female participation in other STEM fields continues to
slowly increase. The apparent rebound (as of 2009) in the number of
women obtaining computer science Master's degrees appears to be
entirely due to an increase in the number of temporary residents
obtaining such degrees; the number of U.S. citizens and permanent
residents continues to decrease. Do we understand why American women
are turning away from computer sciences in such high numbers? Are there
any data since 2009 to indicate that this trend may be changing? What
additional steps could we take to increase the recruitment and
retention of women in computer sciences? How can federal agencies such
as the National Science Foundation and other NITRD agencies help with
these efforts?

A2.  There is no easy answer as to why girls and women are opting out
of computing; that is an important reason why, in 2004, the Computer
and Information Science and Engineering directorate of the National
Science Foundation provided funding to start NCWIT, the National Center
for Women & Information Technology, whose mission is to significantly
increase girls' and women's meaningful participation in computing.
Since then, over 300 organizations (universities, corporations and non-
profits) have worked together to understand the underlying causes and
possible solutions of the low participation of women in computing.
Causes include:

The lack of rigorous, relevant and inclusive computer
science instruction in K-12 education; curriculum needs to be
formulated in a manner that attracts all students and not just
predominantly males, by combining exposure to the applications and
societal implications of computing with purely technical content.

The lack of relevant and inclusive computer science
introductory instruction at the post-secondary level.

The pervasive image of computing as a ``white geeky
male'' endeavor, and a lack of understanding that most computing
professionals apply computing to a variety of fields ranging from
health care to media to entertainment.

The lack of exposure for computing educators to research
concerning unintended bias and stereotype threat.

The lack of understanding about computer science, and
hence encouragement to pursue computer science education, by adult
stakeholders.

While women's overall participation in university computer science
education has not yet turned the corner, members of NCWIT's Academic
Alliance reported recently that the percentage of female enrollments in
their majors has increased, according to a 2010 annual survey conducted
by NCWIT's external evaluator. Sixty percent of the survey respondents
reported increased enrollment of women and 39% reported increased
graduation rates. It is expected that growth in graduation rates will
continue, since students take four to five years after enrolling to
graduate. National data are beginning to corroborate members' reports.
Although women's share of all computer and information science
Bachelor's degrees awarded in the U.S. declined slightly between 2007
and 2010, two NCWIT-only datasets as well as the Computing Research
Association dataset (one-third of which are NCWIT members) show an
increase in women's share of degrees awarded. Furthermore, as the NCWIT
academic alliance membership grows, so does NCWIT's influence on the
overall percentage of computing degrees awarded in the U.S. In 2010,
NCWIT academic alliance member organizations awarded 21% of the nearly
41,000 Bachelor's degrees awarded in computer and information sciences,
an increase of 8% from 2007, when NCWIT members graduated 13% of all
CIS degrees.
Increasing women's participation in information technology
education and workforce requires a systemic approach that gives
attention to multiple factors: recruitment of women by making them
aware of the opportunities, particularly for helping society, that a
computer career provides; development of computing curricula that
combine technical skills, applications, and communication and teamwork
skills; support for women students that recognizes that women often
enter computing programs less confident of their abilities than men;
and support for women in the technical workplace that provides the
flexibility to balance careers and lives. Ultimately this requires
high-level commitment by universities and employers to the importance
of this issue to our society's economic competitiveness. Organizations
taking this systemic approach do show results; as just one example, my
own School of Informatics and Computing at Indiana University
Bloomington has succeeded in doubling the number of women undergraduate
majors, from 75 to 150, in less than two years by taking such a
comprehensive approach.
Three key things that federal agencies can do to help with these
efforts are to include programs that support diversification of the NIT
student body and workforce in their funding portfolios, to support
organizations that are producing successes in these areas, and to
promote the importance of a diverse NIT workforce for our nation's
economic health and competitiveness.


