- STEM Education In Action: Communities Preparing for Jobs of the Future

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STEM EDUCATION IN ACTION:
COMMUNITIES PREPARING FOR
JOBS OF THE FUTURE

=======================================================================

FIELD HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 26, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-40

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-586PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
Tennessee                        FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY

C O N T E N T S

September 26, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Ralph M. Hall, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     7
Written Statement............................................     9

Statement by Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ranking
Minority Member, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
U.S. House of Representatives..................................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Witnesses: Panel I

Dr. Cora Marrett, Deputy Director, National Science Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15

Mr. James Henry Russell, President, Texarkana College
Oral Statement...............................................    19
Written Statement............................................    21

Dr. Brad Johnson, President, Northeast Texas Community College
Oral Statement...............................................    29
Written Statement............................................    30

Dr. C.B. Rathburn, President, Texas A&M University-Texarkana
Oral Statement...............................................    35
Written Statement............................................    38

Witnesses: Panel II

Ms. Pam Kennedy, Vice President of Human Resources, CHRISTUS St.
Michael Health System
Oral Statement...............................................    46
Written Statement............................................    48

Mr. Myron Barnett, Human Resource Manager, International Paper
Oral Statement...............................................    52
Written Statement............................................    54

Mr. Denis Washington, Chairman, TexAmericas
Oral Statement...............................................    55
Written Statement............................................    58

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Cora Marrett, Deputy Director, National Science Foundation...    66

Mr. James Henry Russell, President, Texarkana College............    69

Dr. Brad Johnson, President, Northeast Texas Community College...    71

Dr. C.B. Rathburn, President, Texas A&M University-Texarkana.....    74

Ms. Pam Kennedy, Vice President of Human Resources, CHRISTUS St.
Michael Health System..........................................    76

Mr. Myron Barnett, Human Resource Manager, International Paper...    78

Mr. Denis Washington, Chairman, TexAmericas......................    79

STEM Education In Action:
Communities Preparing for Jobs of the Future

----------

MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 26, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Sullivan Performing Arts Center, Texarkana, Texas

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., at the
Sullivan Performing Arts Center, 3941 Summerhill Road,
Texarkana, Texas, Hon. Ralph M. Hall [Chairman of the
Committee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

STEM Education in Action:

Communities Preparing for Jobs of the Future

monday, september 26, 2011
10:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m.
sullivan performing arts center, texarkana, texas

1. Purpose

On Monday, September 26, 2011, the Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology will hold the third in a series of hearings to highlight
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) education activities
across the Nation, their role in inspiring and educating future
generations, and their contribution to our future economic prosperity.
The purpose of this hearing, STEM Education in Action: Communities
Preparing for Jobs of the Future, is to highlight the role of community
colleges, specifically the importance of their partnerships and
contributions to the local economy, workforce, and other aspects of the
community.

2. Witnesses

Panel 1

Dr. Cora Marrett, Deputy Director, National Science
Foundation

Mr. James Henry Russell, President, Texarkana College

Dr. Brad Johnson, President, Northeast Texas Community
College

Dr. C.B. Rathburn, President, Texas A&M University-
Texarkana

Panel 2

Ms. Pam Kennedy, Vice President of Human Resources,
CHRISTUS St. Michael Health System

Mr. Myron Barnett, Human Resource Manager, International
Paper

Mr. Denis Washington, Chairman, TexAmericas

3. Overview

An educated and well-trained workforce is essential to
the economic prosperity of the United States. Today's employers are
seeking specific skills and all levels of education to meet their
needs. Communities that successfully marry these education needs with
community workforce needs help stimulate the local economies.

Community colleges provide a tremendous service to the
communities they serve. In many cases, they serve as the primary
postsecondary education and training resource for the community. In all
cases, they contribute to the community's economic prosperity,
providing employers with an educated and trained pipeline of workers.
\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://www.aacc.nche.edu/AboutCC/Trends/Pages/
communitycollegesintheircommunities.aspx

The National Science Foundation (NSF) is an independent
federal agency created by Congress in 1950 ``to promote the progress of
science''. With an annual budget of about $6.9 billion (FY 2010), it is
the primary source of federal funding for non-medical basic research,
providing approximately 40 percent of all federal support, and serves
as a catalyst for science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(STEM) education improvement at all levels of education.

Texarkana College is a two-year, comprehensive community
college that offers educational opportunities in traditional academic
studies, occupational/technical programs, and workforce development and
community services.

Northeast Texas Community College is a two-year community
college that offers students the opportunity of academic studies,
workforce programs, distance learning, and partnerships with four-year
universities.

Texas A&M University-Texarkana is a comprehensive
regional university that provides citizens a convenient opportunity to
earn a four year, graduate, and/or a doctoral degree.

The CHRISTUS St. Michael Health System serves the
Texarkana region of Arkansas, Texas, Louisiana, and Oklahoma. The
Catholic, faith-based health system, CHRISTUS St. Michael, was
established in 1916 by the Sisters of Charity of the Incarnate Word.
CHRISTUS St. Michael offers a full scope of expansive health care
services.

The Texarkana Mill, part of the International Paper
Company, produces bleached board for packaging, and hot and cold drink
cupstock and folding cartons. Through the International Paper Company
Foundation the Texarkana Mill is very involved in the local community
and its success.

TexAmericas Center serves as a business and industry
resource for expanding business needs by offering varied
transportation, abundant natural and human resources, an adaptable
infrastructure and a climate and culture that understands, appreciates
and encourages growth on more than 20,000 acres.

4. Background

STEM Education and the Federal Government

A consensus exists that improving STEM education throughout the
Nation is a necessary condition for preserving our capacity for
innovation and discovery and for ensuring U.S. economic strength and
competitiveness in the international marketplace of the 21st century.
The National Academies Rising Above the Gathering Storm report placed
major emphasis on the need to improve STEM education. This
recommendation was embraced by the House Science, Space, and Technology
Committee following the issuance of the report and was included in the
2007 America COMPETES Act. The 2010 America COMPETES Reauthorization
Act continues this emphasis.
In total, the FY 12 Budget Request devotes $3.4 billion to STEM
education programs across the federal government. \2\ The 2010 America
COMPETES Reauthorization Act called for the creation of a National
Science Technology Council (NSTC) Committee on STEM Education to
coordinate federal STEM investments. The first-year tasks of the
Committee are to create an inventory of federal STEM education
activities and develop a five-year strategic federal STEM education
plan. The inventory, as well as a similar Government Accountability
Office (GAO) survey requested by the Committee on Education and
Workforce, is currently underway and results are expected before next
year. These inventories should include community college investments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ White House Office of Science and Technology Policy,
Innovation, Education, and Infrastructure: Science, Technology, STEM
Education, and 21st Century Infrastructure in the 2012 Budget, p. 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
President Obama has made strengthening community colleges a
priority of his Administration. The American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act provided more than $3.5 billion in Pell Grants to low-income
students at hundreds of community colleges across the country; over $1
billion in workforce training programs at community colleges to prepare
students for work in clean energy industries; health IT, and dislocated
worker training; and $40 million in work study funds to help community
college students pay for their education through employment.
In addition, the FY 12 Budget request identifies a number of new
community college initiatives and existing programs at a number of
federal agencies including the Departments of Labor, Education, and
Veterans Affairs.
Within this Committee's jurisdiction, the FY 12 budget request for
community colleges at the National Science Foundation is $100 million.
This funding would be used to expand and strengthen efforts to engage
community colleges through several core research and development
programs, including the Advanced Technological Education (ATE);
Transforming Undergraduate Education in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (TUES); the Louis Stokes Alliances for
Minority Participation (LSAMP); and the Tribal Colleges and
Universities Program (TCUP).
While not specific to community colleges, other funding
opportunities at the Foundation that will also contribute to enhancing
community college programs are the Scholarship for Service program
(SfS); the STEM Talent Expansion program (STEP), Teacher Learning for
the Future (TLF), Math and Science Partnership (MSP), and Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM).
In the 112th Congress, the Science, Space, and Technology Committee
will continue to hold oversight hearings and briefings on STEM
education activities across the federal government and will closely
monitor the scope and findings of both the NSTC and the GAO federal
STEM education inventories.

Communities and Jobs for the Future

Technology and innovation have kept the American economy strong in
the face of increasing competition in the global marketplace. There is
a significant role of American science and engineering graduates in
helping this country's economy keep pace with this rapid change. As
industry moves toward producing more high-tech products and employing
technology intensive production methods, the need for technologically
and scientifically literate individuals at all levels of the workforce
will increase. Thus, the need for science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) training is now as important for the worker running
the production process, as it is for the researcher who created that
process.
Many reports find that there are not enough people with the
requisite skills to fill the jobs that remain. Encouraging more high
school graduates to get some form of postsecondary education is also
important. Today, some high school graduates are lucky enough to land
entry-level jobs in which they can get career skills through on-the-job
training (for instance, machinists, carpenters, and executive
assistants). Expanding opportunities for more high school graduates
through vocational schools and community colleges is crucial. According
to the Job Creation and America's Future report by the McKinsey Global
Institute \3\, employers are having trouble filling some positions
because they cannot find qualified applicants. Some 40 percent of
survey respondents who say that they plan to hire in the next 12 months
have had positions open for six months or longer because they could not
find the right applicant. More broadly, nearly two-thirds report they
routinely have openings that are difficult to fill. Of these,
management was the most frequently cited type of position. The most
difficult occupational categories to fill were in science and
engineering, followed by computer programmers and information
technology workers. The growing shortage of workers with sought-after
skills is reflected in compensation. Wages for engineers and architects
grew by 3.5 percent annually from 2002 to 2009, compared with an
average of 2.9 percent for all occupations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Job Creation and America's Future, McKinsey Global Institute,
pg. 48 http://www.commerce.gov/sites/default/files/documents/2011/july/
jobs_creation_and_americas_future.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The importance for communities to work together as a whole to
overcome this economic hurdle is becoming ever so evident. Community
and technical college programs can produce the kind of graduates
industry needs to fill the open positions. These institutions have long
been involved in training technicians for the Nation's workforce, but
there is now a growing awareness that community colleges can provide
industry with the adequately skilled workers it needs. Serving as
models for technology training, the National Science Foundation (NSF)
Advanced Technology Education (ATE) centers at community colleges
develop tech-training programs that prepare students for a wide variety
of jobs in high-tech settings. This program funds 39 centers throughout
the country that offer both training for local community college
students and a research enterprise to develop and disseminate best
teaching and curriculum practices for fields such as biotechnology,
chemical processing, advanced manufacturing, and information
technology. These programs rely on a partnership between the community
college and industry, and throughout the country other institutions can
look to ATEs as they develop their own training programs.
Feedback from both colleges and industry personnel on their
partnerships, in general, and ATEs, specifically, is positive.
Employers like and readily hire the graduates of these programs.
However, community colleges face many challenges in creating and
developing tech-training programs. Perhaps the most vexing is that
these programs often face low enrollment. Since community colleges
typically incur a much greater expense in capital costs and maintenance
for these programs, they can find it difficult to begin or continue a
program without a large number of students, especially on their
relatively tight operating budgets. Both community college personnel
and industry representatives claim that careers in manufacturing are
either unknown by or considered undesirable by students and their
parents.
An issue very closely related to attracting large numbers of
students to the program is the inadequate math and science backgrounds
of many students enrolled in community colleges. Community colleges
must attract students to these programs, while also taking measures to
remediate basic skills, most commonly in math. Another challenge the
community college must address is balancing its role as a ``feeder''
institution for four year programs with its ability to deliver
specialized training for industry. Though articulation between tech-
training programs and university is not always possible, community
college administrators and tech-training faculty are increasingly
embracing the need to endow their technology students with problem-
solving skills and an ability and willingness to learn so as to enable
them to navigate the inevitably changing skill needs of industry.
Highly involved industry partners are a common theme among the most
successful tech-training programs. Representatives from both industry
and colleges claim that a willingness to devote time and resources to
the partnership is crucial for the program to yield the most qualified
graduates.
Chairman Hall. All right. If everybody's ready, the
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology will come to order.
And I want to welcome today's hearing entitled, ``STEM
Education and Action: Communities Preparing for Jobs of the
Future.'' We have our packets up here and it contains the
written testimony of these very wonderful members here who have
given their time and their ability and their background. The
way we determine what legislation we write in Washington, D.C.,
is based on the testimony we get from folks like you-all,
because you know more about what you're doing than we do, and
from that, we glean the ingredients into the legislation. And
all your testimony will be read and will be going into the
Congressional record. It will be there for a hundred years.
Maybe Congress can get around to it before then, but they will
all have this, have your testimony to read again, and it will
be discussed many times on--in the Committee room and on the
floor of Congress and in the Rules Committee. But thank all of
you for being here.
I guess I want to say another word or so here for some
folks that are here. I want to thank President and Adrienne
Rathburn, first, for my meal last night. And that's number one,
you know with most politicians, feed us real good and treat us
nice, and you sure do and you did, President of A&M Texarkana.
I want to thank the youngsters who are here.
I have Bess Caughran, who is staff member for Mrs. Eddie
Bernice Johnson. She is the Ranking Member of Science, Space
and Technology. And by the way, there's just a small line
between our districts in Dallas and Rockwall and Texarkana. We
work together very well. I have Janet Poppleton, who is my
chief of staff, has been for 12 or 15 years, something like
that. Mele Williams, Mele is a staff director. I have chief of
policy, Aaricka Aldridge, here to my left. And Marjorie
Chandler is in the audience; and Marjorie's one of the best
things that ever happened to me when I got Bowie County into my
district. We're very lucky to have her here and advise me. And
she and Buddy work day and night, and you're lucky and I'm
lucky to have them. And I thank them very much.
I will start out by welcoming everyone here. I had--that
for the children--yeah. Yes. I don't want to miss this. I want
to welcome the students from Texas High, Arkansas High. Maybe
hear from you as I call you out. Students from Texas High,
Arkansas High, Liberty-Eylau High, Texarkana High--Texarkana
High and Texarkana A&M. How about that? Welcome to all of you.
Good morning. Good morning to all of you.
I want to welcome everyone to the Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology hearing on STEM Education and Action:
Communities Preparing for Jobs for the Future.
I had the pleasure of hosting a field hearing in Texarkana
three years ago. And Bart Gordon was the Chairman because the
democrats were in control of the House then, and he was a very
fine Chairman. I served in the position Mrs. Johnson serving in
now as Ranking Member, because I was Republican and we were in
the minority. Republicans are temporarily, maybe for the next
ten years, are in charge up there now. But if things do change,
Mrs. Johnson will be the Chairman, and I'm sure she'll remember
this meeting because, to me, Texarkana, this county, this area
initiated the first thrust for STEM for youngsters when land
was given by people who were very generous that created an
elementary school here were first, so far as I'm concerned. And
I want this meeting to highlight that because others will have
other meetings directing the same thrusts for STEM, Science,
Space, Technology hearing, and they'll be reminded where it all
started. We were the first and we were the best. And I'm sure
pleased that Eddie Bernice would have the time to drive down
from Dallas and be with us here today. We work together very
well.
I know that--like to officially welcome our Committee's
Members here, and I know that we're glad to have these Members
representing the Great State. STEM education's been a top
priority for both of us on this Committee. And I'd like also to
thank the Texarkana Independent School District for providing
the use of this very wonderful new building and auditorium for
our hearing. And I want to thank all the witnesses for taking
time out of their busy schedule to testify before us today. I'm
grateful to have such a wonderful community here in my own
district.
As you may know, our Committee has jurisdiction of
essentially all non-defense and non-medical research and
development activities in the nation. This includes oversight
of agencies like NASA, the Department of Energy's Office of
Science, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
That's NOAA, which includes the National Weather Service,
portions of the Department of Homeland Security, the National
Institute of Standards and Technology, and the National Science
Foundation, which provides approximately 40 percent of all non-
medical basic research at American colleges and universities,
including support for STEM education.
And I'm pleased and honored that Dr. Cora Marrett, Deputy
Director of the National Science Foundation, could be with us
here today. Thank you very much. Dr. Marrett attended one of
our very first hearings here at the Marshall Elementary School
three years ago; and we're honored to have her back today to
discuss the important role of NSF in helping promote STEM
education and careers.
STEM education and a trained, skilled workforce are very
closely connected, and all or both are very essential elements
for U.S. economic prosperity. They should be a top priority for
every community, much less--and an awful lot like they do here
in Texarkana. We're a pattern they could follow. Not only do
community colleges make up almost half of all the U.S.
graduates, but they also create a pathway to four-year
universities. And through valuable partnerships with business,
industry, other schools and local government and economic
development entities, these help to create a competitive and
economically successful community.
I was in the Texas Senate for ten years before going to
Congress, and I think one of the most important bills we passed
there was the Community College Concept. And there's a story
behind it because you had to know the makeup of the Senate at
that time. We were even a divided Senate then. Though there was
one republican, all the rest of us were democrats, but we still
were divided. And we were especially divided in San Antonio
because the Senate--the Senator there was Senator Red Berry,
whose background had been that he was a driver for Al Capone
when he was younger. And then a professor there, Professor
Bernal, they would not vote together. They would not vote
alike. And they voted one after the other. Bernal voted first
because we voted alphabetically and then Berry. And keep in
mind they would not vote alike. And we had to promise--it was a
close vote. It was tied 15 to 15. I had Bernal promise me that
he would vote for it, and I had Red Berry promise me that he
would vote for it. When we got to their line, Bernal voted
first. He voted for it. And when Red Berry saw he voted for it,
he naturally voted against it. And we lost the first vote. And
then we had to sit Red Berry down and teach him how to renew
the vote by which the vote was taken, had to write it out for
him because he had to do it because he voted in the majority.
He did that. And I had to go over and hold Bernal's hand to get
him to pass and let Red go ahead and vote. And he voted, and
then came back and voted. And it was 16 to 15 is the way this
passed. And I think it's probably one of the most meaningful
and important legislation in the ten years I was down there,
because it did a lot of things that we'll all be discussing
later. But the thing it did for me, I got to keep my kids in
the home two years longer and let them go to junior college
there on the edge of Dallas.
But I know that, and I've had the opportunity to learn
about the Texarkana community efforts behind the creation of
the Martha & Josh Morriss Mathematics & Engineering Elementary
School and their generosity at the field hearings three years
ago. And I'm so impressed with all of you and what you've done
here, and I look forward to learning your postsecondary
education efforts to fulfill your workforce needs and the role
each of you play in accomplishing this important feat. And I
thank you again for being with us today.
I have used my five minutes. Was I exactly on five minutes?
And we want to stay within that because we have those of you
who have to catch transportation out of here at noon. I think
we're going to stay pretty close.
Chair now recognizes Mrs. Johnson for an opening statement.
I've explained to you that she's the lead Democrat on the
entire Committee. She is what they call Ranking Member.
Ms. Johnson, thank you. I recognize you for five minutes.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Hall follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Ralph M. Hall
Good Morning. I want to welcome everyone this morning to the
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology Field Hearing on STEM
Education in Action: Communities Preparing for Jobs of the Future. I
had the pleasure of hosting a Field Hearing in Texarkana three years
ago, and it is my pleasure to return as Chairman of the Committee for
our second field hearing to explore the challenges of promoting
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) education for our
students.
I would like to officially welcome our Committee's Ranking
Democratic Member and my good friend, Eddie Bernice Johnson, to the
fourth district of Texas and to thank her for making the journey for
this important hearing. I know we are both glad to be Members
representing this great state, and STEM education has been a top
priority for both of us on this Committee.
I would like to also thank the Texarkana Independent School
District for providing the use of this wonderful new building and
auditorium for our hearing, and I want to thank all of the witnesses
for taking time out of their busy schedules to testify before us today.
I am grateful to have such a wonderful community here in my own
district.
As you may know, our Committee has jurisdiction of essentially all
non-defense and non-medical research and development activities of the
Nation. This includes oversight of agencies like NASA; the Department
of Energy's Office of Science; the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, which includes the National Weather Service; portions
of the Department of Homeland Security; the National Institute of
Standards and Technology; and the National Science Foundation, which
provides approximately 40 percent of all non-medical basic research at
American colleges and universities, including support for STEM
education.

I am pleased and honored that Dr. Cora Marrett, Deputy Director of
the National Science Foundation, could be with us today. Dr. Marrett
attended our first field hearing at Morriss Elementary School three
years ago, and we are honored to have her back today to discuss the
important role of NSF in helping promote STEM education and careers.
STEM education and a trained, skilled workforce are closely
connected and are both essential elements for U.S. economic prosperity.
They should be a top priority for every community, much like they are
here in Texarkana. Not only do community colleges make up almost half
of all U.S. undergraduates, but they also create a pathway to four-year
universities. Through valuable partnerships with businesses, industry,
other schools and local government and economic development entities,
these help to create a competitive and economically successful
community.
I had the opportunity of learning about the Texarkana community
efforts behind the creation of the Martha and Josh Morriss Mathematics
& Engineering Elementary School at the field hearing three ago. I am so
impressed with all that you are doing here, and I look forward to
learning of your post-secondary education efforts to fulfill your
workforce needs and the role each of you play in accomplishing this
important feat. Thank you all again for joining us today.

Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Hall. And I'm
delighted that you've called this meeting here in Texarkana.
It's a little challenge to get here, but it's always nice to
visit. It's a very nice town, and I want to thank the
Texarkanians for ordering this welcome this morning.
We hope that we will leave with information that will
address successful STEM partnerships in the region, and discuss
the unique role of community colleges in both strengthening the
local technical workforce and providing a pathway to continued
education in the STEM fields. We do have a STEM education
crisis in this country, and we must do something to address it
if we hope to compete in the 21st century and the global
economy. Year after year, test after test, our students are
lagging behind their international peers in tests of science
and math. The most recent National Assessment of Education
Progress study found that less than half of our nation's
students are demonstrating solid academic performances and
proficiency in science. This is a startling statistic when you
consider the many recent reports warning that our competitive
edge will be lost if we do not vastly improve STEM education in
this country. More and more U.S. companies are moving abroad.
We think this is because of trade, but it's because they cannot
find the highly skilled workforce they need here at home. A
recent study estimates that in the year 2018, 8 million jobs in
the U.S. economy will require a college degree in one of the
STEM fields. If we want these jobs to stay here in the U.S. and
in Texas, we must continue to invest in STEM education for our
future workforce.
The STEM education problem is a complex one that no entity
alone can solve. There is a role for all key stateholders,
including federal and state governments, local school
districts, higher education and formal education organizations
and industry. The role of community colleges in particular is
increasingly becoming a part of the national competitiveness
conversation. Community colleges have an important role to play
in preparing students for highly technical jobs upon graduation
and in providing a pathway for higher education in STEM fields.
For many students, community colleges can be more affordable
and accessible than a four-year institution. Additionally,
community colleges are highly diverse institutions with great
potential to stimulate interest in STEM among other
historically underrepresented groups. Many minority students
with great potential for success in STEM disciplines begin
their postsecondary education in a community college.
I'm interested in hearing from the witnesses today about
the role they see community colleges playing in broadening
participation in STEM and what experiences they've had in
promoting diversity in local community college and STEM
programs.
We also know that community colleges face unique
challenges, including issues of K through 12 math and science
remediation. I am interested in hearing from witnesses about
how partnerships with K through 12 students' schools and other
efforts that have helped to address this issue.
In reviewing the written testimony of the witnesses, I
notice that many of you have received federal grants and
partnered with many of the federal agencies. Especially in
these tough budget times, it is critical that we continue to
invest in federal programs that leverage resources locally and
can be sustained long after the initial federal support. We
just must do more with less. I'd be interested in hearing from
our witnesses about what federal support your institution has
received, what made you decide to seek out federal funding and
what impact federal grants and partnerships have had in helping
to create and grow effective STEM programs in East Texas.
To truly tackle the STEM education challenge, we need the
involvement of all stakeholders, of entire communities. I look
forward to hearing more about the great success you are having
in this region and to learning from your experience here in
Texarkana.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Johnson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Eddie Bernice Johnson
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm happy to be here in Texarkana to learn
more about successful STEM partnerships in the region and to discuss
the unique role of community colleges in both strengthening the local
technical workforce and providing a pathway to continued education in
the STEM fields.
We have a STEM education crisis in this country and we must do
something to address it if we hope to compete in the 21st century
global economy. Year after year, test after test, our students are
lagging behind their international peers in tests of science and math
aptitude.
The most recent National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP)
study found that less than half of our Nation's students are
demonstrating solid academic performance and proficiency in science.
This is a startling statistic when you consider the many recent reports
warning that our competitive edge will be lost if we do not vastly
improve STEM education in this country.
More and more U.S. companies are moving abroad because they can't
find the highly skilled workforce they need here at home. A recent
study estimates that in the year 2018, 8 million jobs in the U.S.
economy will require a college degree in one of the STEM fields. If we
want those jobs to stay in the U.S., and in Texas, we must continue to
invest in STEM education for our future workforce.
The STEM education problem is a complex one that no one entity
alone can solve. There is a role for all the key stakeholders,
including federal and state governments, local school districts, higher
education, informal education organizations, and industry.
The role of community colleges in particular is increasingly
becoming a part of the national competitiveness conversation. Community
colleges have an important role to play in preparing students for
highly technical jobs upon graduation, and in providing a pathway for
higher education in the STEM fields. For many students, community
colleges can be more affordable and accessible than four year
institutions. Additionally, community colleges are often highly diverse
institutions with great potential to stimulate interest in STEM among
historically underrepresented groups.
Many minority students with great potential for success in the STEM
disciplines begin their postsecondary education in a community college.
I'm interested in hearing from our witnesses today about the role they
see community colleges playing in broadening participation in STEM and
what experiences they've had in promoting diversity in local community
college STEM programs.
We also know that community colleges face unique challenges,
including issues of K-12 math and science remediation. I'm interested
in hearing from our witnesses about how partnerships with K-12 schools
and other efforts have helped to address this issue.
In reviewing the written testimony of the witnesses, I noticed that
many of you have received federal grants and partnered with many of the
federal agencies.
Especially in these tough budget times, it is critical that we
continue to invest in federal programs that leverage resources locally
and can be sustained long after the initial federal support. I'd be
interested in hearing from our witnesses about what federal support
your institution has received, what made you decide to seek out federal
funding, and what impact federal grants and partnerships have had in
helping to create and grow effective STEM programs in East Texas.
To truly tackle this STEM education challenge we need the
involvement of all stakeholders and of entire communities. I look
forward to hearing more about the great success you are having in this
region, and to learning from your experience here in Texarkana.

Chairman Hall. I think this thing works now. That's what I
think.
And I thank you, Ms. Johnson. The gentlelady from Texas
yields back.
At this time, I want to introduce our first panel of
witnesses and stress the importance of trying to stay within
five minutes, if you can, but, of course, we're not going to
hit the gavel on you no matter how much time you take because
we're too grateful to you for being here. But time is
important, and it's important kind of like it was to a fellow
who was going to heaven and he was talking to Saint Peter,
trying to tell him why he ought to let him in. He said, ``Well,
why should you go to heaven?'' And he said, ``Well, I've done a
lot of good things for good people.'' He said, ``Well, name me
some of them.'' He said, ``Well, for instance,'' he said, ``I
was driving down the highway and I looked over there and I saw
a bunch of motorcycles. And I saw guys with tattoos all of
them, and they had a little farm girl about 19--18, 19 years.
They were pushing her from to the other, and they were hugging
her, and then pushing her on.'' And he said, ``I walked over
there and got her and put her behind me. And I got the leader
and I slapped him in the face three or four times. I jerked a
ring out of his ear. And I said, ``Now any of the rest of you
want some of this?'' And Saint Peter said, ``Well, when did all
that happen?'' He said, ``About 15 minutes ago.''
We won't hold you that close, but we want you to stay with
the time, if you can.
At this time, I'd like to introduce our first panel of
witnesses. Our first witness, as I've already acknowledged, is
Dr. Cora Marrett, Deputy Director, National Science Foundation.
Dr. Marrett, let me express how much we're really looking
forward to the upcoming NSF day at Texas A&M Commerce on
November 14th.
For our academic witnesses today and for any other college
representatives who may be in the audience, NSF will be in town
to host a workshop on the programs they fund and to assist
schools in learning how to apply for grants. And that's a lot
of what will come out of this hearing today, the instructions
on how to do that. I encourage all of you to put that date on
your calendar.
Our second witness is Mr. James Henry Russell, President of
Texarkana College. We call him James Henry--full first and
second name here in East Texas. To my wife I'm Ralph Moody
Hall, but she never called me Ralph Moody unless she was mad at
me--but they call you James Henry, don't they, all the time?
He's President of Texarkana College. He's also worked with
the Texas Independent School District for 17 years before he
served a number of positions, including superintendent.
Our third witness is Dr. Brad Johnson, President of
Northeast Texas Community College. He, too, has 17 years of
education experience. And how important education is, it's
important to prevent mobs in the streets and petitions to
federal courts. That's what education is, teaching us how to be
together and how to live together and set examples for the
young people that you're teaching.
And you've worked in various roles from educator to
administrator and development office. We thank you for being
here.
This is written ``our final witness.'' I don't like to ever
say ``our final witness.'' I'm the oldest guy in Congress. I'm
88 years old, and my kids say, ``Papa, doesn't it hurt you to
say, are you really 88 years old?'' And I tell them it sounds
better than, ``Don't he look natural?''
But that's our final witness for today, and that's what I
always want to say, for this panel, Dr. C.B. Rathburn,
President of Texas A&M University in Texarkana. He's married to
Adrienne. I had dinner with them last night, and I love this
couple. And I appreciate everything they do. Dr. Rathburn was
previously president of Savannah Technical College in Georgia,
for over seven years.
And as our witnesses know, spoken testimony is limited to
five minutes, after which, the Members of the Committee will
have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, Dr. Marrett, for five
minutes to present your testimony, and thank you.

STATEMENT OF DR. CORA MARRETT, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
SCIENCE FOUNDATION

Dr. Marrett. Thank you. Thank you very much, Chairman Hall
and to Ranking Member Johnson, the distinguished members of the
panel, the audience, very distinguished audience. I am very
pleased to be here today to speak to you about community
colleges and the role that the National Science Foundation
plays in supporting the important mission of community colleges
to U.S. education. As you know, the National Science
Foundation, or NSF, is the primary federal agency supporting
research at the frontiers of knowledge across all fields of
science and engineering and at all levels of education in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, or STEM.
NSF's mission, vision and goals are designed to maintain and
strengthen the vitality of U.S. science and engineering, both
in research and education. For after all, research and
education fuel the innovation on which the nation builds. The
intersection of research and education advance U.S. global
leadership and cultivate a reserve of human capital and talent,
something we both know so well.
This reserve enables the U.S. to respond rapidly and
effectively to a range of anticipated and unexpected national
challenges. This occurs through the contributions made to
communities often through community colleges, for community
colleges are essential for community development.
It is a pleasure to be in the 4th Congressional District of
Texas, and to be back, I should say, to the district, for this
is home to several outstanding institutions of education at
every level. But one route to this leadership is through
community colleges. As you well know, these institutions
provide a gateway to millions of Americans to good jobs and a
better life. They also lead to STEM careers and here are a few
facts: One, is that community colleges are an increasingly
important part of the education landscape. In 2010, some 8
million students were enrolled in the nation's nearly 1200
community colleges. It is also the case that community colleges
focus on teaching and they respond to educational and workforce
needs of local communities. Even though community colleges have
some of the highest teaching loads across higher education, the
class sizes are generally smaller, giving students the
opportunity then for significant faculty contact.
As Ranking Member Johnson noted, another fact about
community colleges is that they are diverse, and indeed, it's
this appeal to a broad range of students that holds promise to
diversify the STEM workforce of the nation. This
diversification will help the nation sustain our leadership in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics, leadership
that is critical in the increasingly competitive global economy
we face.
Another fact about community colleges, community colleges
are a bargain and they're accessible. And finally, community
colleges prepare workers for important jobs. As already noted,
the jobs that are emerging are jobs that require skills,
especially middle level skills, and these are the skills that
community colleges help support. NSF then recognizes the value
of community colleges for STEM fields. We've made our budget
request for 2012 and really hope that we'll be able to invest
over a hundred million dollars in projects for 2012, projects
that will focus on STEM career pathways. These would include
technician education, entry into four-year institutions and
investments that will build knowledge about how successfully to
achieve the goals. Time does not allow me to elaborate on our
plans, so I encourage you to read my complete written statement
to learn more about NSF's very important and successful STEM
programs, including the Advanced Technological Education
Program, or ATE, which has been our primary source of support
for engagement with community colleges. I've indicated today
about the support of the ATE program to various parts of Texas,
and the community college system of Texas. The testimony
identifies two programs that are supported through other parts
of the National Science Foundation. Our efforts to support
community colleges through the ATE program span renewable
energy, welding, analyzer technician opportunities, cyber
security and general STEM forces that all lead into technician
education and professional development for students and
faculty.
In conclusion, let me note that community colleges
contribute a great deal to the STEM education pathway and
workforce. Not only is NSF committed, but takes seriously our
role to ensure the continued success of community colleges. It
is then my pleasure, my privilege, not only to come to share
developments at the National Science Foundation, but to learn
of those taking place in this region and to determine or help
determine what might be even more effective ways in which the
National Science Foundation can play the role that it's been
given to advance research and education across all fields of
science and engineering. So I thank you again for the
invitation. I thank everybody for the time, and I will, when
appropriate, welcome any questions that might be made of me.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Marrett follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Cora Marrett, Deputy Director, National
Science Foundation
Chairman Hall and distinguished Members of the Committee, I am
pleased to be here today to speak with you about community colleges and
the role that the National Science Foundation (NSF) plays in supporting
their important mission in U.S. education. As you know, NSF is the
primary federal agency supporting research at the frontiers of
knowledge, across all fields of science and engineering and at all
levels of education in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM). Its mission, vision, and goals are designed to maintain and
strengthen the vitality of the U.S. science and engineering enterprise.
As part of the overall national R&D enterprise, the basic research and
education activities supported by NSF are vital and integrated
components that enable the United States to advance economically, and
they provide the know-how to allow the nation to respond rapidly and
effectively to a range of anticipated and unexpected challenges.
Communities and community colleges are an essential element of this NSF
enterprise.
It is also a pleasure to be in the Fourth Congressional District of
Texas, home of several outstanding institutions of higher education. As
Congressman Hall's website states,

In recent years, a growing consensus has emerged
regarding the importance of science, technology, and innovation as the
key driver of long-term economic growth and improved quality of life in
America. Technological progress fueled by investments in research and
development is estimated to be responsible for as much as half of U.S.
economic growth since World War II. It is critical that we continue our
efforts in STEM education to ensure that the next generation of high-
tech industries and products are developed by researchers in the United
States. America has always been the leader in cutting edge technology
and innovation--and we must do all we can to ensure our strong footing
as a global economic leader.

One route to this leadership travels through community colleges. As
President Barack Obama noted at an October 2010 White House Summit on
community colleges, these institutions provide ``a gateway to millions
of Americans to good jobs and a better life.'' They also often lead to
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers.
Before discussing NSF's investment in community colleges, it might be
helpful to remind ourselves of a few facts about this increasingly
important sector of the education system:

Community colleges are an increasingly important part of
the education landscape. According to American Association of Community
Colleges (AACC) statistics, in 2010 there were 1,173 community colleges
in the U.S. enrolling 8 million students (43% of all students in
postsecondary education). Community colleges awarded 605,267
associate's degrees and 325,452 certificates in 2010.

Community colleges focus on teaching. The community
college mission focuses on teaching, and these institutions respond to
the educational and workforce needs of their local communities.
However, some community college faculty maintain undergraduate research
programs, and more faculty are using research as a learning tool in
community colleges (Cejda and Hensel, 2009. Undergraduate Research at
Community Colleges, Council on Undergraduate Research). Community
college faculty have the highest teaching loads in all of higher
education, and there are no graduate or upper division students to
serve as teaching assistants. However, class sizes are generally small,
and students have significant contact hours with faculty. Students who
transfer from a community college to a four-year institution generally
perform at least as well or better than the students who began their
college experience on the four-year campus.

Community colleges are diverse. Community colleges
attract a broader range of students in terms of race, gender, age,
veteran status, working status, and first-generation college attendees
than other higher education sectors. Community college student
populations thus better align with racial/ethnic proportions within the
general U.S. population and hold promise to help diversify the STEM
workforce and tap the nation's entire human capital talent base. With
95% of community colleges having open admissions, they provide a
pathway for many Americans to academic certificates, associate degrees,
and transition to four-year institutions, and to realizing the American
dream.

Community colleges are a bargain and are accessible.
According to the College Board, tuition and fees at community colleges
in 2009-10 averaged $2,544, compared to four-year public schools at
$7,020 for in-state and $18,548 for out-of-state, and compared to
$26,273 for private not-for-profit four-year schools, and $14,174 for
for-profit four-year schools. In fact, the College Board report noted
that the net cost of community college--after subtracting grant aid--
was negative, so many students are not paying even the modest $2,544
total. In 2007-2008, 62% of community college graduates graduated from
public two-year schools without debt, and another 23% had borrowed less
than $10,000. In addition, 95% of the American population lives within
25 miles of a community college.

Community colleges prepare workers for important jobs.
According to a National Governors Association Issue Brief, titled
``Using Community Colleges to Build a STEM-Skilled Workforce'' (June
24, 2011), it is estimated that between the years 2008 and 2018 nearly
47 million anticipated ``middle skill'' jobs will open; 64% of these
will require at least some college education and strong basic skills in
math, science, and other technical areas.

There is increasing research interest in the value and
potential of community colleges. For example, a special issue in 2010
of the Journal of Women and Minorities in Science and Engineering was
devoted exclusively to the ``Role of Community Colleges: Broadening
Participation among Women and Minorities in STEM.'' The objectives were
to: ``(1) Address the diverse functions of community colleges and their
roles in providing access and opportunity for women and ethnic
minorities to pursue STEM education, (2) Understand the role of
community colleges as a pathway to a baccalaureate degree and beyond in
STEM fields, (3) Investigate the role of career and technical education
programs in community colleges in educating and training the 21st
century workforce,'' and (4) discuss implications for policy and
practice, and future research.

NSF recognizes the valuable services that community colleges
provide for the nation, especially in STEM fields. As stated in its FY
2012 Budget Request to Congress, NSF plans to expand and strengthen its
efforts to engage community colleges through many of its programs; the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, for example, is hoping
to invest $100,000,000 in community college projects in 2012. These
investments will focus on STEM career pathways including technician
education and entry into four-year institutions as well as build
knowledge about how to successfully achieve these goals.

The Advanced Technological Education Program

NSF's Advanced Technological Education (ATE) Program has
historically been the primary program for engagement with community
colleges. In 2011 NSF introduced systematic coordination of ATE program
expertise with a number of other programs in the Directorate for
Education and Human Resources (EHR). The ATE program, which has been in
place since 1994, is the core community college activity at NSF,
bringing coherence and synergy to other relevant undergraduate
education programs within EHR. It aims to prepare the next generation
of technicians for tomorrow's STEM workforce, so in this sense the
focus is very specific. The ATE program currently supports proposals in
three major tracks: ATE Projects, ATE Centers, and Targeted Research in
Technician Education. In ATE Projects and Centers, two-year colleges
have a leadership role and work in partnership with business and
industry, universities, secondary schools, and government agencies to
design and carry out model workforce development initiatives. The
Targeted Research in Technician Education program supports research on
technician education, employment trends, the changing role of
technicians in the workplace, and other topics that advance the
knowledge base needed to make technician education programs more
effective and more forward-looking. Fields of technology supported by
the ATE Program include, but are not limited to: agricultural
technology, biotechnology, chemical technology, civil and construction
technology, computer and information technology, cybersecurity and
forensics, electronics, energy (both traditional and renewable)
environmental technology, geospatial technology, manufacturing and
engineering technology, marine technology multimedia technology,
nanotechnology, telecommunications, and transportation technology.
Given this breadth of coverage, ATE will be in a position to work
across disciplines and programs to expand the qualified applicant pool
of community colleges through expanded outreach, capacity building, and
knowledge building activities. The ATE leadership continues to develop
ways to attract new institutions to the program. One such activity is
the inclusion in the ATE solicitation of a focus area for institutions
that have either never submitted a proposal to ATE or have not
submitted a proposal in ten years. Over the four years that this focus
area has been available, approximately 120 new institutions have
submitted proposals to the ATE program.
The ATE program has supported 61 awards within the state of Texas
since its inception. Currently, there are 12 active awards, and one of
the ATE Centers, the Convergence Technology Center, is housed at Collin
County Community College. ATE also supports the ATE Center, GeoTech, at
Del Mar College as well as a range of projects in Texas that span
renewable energy, welding, analyzer technician opportunities,
cybersecurity, general STEM courses that lead into technician education
programs, and professional development opportunities for faculty. The
ATE television project (see http://www.atetv.org/) recently posted its
first episode of the season (on biotechnology). It highlights ATE
active awards and provides insights into specific career paths. The
webpage includes links to related episodes, information for parents,
students and educators, links to the ATE Centers, an active blog and
information other resources.
Enhancing capacity for community colleges is a priority across the
Foundation. Nearly all of the directorates have programs or activities
that include a community college focus. For example, the Directorate
for Geosciences has supported a community workshop for faculty from
two-year colleges that led to creation of a centralized resources
website (Carleton.edu/geo2yc), and for the past two years has funded
travel grants for faculty and students from two-year schools to attend
the annual meeting of the Geological Society of America. In the
Engineering Directorate, the Research Experiences for Teachers (RET)
program includes community colleges, and community colleges are among
the partners in the large Engineering Research Centers. Across NSF key
drivers for community college activities include:

Serving the needs of underrepresented minorities: According to a
July 2011 NSF National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
(NCSES) InfoBrief, women were more likely than men to have taken
community college courses. In addition, among science, engineering, and
health (SEH) bachelor degree recipients in 2006 and 2007, 56% of
Asians, 57% of blacks, 59% of Hispanics, 68% of American Indians/Alaska
Natives, and 50% of whites had attended community colleges. According
to a 2005 National Research Council (NRC) study, ``in effect, community
colleges have become an educational pipeline for underrepresented
minorities entering the higher education system.'' \1\ According to the
Institute for Higher Education Policy, ``Community colleges provide
vital access to low-income students by offering affordable education,
open enrollment, course convenience, and geographic proximity.'' NSF's
Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program
focuses on preparing community college students to transfer to four-
year baccalaureate-producing institutions. The goal for these students
is to become STEM B.S. recipients and ultimately progress to graduate
studies in STEM disciplines.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Research Council, 2005. Enhancing the Community
College Pathway to Engineering Careers.

Another example of NSF's interest in community colleges is the
Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP), which was established
in 2001 to provide support for increased capacity for STEM educational
programs in the Nation's tribal colleges, as well as many Alaska Native
and Native Hawaiian-serving institutions of higher education. The TCUP
eligibility pool includes over 40 institutions, many of which are in
remote geographic areas, and most of which serve students in
economically disadvantaged regions. Although the program emphasized
information technology in its early days, it has evolved to support new
degree programs in mathematics, science, pre-engineering, and,
recently, engineering. Several of the two-year colleges that comprise
the majority of the TCUP pool now offer four-year degrees in STEM
fields such as computer engineering and environmental science--degrees
with cultural relevance and local significance, as the students can
graduate while remaining near home, and are then competitive for jobs
in these fields that traditionally have gone to others outside the
communities. The investment back in the community made by these
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
graduates is incalculable.

Providing pathways for STEM careers: NSF's NCSES reports that
``over the academic years (AY) 2001 to 2007, the percentage of SEH
graduates who had ever attended community college at some point in
their studies remained fairly steady, at around 50% for bachelor's
degree recipient and just under 45% for master's degree recipients.''
Many students enrolling in community colleges enter with specified STEM
career goals, but find they lack the foundational skills needed to be
successful. NSF will coordinate across programs that support community
colleges to facilitate the implementation of successful models for
developmental education. For example, the Bridge to Biotech program at
the City College of San Francisco was developed with funds from NSF's
Course, Curriculum and Laboratory Improvement (CCLI) program, which is
now called Transforming Undergraduate Education in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (TUES). The San Francisco program is
currently being adapted and implemented at other community colleges.
NSF is hoping to coordinate with private foundations in this effort.

Building the foundation for future STEM teachers: According to a
recent report, ``more than 20% of all teachers begin their college
careers at two-year institutions and nearly half of all teachers
complete some of their science or mathematics courses there.'' \2\
Therefore, building strong STEM courses that articulate with four-year
teacher preparation programs is vital in the preparation of a strong
teaching workforce. Through its programs that focus on preparing
teachers, such as NSF's Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program
(NOYCE) and the proposed Teacher Learning for the Future (TLF) program,
NSF will support efforts to build collaborations between two-year and
four-year teacher training programs with a goal of helping to both
increase the number of qualified teachers in pursuit of the
Administration's goal--to increase the number of college graduates by
50%--and to study the need for and to develop approaches for teacher
training necessary for the 21st century. The ATE program also supports
teacher education efforts, and a recent award is increasing the ability
of secondary STEM teachers and students to learn collaboratively and
apply STEM skills using information and communications technology
(ICT). The project is housed in the National Center for Teacher
Education (NCTE), a part of the Maricopa Community Colleges District.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ National Association of Community College Teacher Education
Programs, 2008. The State of Affairs: Impacts and Implications of STEM
Teacher Education at Two-Year Colleges.

Ensuring smooth critical transitions: Transitions from secondary
school to two-year colleges and from two-year colleges to four-year
colleges are especially challenging in STEM fields. For example, recent
work by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching focuses
on the serious issues in the mathematics preparation of community
college students: ``Many students who attend community college begin
unprepared to succeed in mathematics. . . Students are more likely to
fail developmental mathematics than any other courses in higher
education. Failure rates in individual developmental courses exceed
35%, and two-thirds of students fail to complete the entire sequence of
courses to which they are referred.'' (See http://
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
www.carnegiefoundation.org/problem-solving/developmental-math).

At NSF, programs will coordinate their efforts to study key
transitions and develop mechanisms to help students succeed in
negotiating them. The National Academy of Sciences has received funding
from ATE to conduct a study beginning in 2011 on the changing and
evolving dynamic between two-year and four-year colleges and
universities. Pathways through community colleges to STEM careers as
well as transitions and articulations from secondary schools to
community colleges and community colleges to four-year institutions are
expected to be focus areas of this study. Results of the study will
inform and support education pathways across educational levels and
inform NSF's planning activities for community colleges.

Boosting graduation rates: NSF will play a role in addressing the
President's 2020 goal of producing the highest proportion of college
graduates of any country by helping to increase the graduation rate of
recipients of both associate and baccalaureate degrees in STEM
disciplines. In addition to the strategies enumerated above, NSF will
encourage proposals to its STEM education research programs that focus
on better understanding matters such as the competencies needed by STEM
students for successful transfer from two-year to four-year
institutions; the performance of community college transfers compared
to students who matriculate at four-year institutions; and the elements
that contribute to student success and desire for STEM careers among
community college students.

Conclusion

Clearly, community colleges contribute a great deal to the STEM
education pathway and resulting workforce. NSF remains committed to
helping to ensure their continued success.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you very much for holding this
important hearing, and inviting me to testify. I would be pleased to
answer any questions you may have.

Chairman Hall. And I thank you. I thank you for your time,
your own time. Thanks a lot.
Your entire speech will be in the record for the Committee
and for the Congressional record, and thank you for that.
I now recognize what it says here, Mr. Russell, but I
recognize James Henry--I've met him; I call him James Henry,
and that's what everybody else calls him here--for five minutes
to present his testimony.
James Henry, thank you.

STATEMENT OF MR. JAMES HENRY RUSSELL, PRESIDENT, TEXARKANA
COLLEGE

Mr. Russell. Chairman Hall and Ranking Member Johnson,
first of all, thank you for taking the time out of your very
busy schedule to talk with us here in Texarkana today. It is
quite an honor to have all of you here.
STEM education has made a major impact on this community
over the last few years. I believe this community has prided
itself on, not just putting a sign up on a building declaring
STEM education, but actually changing what we do inside to
prove that we are taking that to heart. I think you would be
very proud of what you would see if you would walk through any
of the STEM programs throughout the Texarkana community today.
I am going to quickly address some of the topics that were
sent to me last week. The first relates to how Texarkana
College is helping the U.S. economy with STEM education.
Texarkana College has been a vital part of this community since
1927. We currently offer a wide variety of STEM pathways in
both the academic and workforce education areas. Approximately
50 percent of our most recent graduates or students that earn
certificates did so in an area of STEM education. How we might
help out the economy more than anywhere, though, is providing
it in such an efficient way. The demand for community college
services, as has been mentioned, is growing throughout this
entire country. Students graduating today have way too much of
a debt burden on them. We are so lucky in this area to have
such efficient community colleges and one of the best-priced
four-year universities that you're going to find anywhere in
the nation. We are very lucky in the Texarkana area to have
first class educational opportunities, but also to have them in
such an efficient offering.
Collaboration in STEM is another area that shines in our
region. It is amazing what can be accomplished when you focus
on student success, and that is what is happening in this area.
Our Pre-K through 16 council in this area is one of the most
productive that you will find anywhere. I want to highlight a
new partnership that shows collaboration in the STEM area.
Texarkana College recently opened a new facility at the
TexAmericas Center. You'll hear a lot more about TexAmericas in
just a few minutes. This facility will provide both academic
and workforce opportunities. It is located right in the middle
of our largest employer and has 20,000 acres available for
future plans. This facility was put there to train our current
workforce and to be ready to quickly adapt to provide training
for any need that comes up in the future. The majority of the
jobs in this area are STEM related at TC at TexAmericas. Our
first training class graduated just two weeks ago, and listen
to the partners that were involved in this: Texarkana College,
TexAmericas Center, the United States Army, Texarkana Chamber
of Commerce and Caterpillar Corporation. That's the very first,
it's only been open for a month, and I can't wait to report on
what the future holds.
I want to move now to obstacles to students receiving STEM
degrees and certificates. The number one obstacle that I see
relates to students being ready for math their first year of
college. Study after study will tell you that if a student is
not successful in a college level math class that first year,
the chance of them ever earning a degree or certificate
dramatically goes down. Professional development, in my
opinion, is one of the key ways that we can improve this in the
future. There are many professional educators in this community
that deserve to be in the record, but at the time, I want to
highlight two, and hopefully they will be contacted. Rhonda
Jameson with the Texarkana Independent School District and
Jamie Ashby with Texarkana College are two incredible women
that are doing a great job in this community changing the way
that we teach in the classroom, and they can show a lot of
people how to get STEM education relevant in the classroom.
Ms. Johnson, I was very impressed to see on your website
that you post an annual Science & Technology BrainTrust to
highlight real life examples to students, and that is what
we've got to have at such an early age. It has to be relevant
to our students. One of the past speakers that you had was Dr.
Ben Carson. He is one that we have studied for many years in
Texarkana and would be thrilled to have him here, if you could
ever help us with that. We sure would appreciate it.
A passion and focus of several of us in this community has
been to get more STEM graduates and for those graduates to
reflect the diversity of this community. I have worked with a
group called the Texas High School Project for the past four
years. They are part of the Community Foundations of Texas and
have been instrumental in bringing about quality STEM education
in school districts across Texas, the past few years. And their
headquarters is--Ms. Johnson, it may be in your area and it's
very close to Congressman Hall's.
I am very excited that they are soon announcing that they
are moving to the community college realm. You will soon be
hearing about staffable credentials and ways students can move
in and out of a college environment while they move up in their
earning opportunities. Students in today's world must have the
opportunity to attend college for a short period of time, earn
something, get a better job, come back, stack something else on
top and get a better job. The traditional student life is
changing, and we've got to have opportunities that meet for
all. Texas High School Project, Dr. Reo Pruiett, an incredible
great organization to learn from on quality STEM education.
They have been an accelerator for STEM in the Texarkana area.
Congressman Hall, in closing, I want to tell you thank you
for what you have done for STEM education in this area. I have
been just as excited as the kids every time you have brought an
astronaut to Texarkana to inspire us. I love attending every
Eagle Scout ceremony that you do. You always refer to somehow
that it was Eagle Scouts that took this country to the moon and
back in the '60s. If you looked at the front page of the
Texarkana Gazette yesterday, you will see our board of trustees
last week in a training session, watched a video from 1962, at
Rice University, where President Kennedy entered this country
into the race for the moon. It's a race that I think we all
know that we won. It shows how important STEM education has
been in the past to this country, and I think we all know that
it is going to be the driver for the future.
Chairman Hall and Ranking Member Johnson, thank you so much
again for coming to Texarkana. Thank you for your support for
STEM education. We look forward to working with you in the
future.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Russell follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. James Henry Rusell, President, Texarkana
College

Opening Remarks and History of Institution

Texarkana College is an institution that has been a vital part of
the Texarkana Community since 1927. During this almost century of
service, Texarkana College has been the leader in post-secondary
education in this area and has been the conduit for so many first time
college students to break free from the straps of poverty and achieve
something that truly opened doors many thought would never be possible.
The role of Texarkana College has been, and continues to be, to provide
the path to educational opportunity for a recent high school graduate,
laid off worker, or someone that simply wants a better life or a new
skill. Texarkana College's motto for the last few years has been that
it is, ``A Great Place to Start or to Start Over.''
TC has a history of leadership, from our faculty to our former and
current student body, of excellence in STEM education. ``Man in his
quest of knowledge and progress is determined and cannot be deterred.''
``Great tasks are accompanied with great difficulty.'' These are two of
my favorite quotes from our President, John F. Kennedy, from his
September 12, 1962 speech entering America into the race to the moon.
In that speech, he stated that we must have the courage to overcome
obstacles; he stated that we must pursue tasks not because they are
easy but because they are hard. Texarkana College was a trailblazer in
the fields of Science and Math even before the term ``STEM'' was ever
coined--not because it was easy, but because it has been and continues
to be our mission to prepare our students to overcome obstacles and
achieve great things.
Collaborations throughout our history have included national
partners such as the NASA-funded NOVA (NASA Opportunities for Visionary
Academics) Grant and the U.S. Corps of Engineers as well as state and
local governments. One of our most well-known graduates, H. Ross Perot,
has been a virtual pioneer in STEM developments on the national front.
Dr. Mary Witt Hughes, a graduate of TC from the 1930s, was blazing
trails for women in science as an orthopedic surgeon. Another graduate,
John Tyler, in 1981, was the first person in the world to establish a
satellite radio network with his company Satellite Music Network.
Today, a current lead engineer for the development of space suits for
NASA, Mr. Terry Hill, is an example of another Texarkana native--from a
local high school and former 1990s student of Texarkana College--who
persevered to overcome barriers to achieve his dream of becoming an
aero-space engineer.
Texarkana College was established in 1927 as a public junior
college and as a branch of the Texarkana, Texas Public School Systems.
The College experienced a slow but steady growth from 109 students in
1927 until the end of World War II at which time it became increasingly
apparent that the growth in enrollment caused by returning veterans
demanded expansion. Accordingly, a bond issue was included in a 1948
election to the tune of $40,000 to purchase a new campus and to finance
construction. Twenty acres were purchased and construction of an
administration building and gymnasium began in 1950. In October of 1951
the college relocated to its present site on Robison Road with an
enrollment of 589 students.
Today, Texarkana College (TC) enrolls more than 10,000 individuals
annually. The TC Mission Statement reads: Texarkana College prepares
individuals for success in life by providing quality opportunities for
workforce education and academic advancement. TC is a comprehensive
community college located in the border city of Texarkana, TX and
offers Associate and Applied Associate Degrees, Distance Education,
Dual Credit, Workforce Education, Certificates, and Continuing
Education courses. Since 1971, Texarkana College has collaborated with
other post-secondary higher education institutions to provide seamless
transfer of credit for students. Texas A&M University-Texarkana (TAMU-
T) is our community partner and affords students with access to
bachelor and graduate degree programs. TC's service areas consist of
all of Bowie County, a large portion of Cass County and a small portion
of Red River County in Texas. In addition, we are a border county with
Miller County in Arkansas and serve these residents as well. TC is an
open admission institution located in the twin cities of Texarkana,
Texas/Arkansas serving a unique geographic area where four states
(Texas, Arkansas, Louisiana, and Oklahoma) meet.
Our student profile is twenty-eight percent economically
disadvantaged with seventy-five percent (75%) Caucasian, and twenty-
five percent (25%) minorities. Sixty-one percent (61%) of students are
younger than twenty-five and sixty-five percent (65%) are female. In FY
2010, 751 degrees and certificates were awarded. Of which 28.8% were
awarded to minorities. Approximately sixty percent (60%) were part time
enrollees with 40% enrolled full time; approximately 70% of our student
population is enrolled in academic programs while 30% are in workforce
education programs. Almost 83% of our total academic students are
employed after graduation and/or go on to pursue a four-year degree.
Graduates of our workforce education programs have a slightly higher
rate with almost 85% employed and/or enrolled.
Texarkana College has made a commitment in the last two years to
establishing a culture of evidence for the entire campus by becoming an
Achieving the Dream institution. As we move forward, knowledge gained
and information and data shared through this nationwide network of
community colleges will be a driving factor in insuring that Texarkana
College remains focused on fulfilling its mission: To prepare
individuals for success in life by providing quality opportunities for
workforce education and academic advancement. In May, 2011, Texarkana
College was selected as one of the top 120 community colleges in the
nation from over 1000 community colleges nationwide to compete in Round
2 of The Aspen Prize for Community College Excellence which seeks to
accelerate efforts to improve community college student outcomes and
shine a spotlight on community colleges that deliver exceptional
student results through the development of high-quality measures and
benchmarks for assessing student outcomes. Texarkana College is very
proud to have been recognized and included in the Achieving the Dream
and Aspen Prize community of institutions nationwide seeking to bring
about transformation in community college student success.

Section I:Role of TC in the U.S. economy

Texarkana College has a solid working relationship with Workforce
Solutions Northeast Texas, the regional office of the Texas Workforce
Commission. Realizing that one of Texarkana College's greatest
contributions to our regional economy is preparing a skilled workforce
for our employers, the institution strives to promote the attainment of
certificates in technical fields that lead to employment in the local
market. TC has proven that historically we have had great success in
the award of certificates in technical fields that lead to jobs. TC
students from the 2004-2005 graduating cohort receiving a certificate
earn an average wage of $32,635. For students who graduated with an
Associate's Degree from Texarkana College in 2004-2005, their 2010
Annualized earnings are $38,613.
The college takes an active role in collecting data on labor market
training demands by participating and hosting regional planning summits
with professionals from the fields of healthcare, advanced
manufacturing and technology. The nine-county area served by Workforce
Solutions Northeast Texas has a broad and diverse manufacturing base.
One of the primary employers in this arena is the Red River Army Depot
(RRAD). RRAD is located 18 miles west of Texarkana. The Depot, which
was established in1941, repairs, and converts combat/tactical wheeled
vehicles and operates the U.S. Department of Defense's only road wheel
and track-shoe rebuild manufacturing facility. Many contractors support
the work at RRAD including Day & Zimmerman, URS Corporation, Raytheon,
M2 Services, BAE, and L-3 Corp. Adjacent to RRAD is the TexAmericas
Center. In 1998, the Red River Redevelopment Authority was chartered as
a Special Purpose District by the Texas Legislature to transform former
military land and buildings into a privately held industrial park. This
industrial park is now known as the TexAmericas Center. RRAD and its
affiliated tenants at the TexAmericas Center currently employs 5,458
people, including federal civilian employees (3,403), tenant
activities/workers (1,004), active duty military (3), workers employed
by contractors (784) and 264 others not elsewhere classified.
TC recently established a 19,000 sq. ft. training center at the
TexAmericas Center development park. With support from a recent Texas
Military Preparedness grant funded through the Texas Governor's Office,
this training center specializes in training dislocated and new workers
in heavy equipment operation, mechanics, welding, machinery and related
skills. Training at this site began in Summer, 2011. The skills being
taught at this facility were identified in direct response to
employers' request and include: robotics and process automation;
instrumentation technology; Programmable Logic Controller; advanced
welding/pulse welding; electromechanical, instrumentation and
maintenance technologies (multi-craft), solid modeling and design, and
integrated systems technology as well as diesel engine and transmission
diagnostics and repair. These courses lead to certificates in the
specified field and meet regional labor demand.
Texarkana USA serves as the medical technology and health care
industry hub for the Ark-La-Tex region. In the 1950's, Texarkana
College began the first Associate Degree Nursing program for community
colleges in the State of Texas and was later the first community
college in the nation to receive National League for Nursing
accreditation. TC is a leading producer of highly trained nursing and
EMT/Paramedic workforce personnel in the region. The TC Nursing Program
has an above-average passing rate of 96% of students taking the Texas
Board of Nursing licensure exam for Associate Degree Nursing (RN) and a
93% passing rate for Vocational Nursing students.

Section II:TC Collaborative Partners

Section III: Barriers to STEM Success/TC Involvement in K-12 STEM
Education

To keep a finger on the pulse of the vitally important healthcare
industry, Texarkana College has recently participated in two sequential
studies to identify variables that have led to a nurse and healthcare
shortage in Northeast Texas. It was determined that students are not
graduating at a rate sufficient to keep pace with the demand for a
skilled workforce. Texarkana College has taken steps to identify
students most at-risk and help nursing and health occupation students
remain in college and overcome barriers that keep them from persisting.
Criteria for identification of at-risk students focused on the
following variables: reading comprehension, math scores, Anatomy &
Physiology grades, family support, and working more than sixteen hours
a week.
Texarkana College has implemented a system to identify ``at-risk''
in-coming nursing students by asking them to complete a survey to
determine methods of intervention to assist them with persistence and
completion. Intervention methods include counseling that addressing
stress, anxiety, time management, family support, critical thinking,
test-taking skills, and lecture class participation strategies.
Programs also conducted an intensive one-on-one test remediation for
students who failed their first test in the Fundamentals of Nursing
course by using the Missildine Exam Diagnostic Tool. In addition,
through our partnership with Texas A&M University-Texarkana, nursing
students have access to expanded counseling services to assist with
academic, personal, and financial counseling. As a result of the
aggressive outreach measures in place through the Health Occupations
department at Texarkana College, the Nursing Program has an above-
average passing rate of 96% of students taking the Texas Board of
Nursing licensure exam for Associate Degree Nursing (RN) and a 93%
passing rate for Vocational Nursing students.
As an Achieving the Dream institution, Texarkana College has made
the transition to data driven decision making. Programs across the TC
campus are using data to evaluate their services or programs and
outcomes. Our data showed that one of the areas that hinder student
success is the developmental math sequence. In response, the TC math
faculty has created three innovative curriculum concepts based on
current best practices to prevent students from losing their math
momentum--Modular Math, Integrated Intermediate and College Algebra,
and Math Boot Camp.
All of these curriculum changes are designed to move students
through the sequence more quickly into college credit bearing
coursework and toward completion of a degree, certificate or transfer
status. One part of the math initiative involves the widespread
implementation of collaborative learning techniques and technology. The
math initiative will impact all students enrolling in developmental
mathematics courses and college level mathematic courses which equates
to approximately 2000 or more students annually.
All three mathematics interventions are designed to improve
successful completion rates in the developmental math program. Students
placing into the developmental math series are less likely than their
counterparts to successfully complete a college credit mathematics
course or even to persist in college enrollment due to the length of
time it may take to complete the developmental math coursework. The
data show achievement gaps tied to the following subgroups: ethnicity
(African American), Pell, gender (male), age (18-19). However, this
intervention targets the academically underprepared student population
(based upon their placement into the developmental math sequence) in
its entirety. As a result, the needs of these subgroups will be
represented when they fall within the targeted population.
The Mathematics Department and Institutional Research office will
assess the effectiveness of these changes through persistence and
successful course completion rates for all developmental math courses,
College Algebra, and the sequence collectively, disaggregated by
standard characteristics, and compare it with baseline data with
ongoing treated versus non-treated sections of each course. Also,
success rates for Student Learning Outcomes established for each course
will be compared in treated versus non-treated sections. In addition,
course enrollment rates throughout the implementation process will be
tracked for comparison of treated versus non-treated sections. Surveys
will be administered each semester in each course to both students and
faculty to evaluate the level of satisfaction and engagement in the
treated versus non-treated sections. Each semester these data will be
shared with key stakeholders to improve the decision making process and
ultimately improve and transform student success in mathematics at TC.
Texarkana College contributes to K-12 STEM education in many
diverse ways. Three primary contributions are in pre-service teacher
preparation, in-service teacher professional development, and
sponsorships of student led activities for TC students to collaborate
with public schools students and for public school students to compete
in cutting edge national events.
TC STEM faculty members are leaders both locally and across the
state in pre-service teacher preparation and in-service teacher
professional development programs. Key mathematics faculty members from
TC have in the past eighteen years served on advisory boards at the
state level in establishing guidelines for the mathematical preparation
of pre-service elementary, middle and high school teachers and in
developing guidelines to improve the STEM preparation of public high
school students for college and career readiness.
These math faculty members have received ongoing professional
development as statewide trainers for Texas Education Agency approved
initiatives in mathematics professional development and incorporated
current best practices into the mathematics curriculum at TC, as well
as provided professional development in both content development and
appropriate pedagogy to in-service teachers across Northeast Texas--
actually across the state.
One of our senior math faculty members has twice been selected as a
master mathematics trainer for the State of Texas, has collaborated
with public school mathematics teachers at all K-12 levels and
partnered with the Region 8 Education Service Center to deliver
training in best practices in mathematics and science education through
the grant funded Texas Regional Collaborative for Science, Mathematics
and Technology Excellence. Through this same faculty member, TC has
provided grant funded professional development opportunities to area
educators in math and science on the application of graphing technology
and calculator based laboratories and other hand-held data collection
devices. This math faculty member also compiled and co-wrote a high
school math curriculum adopted by many school districts across the
State of Texas on integrating workforce based agricultural science
areas with algebra to improve underperforming student populations'
performance on statewide assessments in mathematics.
In addition, Texarkana College partners with the Red River Council
of Teachers of Mathematics (a National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics bi-state affiliate group) and Texas A&M University-
Texarkana to host on our campus Project STEAM (Successfully Training
Educators As Mathematicians)--a regional mathematics professional
development conference hosted about every three years since 1994 and
serving approximately 450-800 regional educators from K-12, two-year
and four-year institutions, along with pre-service educators from
participating higher education institutions in Texas and Arkansas.
Furthermore, three senior science faculty members have served as
Instructional Team Members for the Texas Regional Collaborative for
Science, Mathematics, and Technology Excellence for the past twelve
years to lead innovation in classroom practices for area public school
science educators in biology, chemistry and physics. Two of those
science faculty and the previously mentioned mathematics faculty member
were awarded a NASA-funded grant, NOVA (NASA Opportunities for
Visionary Academics), to transform the higher education curriculum for
pre-service teachers at all levels in math and science to incorporate
best practices use of technology in the STEM classroom. These faculty
members received opportunities to train at NASA facilities in Houston,
TX, and at Cape Canaveral, FL, with other leading scientists and
educators around the nation on cutting edge applications of technology.
This training was implemented in TC STEM classrooms to help pre-service
teachers learn to use technology as an avenue to provide a more
realistic opportunity to explore math and science concepts in a hands-
on, interactive way--thus allowing students to approach these concepts
as mathematicians and scientists would approach them. The long-term
impact will be realized in public school classrooms across the region
as these teachers graduate and implement innovative teaching practices
to engage and inspire students in STEM fields.
Two student led activities in the STEM fields at TC involve the
Chemistry Club and Earth Club. The TC 3 Club (Chemistry Club), an
affiliate of the American Chemical Society (ACS), has been recognized
by the ACS as ``Outstanding Chapter'' for the last thirteen years.
Nationwide, approximately only thirty chapters out of seven hundred
receive that special designation from the ACS. The TC Chemistry Club
appears in the In Chemistry Magazine and the Chemical and Engineering
News, and has received the ``Green Chapter Award'' for the last five
years--one of only two two-year colleges that have received these
awards in recent history. Due to the award winning efforts of the club
and its student participation successes, one of its sponsors was made a
``Fellow'' in the American Chemical Society.
In Summer, 2011, the TC 3 Club participated in the TC Kids College
STEM Week activities though exhibits and demonstrations to area twelve
to fourteen year old students. The club provides many service
activities including water monitoring of the Sulphur River Basin,
tutoring, demonstrations at area high schools and for the public
through the mall. The Sulphur River Authority was founded in 1985 by an
act of the Texas Legislature. Since 1999, our chemistry club students,
Dr. Mike Buttram and Patti Harmon, Professors of Chemistry, have tested
water in the Sulphur River Basin as either a sub-contractor or
contractor for the Sulphur River Basin Authority. These contracts are
administered through a contract between the College and Sulphur River
Basin Authority. This testing monitors any pollution or discharges in
the Sulphur River Basin by private, industrial and governmental
entities, which includes the Sulphur River, the tributaries to the
Sulphur River, both streams and creeks, and Wright Patman Lake. This
contract is for a two year period with a positive cash flow implication
of roughly $40,000 annually to the College, which is used for work-
ships, scholarships, and internships for our Chemistry students and the
purchase of both supplies and equipment for the Chemistry Department.
The TC Earth Club receives recognition annually for the Adopt-a-
Highway Texas Department of Transportation project and also for the
Texas Stream Team water quality monitoring group. In 2010-2011, they
were honored for 20 years of service with an all-expenses-paid trip to
Houston, Texas, with accommodations at the Hyatt-NASA, and were asked
to present their research to all state monitors, representatives from
the EPA and the TCEQ. Locally, the Ark-Tex Council of Governments
honors the Earth Club's efforts for environmental projects in the area
by purchasing equipment each year for water testing and recycling. In
addition, they have been recognized annually by the city of Texarkana,
TX for volunteer work. Currently nineteen students are participating in
waterway clean-up of the Lake Wright Patman shores on National Public
Lands Days in coordination with the U.S. Corp of Engineers. In
addition, TC has an Environmental Studies Center and wetland area where
students are involved in environmental studies about invasive species,
water species, bird watching through Project Feederwatch (a Cornell
University project done worldwide) and Frogwatch USA/Texas Amphibian
Watch.
In other student led activities, Texarkana College sponsored a
group of public schools students, the Bionic Bulldogs, in the 2010 FLL
Body ForwardT Challenge which explored the cutting-edge world of
Biomedical Engineering to discover innovative ways to repair injuries,
overcome genetic predispositions, and maximize the body's potential,
with the intended purpose of leading happier and healthier lives. The
Bionic Bulldogs had call-backs to review their exceptional performances
in Teamwork and Project Research in addition to their high Table
Performance scores. The TC Bionic Bulldog team was named Qualifying
Champion--the highest honor given at the First Lego League Qualifying
events. Our team moved forward to the North Texas First Lego League
State competition where they competed for the top honors and a chance
to attend the World Festival.

Section IV:Percent of TC Students with a Degree in STEM Education

TC provides numerous scholarship opportunities through our Rising
Star Scholarship, Presidential Scholarships, Faculty Association
Scholarships, and various other endowed scholarships including the Tom
Wilbanks Scholarship and the Jake and Bessie Eldridge Scholarship,
which allow students to attend their first two years of college
primarily cost-free. In the case of the Eldridge Scholarship,
outstanding TC students are actually awarded scholarships from TC to
continue their education at any Texas public higher education
institution. Furthermore, TC partners with many area public high
schools to offer dual credit instruction in core curriculum areas
including mathematics. Many STEM students pursue both scholarship and
dual credit opportunities to advance their educational goals through
Texarkana College.

Section V:TC Awareness/Use of Federal Grants

NOVA Grant: In 2000, Texarkana College, through the Division of
Physical Science and Mathematics, was awarded the NOVA Grant. Through
efforts made by faculty, collaboration with NASA enabled students from
local Independent School Districts to benefit from state-of-the-art,
technology-based instruction. This grant continued for five years and
the results have been a lasting impact on techniques used both at the
K-12 level and continuing on to higher education in our area. http://
old.texarkanacollege.edu/mstorey/NOVA/tgazette22300.htm.
U.S. Department of Education:

Direct Programs Include-

Student Financial Assistance/Federal Supplemental
Educational Opportunity Grants

Federal Work-Study Program

TRIO- Student Support Services

TRIO- Talent Search

Federal Pell Grant Program

Academic Competiveness Grant

Passed-Through Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board Grants-

Vocational Education- Basic Grant

LEAP

SLEAP

Byrd Scholarship

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Passed-through North East
Texas Workforce Solutions:

Summer Youth Employment - WIA Youth Program

Child Care Mandatory and Matching Funds

Section VI:TC Transfer & Employment Information

Texarkana College has a 24% transfer rate for FY 2010 to higher
education institutions within the State of Texas; however, we have been
unable to track transfer rates to higher education institutions in
other states which is presumably high for TC due to our border state
status. We are joining the National Student Clearinghouse in 2011-2012
to improve a variety of student transfer services including tracking of
our total transfer rate. Almost 83% of our total academic students are
employed after graduation and/or go on to pursue a four-year degree.
Graduates of our workforce education programs have a slightly higher
rate with almost 85% employed and/or enrolled.
Within our community, Texas A&M-Texarkana has been our
collaborative partner to provide a seamless transition for students to
pursue a four-year bachelor's degree. In 2010, more than 80% of their
enrolled students were considered transfer students (TX College
Almanac, 2010) of whom we were the primary source.
Articulation agreements are in place with the following
institutions of higher education:

Southern Arkansas University

Texas A&M University - Texarkana

University of Texas - Tyler

Chairman Hall. And thank you, thank you very much. To
accentuate that day on the moon, just last Thursday, we had
Neil Armstrong, the first man on the moon, and Gene Cernan, who
was the last American on the moon, before our Committee. And
they spent the entire day with us and with our staff and with
youngsters, encouraging them. They are great, great people. I
even found out why Neil Armstrong was the first on the moon.
Buzz Aldrin started to go out, and Neil caught him by the arm
and said, ``Wait just a minute, I'm supposed to go out first.''
Buzz said, ``No, I out rank you. I'm a captain in the Navy.''
He said, ``No, you don't out rank me. I'm a citizen.'' And he
stepped out first, and that was very interesting. And he gave
the time. Kate Kronmiller gets the credit for getting
astronauts for us here because I'd always go to her. She was on
the USA Committee, and she was one, with her boss, who would
count down, ten, nine, eight, seven, six, and save lives of
people by stopping them if they weren't ready to go.
By the way, I've had my eyes done-- redone cataracts. Her
husband had them done at the same time. I had my one at a time
because I had a bill on the floor and I had to have a good eye
to do that. She had both of his done at the same time, not
because it saved time, because Kate likes a party. Anything
that can cause you to have a party, and she wanted to have a
opening up party for him, opening those blinds off his eyes.
They did that with four or five astronauts, several of us there
with her. Everybody shaking a glass with ice in it. And ta-da,
and they opened them and pulled it off. And he opened and he
looked at Kate. He said, ``My God, Kate, you've aged.'' That
ended the ceremony right there.
All right. Now, I recognize Dr. Brad Johnson for five
minutes to present his testimony.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Brad.

STATEMENT OF DR. BRADLEY W. JOHNSON, PRESIDENT, NORTHEAST TEXAS
COMMUNITY COLLEGE

Dr. Johnson. Thank you, Chairman Hall, Congresswoman
Johnson. I appreciate the chance to present this testimony.
Let me tell you just a bit about the college that I serve.
Northeast Texas Community College is a small comprehensive
community college located on 400 acres of farmland about 6
miles outside of Mount Pleasant, Texas. NTCC has grown by
almost 50 percent in the last three years, to more than 3400
credit students. Northeast Texas serves a student body that is
diverse in every imaginable way. We are diverse racially and
ethnically. We are diverse in terms of the family educational
backgrounds from which our students come. And we are diverse in
the educational preparation with which those students arrive.
There are three aspects to the community college's
workforce role that NTCC tries to focus on.
The first is to bring the literacy levels of aspiring
college students up to college level. The second is to provide
whatever general education is needed for their particular
educational goals. And third, to complete the education of
students entering terminal degree areas.
Northeast Texas contributes to the nation's STEM fields in
several critical ways. First, as has already been mentioned, we
are most likely the gateway through which first generation and
economically disadvantaged students begin their college
careers. We also train the technicians required to work within
fields which applies STEM knowledge to American business. The
college, in partnership with Texas A&M Texarkana, provides the
ability for some of our students to become teachers while they
remain on the NTCC campus, a benefit that I have heard from
several of the area superintendents has made the difference in
their ability to continue to provide a quality education to our
area. Our most recent example of successful collaboration is
happening right now. Three partners came together this year to
open a regional training academy in Mount Pleasant. This
project merges with career and technical training provided by
Mount Pleasant Independent School District with the workforce
training provided by Northeast Texas Community College in two
areas, electrical trades and industrial technology. The result
is a state of the art program that serves both high school and
adult students in the same facilities with the same instructors
and using the same equipment. By fall 2012, all 11 of the ISDs
in our service area will be able to participate in this
academy.
The biggest challenges for Northeast Texas Community
College in terms of STEM education line three areas, student
preparation, student interest and college resources. In terms
of preparation, 39 percent of our students must take one or
more developmental math courses on their arrival at the
college, and only 33 percent of our students require no
remediation at all.
In terms of interest, too few students choose a STEM major,
and when we ask them why, they cite the rigger of the science
and math courses or a lack of interest, and I think actually a
lack of awareness of the careers that they believe follow such
degree choices.
In terms of resources, the shrinking college resources that
we have been experiencing in the last two or three years create
a bottleneck within our lab sciences at Northeast Texas. This
fall, our lab science courses were filled well before the term
began, leaving lists of students waiting and hoping for slots
vacated by withdrawals.
Our transfer challenge is also interesting in several ways,
but one of them that is somewhat unique to being a rural
college is the geographic challenge. There are no universities
less than an hour's drive from NTCC. To mitigate that obstacle,
NTCC partners hosted a university center on our campus. This
center has full-time staff and faculty from Texas A&M
University Texarkana, who assist with the transfer process, as
well as providing the courses on our campus necessary to
complete Baccalaureate degrees in education and business.
I want to thank you for the opportunity to provide this
testimony and would welcome any questions that you might have
further.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Johnson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Bradley W. Johnson, President, Northeast
Texas Community College
My name is Bradley W. Johnson, President of Northeast Texas
Community College, here to provide testimony on the contributions of my
college to the economy, workforce and community.
Northeast Texas Community College (NTCC) is a small, comprehensive
community college located on 400 acres of farmland six miles outside
Mount Pleasant, Texas. NTCC has grown by almost 50% in the last three
years, to more than 3,400 credit students (35% male; 65% female) this
fall. Half the students are preparing to transfer to a university and
pursue a baccalaureate degree, while a quarter are preparing for a
career in healthcare. The last quarter is preparing for immediate entry
to other areas of the workforce, such as automotive technology and
culinary arts, law enforcement, computer information technicians,
welding and electrical occupations.
Half of the students at NTCC receive a PELL grant and almost 70%
receive some kind of financial aid to attend college. The cost to a
full time student for tuition and fees is under $1000 (in district) per
semester. However, tuition covers less than 20% of the total cost to
operate the college. The remaining revenue needs are covered with a
local ad valorum tax (currently capped at 10 cents/$100 valuation),
state formula funding and other sources.
Northeast Texas Community College serves a student body which is
diverse in every imaginable way. Almost a quarter of the students are
Hispanic and another 14% are African American. More than 16% of the
students come from homes where neither parent graduated from high
school and only 20% of the students have a parent who completed a
baccalaureate degree. On the other hand, the college serves a number of
the top graduates of the region, annually admitting valedictorians/
salutatorians and other top performers to its Presidents Scholar's
program. These and other students regularly participate in regional and
national undergraduate research contests and earn distinction in head-
to-head competition with public universities from across a five-state
region.

The Workforce Development Role of Northeast Texas Community College

Northeast Texas Community College's role is to provide entry-level
training and education to persons who are either initially entering the
workforce or who are seeking to reenter and retrain in new areas or
with updated skills. The college does that through its credit offerings
(traditional degrees and certificates), as well as through customized
and standardized non-credit offerings.
There are three aspects to the college's workforce development
role; 1) bring the literacy levels of aspiring students up to college-
level, 2) provide whatever general education is needed for their
particular educational goals, and 3) complete the education of students
entering terminal degree areas. By meeting this mission, the college
improves the marketability of job seekers, productivity of workers, and
quality of life for both workers and their families, while reducing the
demand on governmental services by those same people.
In a 2010 study of NTCC's role in the regional economy, several
measures quantified aspects of the college's economic impact on the
eight-county region surrounding Mt. Pleasant, Texas.

1.  The Texas tax base expands by about $16.5 million annually as a
result of the increased earnings and productivity of NTCC students;

2.  State and local governments receive an 8.5% ROI (rate of
return) on the direct support they contribute to the college operation;

3.  Students receive an 18.9% ROI on their investment in the
college (tuition, fees, forgone wages), meaning they earn back 100% of
their investment within 7.8 years;

4.  The state will avoid $823,800 per year in avoided social costs
due to the education of NTCC students. Savings come from improved
health, reduced crime, and reduced welfare and unemployment.

These impacts compounded across the nation through the work of
thousands of sister institutions; make community colleges a critical
player in the U.S. economy.
Northeast Texas Community College contributes to the nation's STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering and Math) fields in several critical
ways. First, we are the most likely gateway through which first-
generation and economically-disadvantaged students begin their college
careers. Although only 10% of our total student body are seeking a STEM
degree, these are still significant contributions to the effort.
We also train the technicians required to work within the fields
which apply STEM knowledge to American business. Lab technicians,
nurses and other medical technicians, industrial technicians, and
numerous others are necessary if the innovations arising from science
research and development efforts are ever to reach the market they are
intended to serve. NTCC has seven health-related programs (844
students) and more than a dozen workforce-related programs (more than
200 students) which provide critical technician-level training to the
region and nation. Programs like computer networking and programming
provide indispensible support to STEM operations in the educational,
research & development, and business arenas.
The college, in partnership with Texas A&M-Texarkana, provides the
ability for students to become teachers on the NTCC campus. The
Superintendent at one area school district (Mt Vernon ISD) recently
reported that, without the teacher education program at NTCC, his
school likely would not be able to find teachers. Supplying, and
strengthening, the pool of educators is important to STEM efforts, as
well.There has been much discussion among those of us in rural areas
about the severe ``brain-drain'' caused when we educate our best and
brightest students through high school, then send them off to the big
city for an undergraduate education and never get them back (until
perhaps they retire). One of our major area employers, a public utility
with a power plant in our region, has noted recently that they strongly
prefer employees who grow up in East Texas. According to their
personnel director, ``we've tried importing skilled workers--they don't
stay. We want those who have family and roots here so our workforce
investment will return a healthy profit.''
Today this company is our partner in a local industrial technology
training program because they have learned their best employees are
those with roots in the region, who want to stay in the area and who
therefore have a long-term view of supporting the company's success.
NTCC educates students who are far more likely to remain in the region
than those who leave for their undergraduate studies.

Collaborations to Create and Maintain an Educated & Skilled Workforce

Northeast Texas Community College partners with every part of our
region to accomplish our mission at a fraction of the cost of the
private sector, for-profit colleges. Programs like ``College
Connection'' put our students and staff in the high schools, junior
highs, and elementary schools of all 11 districts in our region.
College Connection assures that every graduating high school student is
admitted to the college, or has a post-secondary plan, before they walk
across the stage.
The college, through the Communities in Schools program, has staff
in most school districts providing case management, social services,
and educational interventions to at-risk students. These school
districts contribute their own funds, making this program a valuable
grassroots collaboration.In 2010, a regional collaboration called the
``Regional Advanced Manufacturing Academy'' received state and national
awards for its innovations which brought industry-driven training to
new and incumbent workers across the entire Northeast Texas region.
This collaboration between three community colleges, the regional
workforce board, and the Texas Workforce Commission, was managed by
NTCC and exceeded all performance standards while earning strong
reviews by the companies served.
Despite the 2008 economic downturn, which has been particularly
brutal for our region because of our heavy dependence on manufacturing,
three partners came together this year to open the Regional Training
Academy. This project merges the career and technical training provided
by Mount Pleasant Independent School District with the workforce
training provided by Northeast Texas Community College in two areas:
electrical trades and industrial technology. The result is a state-of-
the-art program that serves both high school and adult students in the
same facility, with the same instructors, and using the same equipment.
By Fall, 2012 all other ISDs in the area will be able to participate in
the Academy.
Area industries have identified such a critical labor shortage in
these areas that the project (Regional Training Academy) opened its
doors in March, six months before the facility was finished. Training
occurred in the evening while construction took place during the day.
The Industrial Technology program has two cohorts of students in
training now, and roughly 50 high school students will join the project
this month. Immediate expansion plans include an AutoCAD program, and
long-term discussions have begun on the possibility of an engineering
technology program with a university partner. All this was accomplished
for the cost of $1.5M and in a span of one year. Significant financial
and political support came from the Mount Pleasant/Titus County
Industrial Development Corporation. This project demonstrates the power
of community-based decision making and collaboration.

Challenges to NTCC Students in STEM Subjects

The biggest challenges to Northeast Texas Community College in
terms of STEM education lie in three areas: student preparation,
student interest, and college resources.Despite major efforts on the
part of our public education system to raise standards and improve
student performance in math and science, too many of our students
arrive with deficits in their academic preparation. Thirty-nine (39)
percent of our students must take one or more developmental math
courses and only 33% of students require no remediation at all.
Too few students choose a STEM major, citing the rigor of the
science and math courses or lack of interest in the careers they
believe follow such degree choices. Even though one in ten students are
following a STEM major, the largest numbers of those students (4% of
total student body) are preparing for the healthcare field, leaving too
few students pursuing the pure sciences or engineering.
Shrinking college resources create a bottleneck in the lab sciences
at Northeast Texas Community College. This fall our lab science courses
were filled well before the term began, leaving lists of students
hoping to fill slots vacated by withdrawals. The college simply did not
have either the faculty or lab classrooms available to open more
sections. Lab sciences were offered morning, afternoon and evening
until every qualified instructor was teaching, and still we could not
meet demand.
With more than $2 million in facility deferred maintenance, the
college has no funds to build more classrooms or hire additional
science faculty. We replaced one science instructor this past summer
but could not afford additional faculty. The college has had to close
its Radiologic Sciences program in order to absorb the state funding
cuts.

STEM Education at Northeast Texas Community College

Only 2.4% (or 12 students) of the 2010 graduating class at NTCC
received STEM degrees. Three-quarters of these were male and two-thirds
were minority students. The college is aware of its challenges with
graduation and transfer of its students. Graduation rates are better
than average for community colleges, far too many students are falling
by the wayside. NTCC has recently begun a major rethinking of our
entire operation with the focused intention to achieve dramatic future
improvements in student success.
Northeast Texas Community College has made considerable efforts in
the past to provide opportunities for students interested in STEM
career paths. Most recently, for example, our students participated in
some of the best STEM experiences in the country:

Josh Galloway and Alex Best were chosen to participate in
the REU (Research Experience for Undergraduates) program at TAMU-
Commerce;

Alex Villalobos participated in Baylor College of
Medicine's Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship Program in Houston,
Texas;

Maria Chavez participated in Boston University's Summer
Undergraduate Research Fellowship Program in Boston, Massachusetts;

Clara Ramirez participated in the Dialysis Clinic, Inc.
Collegiate Medical Summer Internship Program in Nashville, Tennessee;

Alex Villalobos participated as a Research Intern in the
Johns Hopkins Asthma and Allergy Center Summer Research Program in
Baltimore, Maryland.

This college was the first community college to be approved by
Texas A&M University--College Station Biomedical Sciences program for
guaranteed admission of our graduates. Students completing their first
two years' studies, following prescribed curriculum, and maintaining
superior achievement are guaranteed transfer into this university
program. A number of students have graduated successfully from Texas
A&M under this preferred admission arrangement.
NTCC's most recent National Science Foundation grant program sought
to improve educational outcomes for STEM students and was entitled,
``Mathematics Access for Promising Scholars (MAPS) Project.'' MAPS was
founded to increase the number of minority and underrepresented
students with low income who have high ability and the desire to major
in a mathematics intensive course of study. The following activities
were incorporated to accomplish this goal:

1.  Advertisement of the scholarship by instructors and posters,
2.  Organization of a campus math/science student organization,
3.  Creation of a cohort of students planning to earn an A.S.
(Associate in Science degree) in a math intensive course of study,
4.  Establishment of direct communication by faculty with selected
transfer universities.
Within the MAPS project, the NTCC math and science faculty recruit,
mentor, and assemble a cohort of students. Working with their
colleagues in the mathematical sciences department of Texas A&M
University-Texarkana and Texas A&M University-Commerce our faculty
remove barriers for students to transfer to each of these institutions
respectively. In particular, an articulation agreement was established
in 2008 in Industrial Engineering with Texas A&M University-Commerce.
To help students with the transfer process, the NTCC calculus sequence
was modified and improved in 2007 to parallel the universities in
Texas.
Creating a cohort of students in the mathematical sciences that is
closely mentored by dedicated faculty mentors continues to be the most
beneficial activity for students majoring in the math-intensive
disciplines. The close friendships and support among students prove to
be the major reason that students elect to continue the more
challenging courses. In addition, academic advisors share information
that is important to help students understand the difficulty of the
mathematical sciences and the time required to earn a degree in a math-
intensive area. Most NTCC students do not understand --nor do their
families understand--the difficulty caused by working excessive hours
to help pay for college expenses while enrolled in classes in the hard
sciences.
MAPS Outcomes since 2002:

A total of 95 students were awarded the MAPS scholarship;

Approximately 45% of these recipients were minority
students;

Overall, 74% of the scholarship recipients completed the
calculus sequence or were on-track to complete the sequence within a
semester;

98% of the recipients have credit for Calculus I or
above;

One in three scholarship recipients have earned a B.S. in
mathematics or were pursuing the degree at the end of the program;

Two-thirds (65%) have earned or were on-track to receive
an A.S. or above in STEM;

The overwhelming majority (91%) of the recipients have
either graduated with an associate degree or matriculated to a
university. NTCC graduation rates overall ranged from 20% to 30% during
the time of this program.

Use of Federal Resources by Northeast Texas Community College

Although we have sought a number of National Science Foundation
grants in the past, we have been mostly unsuccessful. We understand our
challenges to be 1) a lack of experience writing NSF grants which can
be highly technical in nature, and 2) a historic preference at the
agency for funding research institutions.
We have been more successful working as sub-recipients on grants
written by our partner universities. While this has earned our students
scholarships and some enhanced learning activities in the past, it is
difficult to secure grant funds for labs and equipment when we are a
sub-recipient.
One successful effort has focused on STEM recruitment. It was
funded through a combination of grants from the Texas Education Agency
(TEA) and the U.S. Department of Education. The goal was to inspire
interest in Science, Math and Technology among the children of our
service district. NTCC implemented SMART (Science, Math And Related
Technologies) Girls, The Science Road Show and Summer Science Academy
were implemented in February, and conducted throughout the remainder of
the school year.
These projects were conducted in the schools of Mount Pleasant
Independent School District, Pittsburg Independent School District,
Daingerfield-Lone Star Independent School District, Paul Pewitt
Consolidated Independent School District, Harts Bluff Independent
School District, Chapel Hill Independent School District, and Winfield
Independent School District. The SMART Girls Conference was held on the
Northeast Texas Community College campus. Since the inception of these
programs, NTCC has expanded outreach to include hands-on activities
targeting boys in middle school, to pique their interest in science,
math, technology and pre-engineering with WISE Guys (Working In Science
and Engineering).
WISE Guys has brought boys to the campus of Northeast Texas
Community College campus for week-long academies in the summer to learn
about robotics, alternative energy sources, sustainable agriculture and
much more. To help meet the growing interest among students, NTCC also
implemented SciFi2 (Science Fun, Instruction and Interaction),
workshops for teachers in grades 4 through 6 to help them develop new
strategies for presenting science instruction to students. These
workshops were sponsored in part by the American Chemical Society (ACS)
and offered exciting and engaging activities using low-cost items that
teachers could incorporate into their existing curriculum. Other
activities, such as Engineering Your Future have brought hundreds of
students to the campus of NTCC to learn about careers in science,
mathematics, engineering and technology, featuring speakers such as
NASA engineer Thomas Morrow.
Other examples of NTCC's outreach in the areas of science, math,
engineering and technology include offering high school students the
opportunity to explore careers in those areas. To do this the college
has created opportunities for students to dialogue with professionals
from careers in science and engineering, including a NASA Astronaut.
Since 2004, almost 2,000 girls in grades 5-8 have attended a SMART
Girls Conference and over 4,000 girls have participated in some kind of
SMART Girls activities throughout the year, with the following
demographic breakdown:

Hispanic 43%

Asian 36%

African American 20%

Over 14,000 students have participated in Science Road Show
Activities. These students had the following demographic makeup:

Females 52.1% / Males 47.9%

Hispanic 29.63%

Asian 0.8%

African American 17.68%

So far, over 200 girls have participated in Summer Science Academy
activities and 115 boys have participated in WISE Guys Academy
activities. SciFi2 has brought 60 teachers from NTCC service area
schools to the campus of NTCC for a two day workshop coordinated by
NTCC faculty in science and engineering.

Preparing Students to Transfer or Enter Workforce

To enhance the capabilities of our students for success after they
leave Northeast Texas Community College, we seek to match or exceed the
rigor offered at universities in core curriculum courses, while
providing the advantages which come with a small campus--personal
relationships with our students which allow for more effective
instruction.
There are no universities less than an hour's drive from NTCC. To
mitigate that obstacle, NTCC partners to host a University Center on
the campus. This Center has full time staff and faculty from Texas A&M
University--Texarkana who assist with the transfer process as well as
provide the courses on the NTCC campus necessary to complete
baccalaureate degrees in Education and Business.
Our advisors regularly work with their university-counterparts so
advising can be as accurate as possible and students can complete as
many courses at NTCC as will count toward their baccalaureate degrees
before they leave us.
Student preparation for the workplace is enhanced because we have
personal experience with our major area employers, having toured their
facilities and often provided workforce training in partnership with
those employers. This assists faculty in bringing the curriculum to
students which fits the needs of our regional employers. These local
adjustments are most clearly seen in decisions like which versions of
software we will teach, the integration of LEAN manufacturing methods
into business classes, and the decision to add Level II training to the
Industrial Technology program a year sooner than planned.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony to this
Committee. The challenge to prepare high quality college graduates in
sufficient numbers to return the United States to its leadership role
on the world economic stage is great and will take all of us working
together to be successful.

Chairman Hall. Thank you very much.
And at this time, I recognize our final witness for this
panel, Dr. Rathburn, for five minutes, Mr. President.

STATEMENT OF DR. C.B. RATHBURN, PRESIDENT, TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY
- TEXARKANA

Dr. Rathburn. Thank you, Chairman Hall and Representative
Johnson for being here with us this morning. Welcome to
Texarkana, Texas, the home of integrated STEM education.
My name is C.B. Rathburn. I'm honored to serve as President
of Texas A&M University Texarkana, but prior to this, I spent
27 years of my career at a community college, including 13
years as a community college president in two states.
The emphasis and focus on community college education here
today, especially on the topic STEM education, is not only
timely but incredibly important. I appreciate the opportunity
to participate this morning and discuss lessons learned from a
seven-year partnership in a pre-kindergarten through
Baccalaureate degree integrated STEM education, as well to
address your questions regarding the development and operations
of STEM education programs leading to enhanced workforce
development and economic development. Your subject is, in fact,
critical to the future our nation's economy. The tide of losing
high paying science, technology and engineering jobs to other
countries is alarming but understandable when you consider the
declines experienced over the last two decades in the
performance of our students in math and science curricula and
the production of both STEM field graduates and qualified STEM
educators. The decline has been especially challenging in our
smaller and more rural communities across our nation.
While America has experienced significant declines over the
last decade in STEM education performance and resulting
economic developments, other nations, among them China, North
and South Korea, and India, are enjoying significant
improvements in both postsecondary attainment in STEM fields
and overall STEM education performance. This does not bode well
for our nation long-term.
For the United States to regain and expand our competitive
edge in the global economy, this trend must be reversed.
Unfortunately, there are no quick fixes to this challenge. Most
recent studies in STEM education performance conclude that an
integrated emphasis on critical math, science and engineering
concepts must begin at the early childhood education level and
continue each and every year through high school for students
to be adequately prepared for success in postsecondary STEM
education. To accomplish this, we must refocus our primary and
secondary education resources and curricula structures to
enhance core math, science and analytical thinking skills
before we will see a significant improvement in STEM
postsecondary attainment.
The United States continues to face a critical shortage of
well prepared STEM educators at all levels, as well as the
resources to support essential continued professional education
to STEM teachers currently in the field. This shortage is
especially acute in rural communities where the need for STEM
education and the resulting economic renewal through a well
educated workforce is most needed. A&M Texarkana is proud of
the easily replicable partnership created and tested with the
Texarkana Independent School District, which has demonstrated
great promise in reversing the declining tide in both STEM
education performance of our students, as well as significant
improvement in STEM teacher preparation. We look toward the
opportunity in our written testimony to describe further how
this can be enhanced.
In response to the questions proposed by Chairman Hall, I
am pleased to provide the following responses. A&M Texarkana is
a comprehensive regional university serving the educational
needs of East Texas, and our diverse four-state region. We are
an institution of access and a proud member of the Texas A&M
University system with over 130,000 students served daily
through 11 member universities and 7 state agencies. For the
first 38 years of our existence, A&M Texarkana served as an
upper division and Master's degree rating university, but
thanks to visionary local leadership, strong legislative
support, the university transformed over the last two years
into a comprehensive regional Doctoral level university. The
fall of 2011 freshmen class, our first freshmen class in the
fall of 2010, grew by almost 300 percent, making us one of the
fastest growing universities, not just in Texas, but in the
Southwest.
A&M Texarkana has a distinguished history in the
preparation of professionals in all fields with a particular
focus on quality teacher preparation. With the establishment of
the first STEM college in the state of Texas in January of
2010, our emphasis on the production of STEM graduates has
expanded exponentially in the last two years. Our programs in
computer science, electrical engineering, biology, mathematics,
and nursing boast world class faculty and are growing at a
tremendous rate. For the last two years, a majority--I'll state
it again--the last two years, a majority of our incoming
freshman have chosen for fields in the STEM college, which
we're very proud of. Presently, the STEM college is searching
for faculty to start a new program in environmental engineering
in partnership with the program at Northeast Texas Community
College. We have great natural resources in water and land in
East Texas, and we want to take advantage of those, not only
for education, but for economic development purposes.
A&M Texarkana has received accolades for the success of our
undergraduates in STEM education, placing first and third in
the last two years in statewide undergraduate research
competitions. That was in direct competition with universities
such as A&M College Station.
You talk about partnerships, the Hedgehog, if you're a
student of Collins, Good to Great, for our university is to be
world class at partnerships. Our collaborative efforts for the
creation of Martha & Josh Morriss Mathematics & Engineering
Elementary School in recent years, coupled with the extension
of this PK-16 STEM partnership through the middle and high
school, has produced great student success as well as national
acclaim. The Westlawn Professional Development School, in
partnership with TISD, is a new model for teaching preparation,
which we must take a hard look at, and has proven its worth
over the last eight years. Our electrical engineering and
computer science programs grew directly out of the
collaboration with local business and industry and were funded
with the private sector investment of over nine million
dollars, including support of our own H. Ross Perot here in
Texarkana. Students in these STEM fields are engaged in
internships with organizations such as Cooper Tire and other
local employers.
Our newest STEM initiative is in environmental engineering
program, as I mentioned. It's a collaboration between
TexAmericas Center, the City of Texarkana, Texas, and Northeast
Texas Community College. We have nearly 100 million dollars in
remediation work that needs to be done environmentally at the
TexAmericas Center, which the opportunity for workforce
development and the opportunity for research in that area is
incredible. We recently received a $300,000 Brownfield EPA
grant to begin workforce development critical for this.
By far, of course, our largest collaboration partnership is
workforce development with our regional community college
partners in Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Louisiana. We are a
strong supporter of the ``2+2'' model of higher education and
have recently initiated an expanded effort with all of our area
community colleges to enhance the vertical articulation, joint
student advisement and seamless transfer of our students. We
are convinced that this is a premier model for efficient, cost
effective production of a skilled workforce at the
Baccalaureate level and that this partnership produces the best
option for many of our students. We are proud to have the
lowest tuition rate in the state of Texas, and we think this
provides access for our students.
The major challenge impacting the performance and success
of our students in postsecondary STEM fields is clearly the
core science and math skills of the entering students coupled
with what I like to call the ``Google'' effect. With fewer
students mastering higher level math and science skills up
through calculus, as demonstrated by falling math and science
quantitative measures, we see the growing and growing challenge
of unsuccessful remediation at the postsecondary level. Our
students are simply not prepared for success in the STEM
fields, especially in fields like engineering and physics. In
addition, too many students entering lack the analytical and
critical thinking skills essential to the success in STEM
education. Far too many students are content with a simple
Google search to find the answer to a question rather than
scientific discipline to seek the answers through creative
inquiry. This leads to the inability of today's students to
conceptualize higher order STEM concepts and develop the
analytical thinking skills.
Clearly, STEM education is in the forefront in the
Texarkana community. Clearly, STEM education in this community
is a result of enhanced partnerships. And clearly, it is the
future for the Texarkana region. Thank you for the opportunity
to participate this morning.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rathburn follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. C. B. Rathburn, III, Texas A&M University-
Texarkana
Honorable Chairman Ralph M. Hall and Members of the U.S House of
Representatives Committee on Science, Space and Technology, welcome to
Texarkana, Texas and to the home of integrated STEM education in Texas.
My name is C. B. Rathburn and I am honored to serve as the President of
Texas A&M University-Texarkana. Thank you for inviting me to
participate in this important hearing this morning to discuss lessons
learned from a seven year partnership in Pre-Kindergarten through
Baccalaureate Degree integrated STEM education and to address your
questions regarding the development and operation of STEM education
programs leading to the development of an enhanced workforce, economic
development and job creation for our local communities. I am pleased
and honored to have the opportunity to provide testimony to your
Committee today and to welcome you, Mr. Chairman, home to East Texas.
Your subject is critical to the future of our nation's economy. The
tide of loosing high paying science, technology and engineering jobs to
other countries is alarming but understandable when you consider the
declines experienced over the last two decades in the performance of
our students in math and science curricula and the production of both
STEM field graduates and qualified STEM educators. This decline has
been especially challenging in our smaller and more rural communities
across our nation.
While America has experienced significant declines over the last
decade in STEM education performance and resulting economic development
as detailed in a variety of reports including the Educational Testing
Services pivotal work, ``America's Perfect Storm,'' other nations
including China, North and South Korea and India are enjoying
significant improvements in both postsecondary attainment in STEM
fields and overall STEM education performance of their students. For
the United States to regain and expand our competitive edge in the
global economy, this trend must be reversed. Unfortunately, no quick
fixes to this challenge exist.
Most recent studies on STEM education performance conclude that an
integrated emphasis on critical math, science and engineering concepts
must begin at the early childhood education level and continue every
year through high school for students to be adequately prepared for
success in postsecondary STEM education. To accomplish this we must
refocus our primary and secondary education resources and curricular
structures to enhance core math, science and analytical thinking skills
before we will see significant improvement in STEM postsecondary
attainment.
The United States continues to face a critical shortage of well
prepared STEM educators at all levels as well as the resources to
support essential continuing professional development for STEM teachers
currently in the field. This shortage is especially acute in rural
communities where the need for STEM education and the resulting
economic renewal through a well educated workforce is most needed.
Texas A&M University-Texarkana is proud of the easily replicable
partnerships created and tested with the Texarkana Independent School
District, which have demonstrated great promise in reversing the
declining tide in both STEM education performance at the PK-12 level
and a significant improvement in STEM teacher preparation. We have
developed a plan for the creation of a Regional STEM Research and
Education Center as a collaborative with a number of school districts
and partner universities across our four-state region designed to:

Enhance the recruitment and production of STEM educators
at all levels,

Expand continuing professional development opportunities
for current STEM educators designed to improve student performance in
critical knowledge and skills areas and enhance the retention of
current STEM educators and

Develop a digital demonstration laboratory library to
support current STEM educators in the field with special emphasis on
the needs of STEM educators in rural and small school districts

We would welcome the opportunity to further develop and test these
concepts and process as a model for use in communities across the
nation.
In response to the questions proposed by Chairman Hall, I am
pleased to provide the following responses and comments.
Texas A&M University-Texarkana is a comprehensive regional
university serving the educational needs of East Texas and our diverse
four state region. We are an institution of access and a proud member
of The Texas A&M University System serving over 130,000 students
annually through 11 member universities and seven state agencies across
Texas. For the first 38 years of our existence, A&M-Texarkana served as
an upper division and master's degree granting university but thanks to
visionary local leadership and strong legislative support, the
University transformed into a comprehensive regional doctoral level
university over the last 24 months accepting our first freshman class
and first doctoral students in the fall of 2010. The fall 2011 freshman
class grew by nearly 300% compared to the fall 2010 class making us one
of the fastest growing universities in the southwest.
A&M-Texarkana has a distinguished history in the preparation of
professionals in all fields with a particular focus on quality teacher
preparation. With the establishment of the STEM College at A&M-
Texarkana in January 2010, our emphasis on the production of STEM
graduates has expanded exponentially in the last two years. Our
programs in computer science, electrical engineering, biology,
mathematics and nursing boast world class faculty and are growing at a
tremendous rate. For the last two years a majority of our incoming
freshman chose majors within the STEM College over programs in the
other two colleges within the University. Presently the STEM College is
searching for faculty to start a new program in environmental
engineering and water and land management to take advantage of these
great East Texas natural resources and the resulting potential economic
development.
Texas A&M University-Texarkana has received accolades for the
success of our undergraduate STEM students placing first and third in
the past two years in statewide undergraduate research competitions in
direct competition with universities such as Texas A&M-College Station.
The STEM College has received funding from the National Science
Foundation and the EPA in the last two years to support these research
and workforce development programs.
The ``Hedgehog'' for the university, if you are a student of
Collins work Good to Great, is to be world class at partnerships. Our
collaborative efforts in the creation of the Martha and Josh Morris
Mathematics and Engineering Elementary School in recent years, coupled
with the extension of this PK-16 STEM partnership through the middle
and high school, has produced great student success and national
acclaim. The Westlawn Professional Development School, in partnership
with TISD as a new model of teacher preparation, has proven its worth
over the last eight years. Our electrical engineering and computer
science programs grew directly out of collaboration with local business
and industry and were funded with the private sector investment of over
$9 million. Students in these STEM fields are engaged in internships
with organizations such as Cooper Tire and other local employers.
Our newest STEM initiative in environmental engineering is a direct
result of a collaborative effort between the TEX-Americas Center, the
City of Texarkana, TX and Northeast Texas Community College. The nearly
$100 million environmental reclamation of the former Lone Star Army
Ammunition Plant served and a catalyst for this initiative to develop
critical education and workforce development programs for the emerging
field of environmental remediation and environmental engineering. The
University, in cooperation with the city of Texarkana and Tex-Americas
Center, recently received an initial $300,000 EPA Brownfield training
grant in preparation for this effort. This effort is projected to grow
significantly in future years.
By far our largest collaborative partnerships in workforce
development are with our regional community college partners in Texas,
Oklahoma, Arkansas and Louisiana. We are committed to the ``2+2'' model
of higher education and have recently initiated an expanded effort with
all of our area community college partners to enhance the vertical
articulation, joint student advisement and seamless transfer of
students. We are convinced that this is the premier model for
efficient, cost effective production of a skilled workforce at the
baccalaureate level and that this partnership produces the best option
for many students. With Texas A&M-Texarkana's lowest tuition and cost
of attendance in Texas and the entire region, this also produces the
best value for degree attainment for the student.
The major challenge impacting the performance and success of
students in postsecondary STEM fields is clearly the core science and
math skills of the entering students coupled with a ``Google'' mindset.
With fewer students mastering higher level math and science skills up
through calculus, as demonstrated by falling math and quantitative
measures on standardized tests such as the ACT or SAT and the growing
challenge of unsuccessful remediation of basic skills at the
postsecondary level, many students are simply not prepared for success
in collegiate STEM courses especially in engineering and physics. In
addition too many entering students lack the analytical and critical
thinking skills essential to success in courses requiring creative
inquiry and the application of the scientific method. Far too many
students are content with a simple ``Google'' search to find the answer
to a question rather than the scientific discipline to seek the answers
through creative inquiry processes. This leads to the inability of
today's student to conceptualize higher order STEM concepts and develop
the analytical thinking skills necessary for success in these fields.
These academic challenges along with the pressing financial burden of
the cost of higher education often leads to students either dropping
out totally or finding an easier course of study outside the STEM
fields. In either way we are losing the production if critical
graduates for the STEM fields.
The answer to this challenge is clearly demonstrated in the PK-16
STEM partnership operational in Texarkana today. Beginning with the
Morris Math and Engineering Elementary School through the Texas Middle
School STEM Academy, on into the Perot STEM Academy at Texas High
School and directly into the STEM programs at Texas A&M University-
Texarkana, students in our community are provided the opportunity
beginning at the Kindergarten level to develop both a solid STEM
background and the inquiry skills to be successful at the postsecondary
level. A&M-Texarkana was involved at all levels of the development of
this partnership from the design of the curriculum, to the design of
the facilities, to the creation of a unique masters program to equip
the public school teachers with the critical knowledge and skills to be
successful in teaching the STEM concepts. The success of this
partnership is documented in the students progressing through this
system today and will be demonstrated over the next six years as
successful graduates from the University.
With the creation of the STEM College at Texas A&M-Texarkana in
January 2010 the number of students majoring in STEM programs has grown
by 100% and the number of STEM graduates by over 50%. In 2011,
approximately 10% of A&M-Texarkana's graduates were in STEM fields.
Females represent approximately 66% of these graduates with minority
representation at approximately 20%. Both these numbers are reflective
of the overall percentages for all students in all programs at the
university.
As previously stated the growth in the STEM College enrollments
over the last two year at A&M-Texarkana has been exceptional. A
majority of new freshman entering the university in each of the last
two fall semesters have chosen degree programs in the STEM fields.
Full-time equivalent student enrollment (FTE) changes over the last
three years in STEM fields are as follows:

Biological Sciences  302%
Electrical Engineering  341%
Mathematics  301%
Computer Science  440%

Base on this surge in STEM enrollments we anticipate significant
growth in STEM graduates over the next four years.
The primary reason for this growth has been the generosity of Anita
and Truman Arnold and the gift of $10 million dollars over ten years
for new student scholarships. This opportunity coupled with our summer
camps in robotics, forensic sciences and other fields for bright high
school students have established Texas A&M University-Texarkana as a
destination point for STEM minded students. The university has
initiated a number of support efforts over the last two years including
the First Year Experience program, the student tutorial programs and
the ASK Center designed to support students in their studies and foster
increased student retention. As all of these programs are new over the
last 24 months, an evaluation of the success of these initiatives is
premature at this time.
External funding from federal and other sources will continue to be
critical to the success of our STEM education efforts. As a small
regional university, our ability to attract federal funding is limited.
Unfortunately many federal grant reviewers make decisions on new grant
awards based upon the previous funding history for the university. Many
federal grant programs provide ``bonus points'' in the review process
for more ``seasoned'' universities with far more human and capital
resources. Unfortunately, this serves as a road block for emerging
comprehensive universities such as A&M-Texarkana in competing for these
declining sources of support.
Access to information on various federal grant programs is
available but the technical assistance critical to successfully compete
for these funds is lacking. The Texas A&M University System has
initiated a program of shared services designed to utilize the
expertise and resources of Texas A&M University-College Station, the
other regional universities and the seven state agencies within the
system to assist emerging universities such as Texas A&M University-
Texarkana in developing the resume and expertise critical to
successfully compete for these federal resources.
In the fall of 2009, A&M-Texarkana received our first direct
research grant from the National Science Foundation Grant in the amount
of $300,000 to study multilayer neural network with multi-valued
neurons and their application to image recognition and processing
directed by Dr. Igor Aizenberg. This grant led to the creation of the
award winning undergraduate computer science and electrical engineering
student research team and will hopefully serve as the foundation for
additional funding in this important emerging field for homeland
security and medical image recognition.
Earlier this summer the University received an Environmental
Protection Agency grant for $300,000 to support environmental workforce
development and job training as a collaborative effort with the City of
Texarkana, Texas and Texarkana College and serve as a foundation for
the initiation of the new environmental engineering program at the
university. We anticipate that this effort is the first step in a
series of grants and partnerships to support our environmental
engineering initiatives.
I would like to again express my appreciation to Chairman Hall and
the membership of the Committee on Science, Space and Technology for
the opportunity to present Texas A&M University-Texarkana to you this
morning and our vision and please in the world of STEM education and
workforce development. We have a solid foundation built in Texarkana
with our partners and look forward to working closely with your
Committee and various federal agencies as we together strive to regain
our global prominence in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Technology. I would be happy to answer any questions.

Chairman Hall. Mr. President, thank you.
And thank all four of you. That's your accolades right
there. And Mr. President, I'm going to quote you many times for
the future hearing when you said we launched the first STEM
college.
Dr. Rathburn. We did.
Chairman Hall. By golly, and that's something to brag
about. Like Billy Dean said, ``It ain't bragging if you can do
it.'' We've done it.
That takes care of testimony for today, and now we'll have
the questions. And I can take another minute and a half just to
tell you a story about a guy in our hometown that his elevator
didn't go all the way to the top, but he was smarter than
people thought he was. They were always sending him for jobs.
He'd go by the barbershop, and they'd say, ``Well, somebody
needs you over at the hardware store.'' He'd go and they didn't
need him at all, but he liked the attention. They sent him to
the sheriff's office one day for a deputy sheriff's job. He
said, ``Yes, we have an opening, but you have to answer some
questions,'' like y'all are going to have to do here in just a
minute. He said--asked him this first question, ``What two days
of the week starts with a T?'' He said, ``Today and tomorrow.''
He said, ``Well, that's not exactly wrong, but it's not exactly
right. What's one plus one?'' He said, ``One plus one, that
makes an 11.'' He said, ``Well, that's not really wrong, but
it's not exactly right. I'll ask you the third question. Who
killed Abraham Lincoln?'' He said, ``I don't have any idea. I
never heard of it.'' He went on back by the barbershop, and
they said, ``Did you get a job?'' He said, ``Get a job nothing,
they already got me working on a murder case.''
We have questions that we have to ask, and we're going to
be brief with them. I'll start out first with the first
question.
Dr. Marrett, it's good to hear about the success of the
advanced technological education program in Texas, particularly
the convergence technology center at colleges in Collin County.
Half of Collin's campuses are in my district, and the other
half's in my friend, Sam Johnson's. You describe in your
testimony that there's an ATE solicitation for institutions
that have either never submitted a proposal to ATE or have not
submitted one in the last ten years. Could you tell us just a
bit more about the solicitation and any other NSF, or National
Science Foundation, opportunities in which community college,
ours here, and the university representatives here today might
take an interest or be well suited to pursue?
Dr. Marrett. Thank you very much for the question. In fact,
as I was preparing the material, I looked very closely at what
had been the support for community colleges in Texas, by the
National Science Foundation, and then thought that there really
are other opportunities that should be expanded to the colleges
that have not participated. What you described is something
that we've recognized as an issue. We have programs, but we
don't always get as full participation in those programs as
would be desired. And for that reason, the advanced
technological program that has said we want to target the
places that have not come to the foundation for support. Now, I
should note, as you know, what we do is always on a competitive
basis, so coming doesn't by itself mean that there would be
support, but that's one of the programs. We have others, and
I'm more than willing to be the one--if anyone has questions
about other programs that you can't get on our website, those
people should get in touch with me. And I will tell you about
other things that should be pursued.
Chairman Hall. Thank you--thank you very much.
And to any of the witnesses, there's been a lot of
testimony, and we've heard a lot about students who had a
difficult time transitioning from high school to college and
then from a two-year institution to a four-year institution. We
hear a lot about the difficulty moving from high school to
college, but what are the reasons for the problem between a
two-year and four-year institution and what are each of you
doing in respective roles to alleviate this problem? How do you
address that?
Dr. Rathburn. Well, if I might start. And again, the unique
situation because I spent 27 years at a two-year institution,
and now I'm part of a university. A lot of it is conceptual. A
lot of it is in the mindset of the students. We need to deal
with students in a seamless environment. We talk about
transitions from any educational level to another level. We
need to get rid of the word ``transitions.'' It needs to be
seamless. We are already seeing the work community colleges
have done, a tremendous job with dual credit enrollment in high
school. We want to see that same sort of transition from the
Associate's level to the Baccalaureate level. It starts first
and foremost with a great academic advisor the first time the
student steps onto a postsecondary campus. Building a plan that
takes them from the community college through the university at
that very first step is absolutely critical. The second thing,
as I mentioned in my testimony, is the vertical articulation of
the curriculum itself. Too oftentimes we find students having
to repeat classes or heading off on tracks at the community
college that then sort of block them in the university
environment. So the work that we're doing right now with our
community college partners in this area is to make sure that we
have not only seamless articulation, but also that we would
have seamless education planning with our students as they
transition postsecondary so that they can begin with the end in
mind. And a lot of that is just the collaboration. I have to
give all the credit in the world to the community college
partners in this region for making that happen.
Chairman Hall. I think that answers the question for me,
and she's nudged me three times telling me my time was up.
Ms. Johnson, I recognize you for five minutes or whatever
you take.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much. Let me thank all of you
for your testimony. It's been very enlightening and, the more I
listen, the more the question came to my mind because it's very
clear that probably the community colleges get more students
that need remediation than the four-year institutions. And we
talk about partnerships and it occurred to me that I have a
grandson that goes to a public school that was built by Samsung
in Austin, at Manor, and he's going to have 23 hours of college
work when he finishes high school. How do you develop these
partnerships and do these partnerships help the students be
more prepared for college when they arrive?
Mr. Russell. Ms. Johnson, I'll attempt to answer that
first. I think you may have said Manor ISD, and if you did,
that might be a partnership with the group that I mentioned a
little while ago, the Texas High School Project, that not only
is doing STEM education, but also the early college high
school. That is so important for all of our students to start
early on with that dream of college, so really, college doesn't
become that big a deal. It is just a normal expectation that
you're expected to move forward to. Community colleges and
school districts all throughout the state are working together.
Texarkana College, for example, has dual credit opportunities
to 19 school districts in this area. And it is very common for
students to graduate with around 30 hours. Not only is that a
great start, but if you multiply the cost for that 30 hours
right now for Texarkana College, that's about a thousand
dollars, is what that 30 hours is going to cost. You take the
savings on that compared to where you're going, you're talking
$15-$20,000 a year saving the family early on. Again, as we
talked about that expectation of college is huge, and then
going back to Dr. Ben Carson again, I was reading on the
Internet last night about his momma just refused to allow him
to fail. We've got to build that family environment around
every single student. Whether they have a family or we become
the family, that expectation in every student is going to go to
their maximum benefit. We've got to make sure that expectation
is surrounding every student.
Dr. Johnson. If I may add, as I'm sure you recognize these
problems are complex. There are a lot of different aspects that
we could talk about. Let me add one that I haven't heard
discussed much, and that is the difference between the needs of
our top students and the needs of our average students.
Our top students are oftentimes the ones who take advantage
of the dual credit programs and who graduate from high school
today with 30 or more hours. And those programs work very well
for those top students, and it moves them through the pipeline
quicker. And I think our transfer relationships with the
universities with those students work quite well. I think the
challenge that we're starting to recognize is that in STEM we
need far bigger numbers. We can't compete with the top ten
percent of our students if we're going to meet this challenge.
And so the needs of that next 25 or 30 percent of our high
school graduates are different. And one of those differences is
that they tend to be less willing to move as a part of their
pursuit in preparation for the rest of their life. So the
geographical issues, which I mentioned in my testimony, are a
bigger barrier for them and for their families than for our top
students.
One of the things we're trying to do to work with that is
to build dual credit CTE, or career technical education,
linkages so that more of our students graduate from high school
with some college associated with a particular career path. And
then, as we've talked about earlier today, that stackable
career credential options make more sense to them because when
they walk across the stage in high school they already have a
certificate that is--that leads to employable skills. And they
don't necessarily see college as something only for other
students. They see it as part of their own future.
Chairman Hall. Ms. Johnson, if either of us have other
questions, and I have several other that I would like to have
in the record, and for those on your side of the aisle, and on
my side of the aisle, I think y'all would agree for us to
submit those questions to you in writing. And if you'll give us
your answer, your answer will be put back into the record, just
as if they were here to ask the questions. Is that okay with
you.
Ms. Johnson. That's fine.
Chairman Hall. All right. Without objection, that's the way
we'll do it.
[Appendix I:]
Chairman Hall. So we'll close the second round panel and
thank each one of you very much for your questions and for your
answers and for your participation, for the time it took to get
ready to come here, for some of you to drive here. You've been
generous with your time and we're grateful to you.
Let's hear it from the crowd for them.
And while they are leaving the stage, the others--the
witnesses will come forward. I'll have some encouragement for
those of you who are not very good students out there. I always
thought 70--anything over 70 was wasted in school for me, and I
was a very poor student. I was a terrible student. My sister,
my wife and my mother and all the other women in my family were
teachers, and they were always embarrassed in my grades. As a
matter of fact, one time I made four Fs and a D, and they said
my father punished me for spending too much time on one
subject. That wasn't really true, but it was almost true.
But no matter how poor a student you are, just know that
somebody out there cares. And the one who usually cares the
most is the teacher. Thank God for teachers. And I always think
about the poet who wrote about teachers and wrote about who
were the leading people in people's life and said--and was a
point to him, he said, ``I thank you, teacher, for all you've
done for me. I thank you for reaching your hand into my heaped
up heart and finding something there that no one else looked
quite far enough to find.'' That's what teachers are for. And
that's what I benefited from.
We have our panel in place now so I didn't use up any of
the time. I didn't throw away any time. Was it okay with you?
Ms. Johnson. It's okay.
Chairman Hall. Without objection, we won't erase that from
the record. We'll leave it in there.
The first round panel, I want to thank you and introduce
it.
Our first witness is Ms. Pam Kennedy, Vice President of
Human Resources, CHRISTUS St. Michael Health System.
Originally, Mr. Chris Karam, the President and CEO of St.
Michael's, he was going to represent his organization today,
but impending grandfather duties required his absence. So Ms.
Kennedy graciously stepped in at the last minute and said she
would take over and give the testimony, and we're going to ask
her to do that. I want to stay with it. I know you're prepared
for it, and we want you to do it.
But Mr. Karam is here after all, and for official purposes,
Ms. Kennedy will remain the official witness to provide
testimony, but I'd like to ask you now to consent--or consent
for Mr. Karam to join her as an accompanying witness for any
questions following opening statements. Is that okay with you?
Ms. Johnson. That's fine.
Chairman Hall. All right. Without objection, Mr. Karam,
please join the witnesses as they've all finished their opening
statements. And conveniently, there's already a chair and a
microphone for you over there.
Our second witness is Mr. Myron Barnett, Human Resource
Manager, International Paper. He began his career with Exxon
USA in technical sales in 1988, which led him to his career
with International Paper.
And we're very happy to have you. And your people do visit
me in Washington, and I always appreciate them.
Our final witness for this panel is Mr. Denis Washington,
Chairman, TexAmericas. In addition to his role with Texas
Americans Center, he serves as chairman for the Board of
Commissioners for the Housing Authority of Texarkana, Texas.
As our witness should know, spoken testimony is limited to
five minutes, after which the Members of the Committee will
have five minutes each to ask questions. And we are trying to
finish by high noon, 12 o'clock. We're on good time.
I now recognize our first witness, Ms. Kennedy, for five
minutes to present your testimony. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF MS. PAM KENNEDY,

VICE PRESIDENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES,

CHRISTUS ST. MICHAEL HEALTH SYSTEM

Ms. Kennedy. Thank you, Congressman Hall and Ranking Member
Ms. Johnson. We're glad to be here today and glad to have y'all
here in our community.
My name is Pam Kennedy. I'm the Vice President of Human
Resources and Organizational Development at CHRISTUS St.
Michael Health System, and I've been there for 24 years. And
education is very near and dear to my heart. I do possess a
Master's degree in science and Bachelor's in science, both of
which I received in Texarkana, and I'm very excited that we
have that education available to us here.
So I'm very privileged to share my testimony today. I think
it's important to talk about where I work to understand the
importance of the STEM education. CHRISTUS St. Michael is the
second largest employer in the Texarkana area. It's a central
location in Northeast Texas that allows us to serve residents
of Arkansas, Texas, Oklahoma, and Louisiana. We're a 300-bed
acute care hospital with a 50-bed rehabilitation hospital. We
have a cancer center, outpatient rehab center, imaging center,
day rehab, wound care center and two medical plazas.
The Sisters have been in the community for 95 years. And
during this time, their mission has always been to extend the
healing ministry of Jesus Christ. We offer comprehensive
service ranging from specialized care for women, a Level III
NICU, a Level III trauma center, comprehensive cancer and heart
services, and we're a recognized leader for surgery, heart
care, heart surgery and cancer care. With approximately 70,000
emergency department visits in 2011, we are the regional leader
in specialty care.
The 50-bed CHRISTUS St. Michael Rehabilitation Hospital
combines treatment and education to help patients gain
independence that have been lost due to illness or injury. Some
of those are occupational and speech therapy, cardiac/pulmonary
outpatient rehab, respiratory care, case management, nutrition/
dietary and pharmacy.
As the Sisters of Charity of the Incarnate Word for Houston
and San Antonio joined congregations to form CHRISTUS Health in
1999, the leadership provided enabled our ministry to flourish
and be ranked among the top ten Catholic health systems in the
United States.
We're truly blessed to have the opportunities to reinvest
in our community through capital expenditures for advanced
diagnostic and treatment options in cancer, heart, neosurgical,
neonatal, intensive care and health and wellness, as well as
other areas.
The STEM workforce is imperative to healthcare. It's
imperative to our workforce, our community. Science and
technology are the foundation of the healthcare industry. Going
forward, technology will be a key driver in providing care, our
reimbursement, electronic medical records, and sharing of
information via the health information exchange. In addition,
we currently have two robots, one of which is DaVinci that
provides less invasive prostate and gynecology service with
less recovery time, and a MakoPlasty robot, which provides
minimally invasive knee and hip procedures.
And definitely, it takes someone that knows about science
and technology to be able to provide these services.
Other services we offer are radiology, MRI, CT, ultrasound,
linear accelerator, radiation therapy and sophisticated heart
catheterization. So we need to be able to provide STEM
education locally so students are prepared to easily advance
when opportunities present themselves. Fortunately, we have two
local colleges and universities that provide nurses and other
allied health professionals to our community. We found we've
been most successful by growing our own within the community
because they're committed to remaining in the area after
graduation. Having the local school districts teaching and
providing educated students to these colleges and universities
is critical to our workforce. Associates having degrees at
various levels of our organization include, 40 percent with
Associate degrees, ten percent Bachelor's degrees, three
percent Master's degrees, and probably less than one percent of
Doctorate degrees. And these all involve nurses, respiratory
therapists, radiology technicians, laboratory technicians,
healthcare administration, pharmacists, physical therapists,
occupational therapists, physicists and dosimetrists. And we
all know that math plays an integral part in those, too.
For most of our Associate/Master degree programs, we can
recruit within our area for the positions mentioned--above.
Fortunately, Master's degrees in business, management and
science are available as well. For the more advanced degree,
there is normally out-migration upon completion of their
degree. If the advanced degrees were offered locally, this
would minimize the out-migration to other universities.
If we can provide the STEM education early in a student's
educational experience, we can minimize our out-migration to
larger cities around us. We also want to position ourselves to
be attractive for medical tourism, and we can't do that without
advanced technology.
We--at CHRISTUS St. Michael, we have a formal job shadowing
program for local high school students. We participate in the
Junior Achievement Board and activities to support young
students, MASH program and on-site job fairs to the students so
they have an opportunity to visit with healthcare professionals
to plant the seeds early. To date, this has been a successful
program, and we've had students attend from our local school
districts here in Texarkana and surrounding areas. And this
would not be possible if we were not able to provide the STEM
education within our area. In order for CHRISTUS St. Michael to
continue to remain viable and move forward in the industry,
it's imperative we have STEM education available so that we can
continue to recruit members of our community.
In conclusion, without STEM education as our foundation of
science and technology, we feel we cannot have achieved
national recognition for Thomas Reuters 100 Top Hospitals in
Modern Healthcare, Top 100 Best Places to work. STEM education
has prepared our workforce in providing the skills necessary
for the healthcare industry. Thank you for the opportunity to
share today and for the STEM education. And I'd be happy to
answer any questions you have at the appropriate time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Kennedy follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ms. Pam Kennedy, Vice President of Human
Resources, CHRISTUS St. Michael Health System

Chairman Hall. Thank you very much. And we'll be asking
Chris to come up whenever he wants to. You've done a very good
job for him. I'm a little surprised that you've been there 24
years. I didn't know Chris and that bunch out there hired
eight-year-old girls to work, but thank you for the good job
you did.
Chris, you want to come up and--Chris is waiting for his
grandson to be born. And I had three sons, and I had to wait in
that waiting room. And had a guy in there with me, the last
son. He had been there two and a half or three hours. He smoked
three packs of cigarettes. Every time the door opened, he'd run
to the door and look in hopefully. Finally, they came in and
they said, ``It's a girl.'' He said, ``Oh, thank God. I'd hate
for any son of mine to have to go through what I've had to go
through out here in this waiting room.''
Chris, you got another day or so to wait, haven't you? Good
luck to you. And God bless the little young one that's coming
into this world.
All right. I now recognize Mr. Barnett for five minutes to
present his testimony.

STATEMENT OF MR. MYRON BARNETT, HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGER,
INTERNATIONAL PAPER

Mr. Barnett. Good morning.
Chairman Hall. Good morning, sir.
Mr. Barnett. The Honorable Mr. Hall, The Honorable Ms.
Johnson, I'd like to thank you for the opportunity today to
appear before the Committee to discuss how a workforce skilled
in science, technology, engineering and math, or STEM
workforce, is critical to the success of International Paper's
Texarkana mill.
Our facility is situated on more than 1500 acres in Cass
County, Texas. We currently employ 120 salaried employees and
650 hourly employees who are represented by the USW, the United
Steel Workers, and the IBEW, the International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers. Together, we donate more than $250,000 to
our local communities in both Arkansas, and Texas, and provide
community resources to the areas where our employees live and
work. We also have an enormous impact economically on this
region with our labor costs, our wood purchases, equipment
purchases, maintenance and capital improvements. Our economic
impact on this community totals nearly $300,000,000 annually.
International Paper's Texarkana mill hires across a wide
range of jobs--roles that are more physically attentive to
those that are very sophisticated in terms of the production
and maintenance positions that operate the very latest in paper
manufacturing technology. Our salaried employees have expertise
in engineering, accounting, communications and other
professional areas. Even in our entry level positions, it is
imperative that our employees have basic computer and
technology skills and have knowledge of fundamental mechanical
concepts commonly utilized in manufacturing.
This is one of the reasons I'm glad to be here today. It
gives me the opportunity to share with this Committee some very
important points. First, our enthusiasm and appreciation for
our current workforce at International Paper. Second, the fact
that we are seeing an entire generation of highly skilled
employees at all levels of our organization retire at a very
rapid pace. And third, in light of this changing dynamic, the
need for us to modify our recruiting strategies in a way that
causes us to depend even more on our current educational
systems to produce a well-educated workforce. This last element
is essential to the current and future success of our business.
We define our workforce both in terms of production and
maintenance employees and engineering and management employees.
As it relates to engineers, we recruit primarily chemical,
mechanical, electrical and environmental engineers. While
International Paper has a coordinated national recruiting
program in which we participate, we focus on local recruiting
efforts at Louisiana Tech, but I would also add that several of
our engineers are graduates from Texas A&M. Over the years,
including recently, we have been very successful finding
technically trained engineers to help us meet our business
needs.
Regarding production employees, we're looking for
individuals that have good computer knowledge and a basic
mechanical aptitude. Maintenance mechanics must be skilled in
areas like welding, pipe fitting and machining. Instrument
electricians must understand motors, handling low, medium and
high voltage, programmable logic controls in DCS technology.
From a recruiting standpoint, we have been fortunate to
find skilled production and maintenance employees from our
local communities, but please understand that this is getting
more and more difficult. As the human resources manager at our
facility, I believe that in order to avoid a disconnect between
the jobs that we all want to see kept in the United States and
our workforce's ability to perform these jobs well, then we
simply have to be more successful educating production and
maintenance employees earlier during the high school years. We
must establish more collaborative efforts between the
manufacturing world and the world of education to expose
students to manufacturing-oriented technology. As we evaluate
hundreds of candidates for well-paying jobs, we don't regularly
see the type of exposure to technology that makes for a skilled
workforce that will have to compete in a global economy. And
ladies and gentlemen, familiarity with video games and
smartphones and the latest APs just won't cut it.
At this time, the Texarkana mill has begun work with
Texarkana College on this type of training and skills
development effort. This is something we must do, but it can't
just occur at the collegiate level. Our high schools will also
play a critical role in helping inspire a future skilled
workforce.
Finally, I'd like to thank the Committee for allowing me to
represent the employees of International Paper Texarkana mill
in this forum today. This is a critical subject, and it will
impact the success of both this community and our business. You
see, our futures are truly interconnected. For we, indeed, are
in this together. I appreciate your time, and thanks again for
inviting me to be involved in today's hearing.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Barnett follows:]
Prepared Statement of Myron Barnett, Human Resources Manager,
International Paper Texarkana Mill
Chairman Hall and Congresswoman Johnson and Members of the
Committee, I am Myron Barnett, Human Resources Manager, at
International Paper's Texarkana Mill. I'd like to thank you for the
opportunity to appear before the Committee today to discuss how a
skilled STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Math) workforce is
critical to the success of International Paper's Texarkana Mill. The
Texarkana Mill is a part of International Paper, a company which
currently employees 60,000 employees in more than 24 countries.
International Paper is a global leader in the paper and packaging
industry with manufacturing operations in North America, Europe, Latin
America, Asia and North Africa.
The facility that I'm representing in Texarkana is situated on more
than 1,500 acres in Domino, which is a part of Cass County, Texas. In
2012, we will celebrate our 40th Anniversary at the Texarkana Mill. We
currently employ roughly 800 hourly and salaried employees. We have an
enormous economic impact on this region. With labor, wood purchases,
equipment, maintenance and capital improvements our economic impact in
this community totals nearly $300 million annually. Most economists
would say that you could multiply that figure times three or five in
total direct and indirect economic impact. We are truly committed to
the communities where our employees live and work. In addition to the
economic impact we have in this area, we contribute more than $250,000
to the local community through foundation grants, community giving and
our annual United Way campaign.
International Paper's Texarkana Mill hires for a wide range of jobs
from manual labor to automated equipment operators to maintenance,
mechanical and instrument electricians. We also have a large number of
salaried employees with expertise in engineering, accounting,
communications, human resources and other professional areas.
At our most entry level positions, it's imperative that our
employees have basic computer and technology skills and have knowledge
of routine procedures within the manufacturing environment. Not only do
they need these skills, but they also need training in critical
thinking and problem solving. This is one of the reasons I'm glad to be
here today--it gives me the opportunity to let this Committee know that
we have a solid workforce at International Paper, but we definitely see
areas where we could improve our recruitment efforts early in the
education system. With an entire generation of skilled employees at all
levels retiring at a rapid pace, an educated workforce is essential to
the success of our business.
We define our workforce both in terms of production and maintenance
employees versus engineering and management employees. When we speak to
our engineering employee base we're looking at chemical, mechanical,
electrical, civil and environmental engineers. It's imperative that on
the production and maintenance side that we're looking at individuals
that have good computer knowledge, PLC's and are skilled from a
technical standpoint. It is our company's preference to have production
employees who have exposure to technology in areas like DCS
(Distribution Control Systems), as well.
From a recruiting standpoint, we have been fortunate to find
employees from production, maintenance as well as our salaried
employees locally and in surrounding areas. However, that is getting
more and more difficult. Our company has a broad based recruiting
effort at major universities across the country, but locally we focus
much of our recruiting efforts at proven successful engineering schools
like Texas A&M and Louisiana Tech.
As the Human Resources manager at this facility, I'm believe that
in order to avoid a disconnect between the jobs we want to the keep in
the U.S. and our workforce's ability to perform these jobs, that we
simply have to start educating production and maintenance employees
earlier in the high school years. By doing this we expose students and
potential employees to computers and technology as well as
opportunities available to them after high school and college. Frankly,
we don't see the type of exposure to computers and technology that
makes for a skilled workforce happening at this time outside of video
games, smart phones and apps.
At this time, our company is not working with local colleges and
universities on training programs, but it's something we'd like to get
involved with. Not just at the collegiate level but also with local K-
12 schools that help inspire a future STEM workforce.
I'd like to thank the Committee for allowing me to represent the
800 International Paper employees here in Texarkana. This is a critical
subject for recruitment and I appreciate your time and inviting me to
be involved in today's hearing.

Chairman Hall. And we thank you. You've had some problems
with fires, have you not, in your home county, in that area? I
heard, I think on TV this morning, our governor is headed back
from Florida, to Austin to go to work for us--continue working
for us to get some help from the federal government on that.
And I'm--I have never--in my 88 years, I have never seen
the likes of earthquakes, of fires, of hurricanes and tragedies
like that. Maybe they just didn't print them before. Maybe we
just didn't know about them and we had them, but I don't
remember it being this bad. Do you? Any of you remember it
being like the way it is here, the people, the deprivation, the
hardship, the-- the injuries, the deaths of so many people.
It's just amazing. Probably need to spend more time on our
knees, by golly, but we are praying for your folks and--and
pray that we get some help for them quickly. I know they need
it.
I now recognize, excuse me, our final witness for this
panel, Mr. Washington, for five minutes.
Mr. Washington, thank you.

STATEMENT OF MR. DENIS WASHINGTON, CHAIRMAN, TEXAMERICAS

Mr. Washington. And thank you, Mr. Chairman and appreciate
the opportunity to speak on behalf of this testimony today.
My name is Denis Washington. I'm the Chairman of the Board
of Directors of the TexAmericas Center. As you may know, the
TexAmericas Center was established in 1998 by the Texas State
Legislature as a special purpose district. Its mission has been
to redevelop excess military properties subjected to both the
1995 and 2005 rounds of Base Realignment and Closure. Our goal
has been to place the property at Red River Army Depot and the
former Lone Star Army Ammunition Plant back into productive use
with emphasis on job creation, job retention and increase in
tax base.
The organization's name used to be Red River Redevelopment
Authority, but was changed in 2011, to TexAmericas Center to
create a more--to create a more defined identity that attracts
businesses interested both nationally and globally in our
location.
Our board is composed of appointees of the mayors of all
the cities within Bowie County plus appointees by the Bowie
County Commissioners or the County Judge. The 15 members of our
board, our staff and the communities we serve have stood united
in efforts to enhance the lives of our citizens with the
preservation of existing workforce to attract new businesses.
There is one figure in particular who has stood tall for
all of us through the BRAC Process and related transition
issues that have affected our community. Mr. Chairman, you have
been a guiding light for our mission and our successes, and we
are thankful for the significant amount of time and energy you
devote to promote and serve this community's needs. Without
you, the successes we enjoy so far would not be possible.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Johnson, on behalf of
TexAmericas Center Board, I'd like to thank you for the
opportunity to give this testimony, and thank you for being
here in this brand new facility.
I'd also like to share with you some accomplishments the
TexAmericas Center has experienced in support of local
workforce development. I would then like to share with you some
of the things we are doing now in support of collaborative
efforts with industry, schools and institutions of higher
learning.
Today, companies and government organizations located at
TexAmericas Center boast nearly 1,000 jobs. Support for Red
River Army Depot is a strong component of what TexAmericas
Center does. 75 percent of the jobs reported there are
attributed to both government and commercial support for the
depot. While we have been a strong part of the depot, we
understand we must insulate it for future rounds of BRAC.
Roughly 25 percent of employees at TexAmericas Center work
in one of 13 non-federal related companies we host. Staff
reports one in three companies per month come to us seeking
space. Whereas a significant number of our prospects once were
searching for warehouse space, they are now seeking acreage to
create industry, energy and technology-oriented businesses.
During fiscal year 2011, 12 prospects expressed an interest
in relocating or establishing their businesses' operations on
TexAmericas Center's properties. These entities' projected
investments were in excess of $1.8 billion and will create
approximately 2500 jobs. While the site selection process
continues with some, we realize that not only are they
interested in land, water resources, utilities, infrastructure
and transportation, but a desire to know more about our
cultural activities, professional job opportunities for spouses
and the local education system and curriculum. What was
considered by our board members to be quite unique, it was
entity's inquiry about our proximity to international schools,
meaning a school that provided instruction to multiple
languages and had a diversity of students and curriculum. Our
CEO remarked to our board that, ``World class academic
credentials are critical to international companies.''
TexAmericas Center spends a great deal of time and energy
pursuing new opportunities, but it is also appropriate to
acknowledge our close working relationship and efforts with the
City of Texarkana, Texas, the State of Texas Department of
Economic Development and Tourism and Texas A&M University in a
collaborative role in economic development. We continue to
forge these relationships knowing that the entire community
benefits from all our endeavors, including--business relocation
and employees and families that choose to reside in our region.
TexAmericas' acquisition of 12,000 acres of land formerly
occupied military installations that supplied various war
theaters are now being returned to the community to a different
productive use. To ensure a reintroduction of the properties to
the community, we realize the importance of teaming with our
school and our institutions of higher learning. Let me share
with you some of our recent initiatives. TexAmericas Center is
a participant in the Pre-K-16 education initiative where STEM
education pathways are a predominant focus. TexAmericas Center
is also part of the Texarkana Market Analysis Project and
Business Advisory Council at Texas A&M Texarkana. These
networks help us to find ways to deploy business solutions and
engage the academic community on ideas, including the STEM
curriculum. The Dean of the Engineering College at A&M and
TexAmericas Center's CEO has been in detailed discussions about
the use of TexAmericas Center as a living laboratory for
environmental issues ranging from support for the Army's over
$2,000,000 environmental restoration program and TexAmericas
Center's materials reclamation program, which we are
demolishing the old facilities and reusing the materials.
TexAmericas Center is working with a division of Texas A&M
University College Station to deploy millions of dollars in
surplus electronics recycling production equipment in a for-
profit model and working with the system's industrial alliances
branch to bring high-tech manufacturing to our region. At the
community college level and local school district level,
TexAmericas Center's CEO has met with the President of
Texarkana College and briefed the Texarkana Independent School
District's science faculty and administration on collaborating
on a life education center for both faculty continuing
education and classroom enrichment. This past summer,
TexAmericas Center initiated our first ever comprehensive
summer internship program, which we introduced juniors, seniors
in high school and college students to the world of work. We
interned four students this year and plan to expand to six or
more next year. Two of the students worked independently in the
field doing water chemistry on the public drinking water system
and their work efforts actually helped effectively implement
our water compliance program this summer. Recently, TexAmericas
Center collaborated with Texarkana College for the creation of
a workforce training center. Branded Texarkana College at
TexAmericas Center, this satellite campus is intended to
support the academic and workforce training for Red River Army
Depot, local commercial companies, as well as provide dual
credit courses with the surrounding community high schools. The
over 5,000 jobs of Red River Army Depot and its associated
contractors can use the facility to develop their technical
skills and progress towards degree completion.
In our efforts to characterize the potential use of our
property, we are dedicated to attracting compatible industries
with our adjacent communities. We believe that being centered
on job creation should not sacrifice the quality of life for
our neighbors.
I believe that TexAmericas Center can be a stabilizing
force for the economic future of Northeast Texas and Southwest
Arkansas. In order to achieve that mission, the education
system and job opportunities combined with economic development
must share the a vision of the needs for our workforce and for
those industries and companies we wish to attract.
As I conclude, I would like to share a couple of thoughts.
First, STEM is an integral part of our success independent in
our children and this community. Those existing skill sets and
those being developed within our workforce will be vital to our
mission in trying to persuade prospective companies to relocate
or expand operations in this region. In preparing our students
for the challenges ahead, the greater the opportunity they are
provided to have hands-on experiences, the more likely they
will gravitate to a productive and rewarding career. We see
this nexus as a key to a community's long-term future.
So on behalf of the board, I thank you for your service,
your kind attention for making the trip to Texarkana and
support for STEM education.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Washington follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Denis Washington, Chairman, TexAmericas
My name is Denis Washington and I am the Chairman of the Board of
Directors of the TexAmericas Center.
As you may know, TexAmericas Center was established in 1998 by the
Texas State Legislature as a special purpose district. Its mission has
been to redevelop excess military properties subjected to both the 1995
and 2005 rounds of Base Realignment and Closure. Our goal has been to
place the property at Red River Army Depot and the former Lone Star
Army Ammunition Plant back into productive use--with emphasis on job
creation, job retention, and increase in the tax base.
The organization's name used to be Red River Redevelopment
Authority, but was changed in 2011 to TexAmericas Center to create a
more defined identity that attracts interested parties both nationally
and globally to our location.
The Board is composed of appointees of the Mayors of all the Cities
within Bowie County plus appointees by the Bowie County Commissioner's
Court and County Judge. The 15 members of our Board, our staff and the
communities we serve have stood united in an effort to enhance the
lives of our citizens with the the preservation of the existing
workforce and to attract new business.
There is one figure in particular who has stood tall for all of us
throughout the BRAC Process and related transition issues that have
affected our community . . . Mr. Chairman, you have been a guiding
light for our mission and our successes, and we are thankful for the
significant amount of time and energy you devoted to promote and serve
this community's needs. Without you, the successes we have enjoyed so
far would not be possible.
Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Johnson on behalf of TexAmericas
Center Board, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to give
this testimony, and thank you for being here today in this wonderful
new building.
I would also like to thank Superintendent Paul Norton for the
Texarkana Independent School District's hospitality today.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to share with you some of the
accomplishments TexAmericas Center's has experienced in support of
local workforce development.
I would then like to share with you some of the things we are doing
now in support of collaborative efforts with industry, schools and
institutions of higher learning.
Today, companies and government organizations located at
TexAmericas Center boast nearly 1,000 jobs.
Support for Red River Army Depot is a strong component of what
TexAmericas Center does . . . 75% of the jobs reported here are
attributed to both government and commercial support for the Depot.
While we have been a strong partner with the Depot, we understand that
we must insulate it from future Base Realignment actions.
Roughly 25% of employees at TexAmericas Center work in one of the
13 non-federal related companies we host. Staff reports that 1-3
companies per month come to us seeking space. Whereas a significant
number of prospects once were searching for warehouse space, they are
now seeking acreage to create industrial, energy and technology-
oriented businesses.
During FY 2011, twelve prospects expressed an interest in
relocating or establishing their business operations on TexAmericas
Center's property. These entities' projected investments were in excess
of $1.8 billion and could create approximately 2,500 jobs. While the
site selection process continues with some, we realize that not only
are they interested in the land, water resources, utilities,
infrastructure, and transportation, but desire to know more about
cultural activities, professional job opportunities for spouses, and
the local educational system and curriculum. What was considered unique
by our Board Members, was one entity's inquiry about our proximity to
international schools--meaning a school that provided instruction in
multiple languages and had a diversity of students and curriculum. Our
CEO recently remarked to our Board that, ``World class academic
credentials are critical to international companies.''
TexAmericas Center spends a great deal of time and energy pursing
new opportunities, but it is also appropriate to acknowledge our close
working relationship and efforts of the City of Texarkana, TX, the
State of Texas Department of Economic Development and Tourism and the
Texas A&M University system in their collaborative role in economic
development. We continually forge these relationships knowing that the
entire community benefits from all our endeavors including but not
limited to new business relocation, and the employees and families that
choose to reside in our region.
TexAmericas Center's acquisition of 12,000+ acres of land formerly
occupied military installations that supplied various war theaters, are
now being returned to the community for a different productive use. To
ensure a wise re-introduction of the properties to the community, we
realize the importance for teaming with our schools and institutions of
higher learning. Let me share with you some of our recent initiatives.

1.  TexAmericas Center is a participant in the PK-16 education
initiative where STEM education pathways are a predominant focus.

2.  TexAmericas Center is also part of the Texarkana Market
Analysis Project and Business Advisory Council at Texas A&M Texarkana.
These networks help us find ways to deploy business solutions and
engage the academic community on ideas, including the STEM curriculum.

3.  The Dean of the Engineering College at A&M and TexAmericas
Center's CEO have been in detailed discussions about the use of
TexAmericas Center as a living laboratory for environmental issues
ranging from support for the Army's over $200M environmental
restoration program and TexAmericas Center's materials reclamation
program where we are demolishing the old facilities and reusing the
materials.

4.  TexAmericas Center is working with a division of Texas A&M
University in College Station to deploy millions of dollars in surplus
electronics recycling production equipment in a for-profit model and
working with the System's industrial alliances branch to bring high
tech manufacturing to our area.

5.  At the Community College and local School District level,
TexAmericas Center's CEO has met with the President of Texarkana
College and briefed the Texarkana Independent School District's science
faculty and administration on collaborating on life sciences to include
the development of an outdoor education center for both faculty
continuing education and classroom enrichment.

6.  This past summer, TexAmericas Center initiated our first ever
comprehensive summer internship program where we introduce juniors/
seniors in high school and college students to the world of work. We
interned four students this year and plan to expand to six or more next
year. Two of the students worked independently in the field doing water
chemistry on the public drinking water system and their work efforts
actually helped effectively implement our water compliance program this
summer.

7.  Recently TexAmericas Center collaborated with Texarkana College
for the creation a workforce training center. Branded ``Texarkana
College @ TexAmericas Center'', this satellite campus is intended to
support the academic and workforce training for Red River Army Depot,
local commercial companies as well as provide dual credit courses with
the surrounding community High Schools. The over 5,000 employees of Red
River Army Depot and its associated contractors can use the facility to
develop their technical skills and progress towards degree completion.

In our efforts to characterize the potential use of our property,
we are dedicated to attracting compatible industries with our adjacent
communities. We believe that being centered on job creation should not
sacrifice the quality of life for our neighbors.
While some may say that education is abandoning academia for
workforce education, it is our business leaders that share a desire for
a more work-ready product. Current Texarkana, Texas City Manager, Dr.
Larry Sullivan, in his former position as Texarkana Independent School
District Superintendent, once solicited feedback from a group of
businessmen and women. He asked them to tell him about the skills they
desire to see in the product they were turning out. How can we better
prepare them before they arrive at your door? To take it a step
further, how do we attract, retain and convince those students to
return to Texarkana should they go away for college and complete their
degrees?
I believe that TexAmericas Center can be a stabilizing force in the
economic future of Northeast Texas and Southwest Arkansas. In order to
achieve that mission, the education system and job opportunities
combined with economic development must share the vision about the
needs for our workforce and for those industries/companies we wish to
attract.
As I conclude, I would like to share a couple of thoughts.
STEM is an integral part of the success of our children and this
community. Those existing skill sets and those being developed within
our workforce will be vital to our mission in trying to persuade
prospective companies to relocate or expand their operations in this
region. In preparing our students for the challenges ahead, the greater
the opportunity they are provided to have hands--on experiences, the
more likely they will gravitate to a productive and rewarding career.
We see this nexus as a key to a community's long-term viability.
So, on behalf of our Board, I want to thank you for your service,
your kind attention for making the trip to Texarkana to show your
support for STEM Education in Action: Preparing for Jobs of the Future.

Chairman Hall. Mr. Washington, we thank you. And I
personally thank you for your input in holding two groups
together where both groups benefited for Bowie and for the area
here. Y'all did a good job. And you named a lot of people. The
Secretary of the Army happened to be Pete Geren at that time, a
gentleman from Fort Worth. And I don't know why I knew
everybody's grand-daddy, but his father was--was one of my best
friends, and Pete was the Secretary of the Army the two years
we were battling to see if we could keep that land out there
for Bowie County. And you succeeded, and I thank you personally
for all you did. Thank you----
Mr. Washington. Thank you for your effort.
Chairman Hall. Now, I think that is our witnesses. We're
going to have questions now, and we're limited to five minutes.
I think we have--we're doing pretty good time wise.
I'll start off with the first question. And I thank all of
you for being here, preparation, travel time and all that. And
my first question will be to any witness who wants to answer.
What role do each of your organizations play in helping to
inspire our nation's youth about the importance of STEM
education? What do y'all do and do you encourage your staff to
serve as mentors to their children's classrooms or offer tours
of your facilities so children can learn about how a medical
center runs or--or how engineering plays a role in the creation
of paper for the paper mill? Gentleman there. Any of you that
want to answer that, take a shot at it. What are we doing to
enroll kids and encourage them to come on in and be a part here
and then be successful?
Mr. Washington. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'll begin with our
initial program at TexAmericas Center involving the internship
program. You know, we realized that our mission continues to
change on a daily basis. Our whole system involves them on a
regular basis. And I believe that with the environmental
cleanup that we have available, the partnerships that we have
with the universities, that we can be able to employ the use of
some of those students to be able to expand the research they
need to do, as well as to provide some of the manpower we need
to accomplish our mission.
Chairman Hall. Are there others, others who want to take a
shot at that.
Mr. Karam. Mr. Chairman, at CHRISTUS St. Michael, we are
very involved in the community with Junior Achievement, as well
as we have a fairly robust student volunteer program. It's
amazing how many of God's children eventually become our
associates. And it's great exposure. A lot of children want to
know what that's like and that gives them the opportunity by
being a junior volunteer. We also have a shadowing program,
where students can come through the organization. We do
multiple tours of the hospital so that students can come
through and see the different areas so they think about their
future. And then we also work with some of the area
organizations when they actually go ahead and actually follow a
profession through different programs and see if that's
something they might be interested in.
Chairman Hall. You know, during the last three years, and
as we were pushed into the arena and you were carrying out the
request that Congress had made, I had some whispers around that
you were fearful that you were overly educating those and that
they wouldn't be whole and complete students when they got to
the end of the road. Do you remember that, that there was some
suggestions of that.
Mr. Karam. Well, I--I do remember that----
Chairman Hall. I never was overeducated myself. Nobody
ever----
Mr. Karam. Well, we never felt like that was really an
issue. I think the concern was that people would maybe find
they weren't challenging enough.
Chairman Hall. Yeah, yeah. Any others care to----
Mr. Barnett. Yes, Mr. Chairman----
Chairman Hall. Yes, sir.
Mr. Barnett. --I guess I would add that we at the
International Paper facility in Texarkana, we have an
internship program for engineers that we just reinvigorated the
last 12 months. We're for 12 months out of the year, we have a
student who is either a chemical engineer or mechanical
engineer, normally is working during an off semester or during
the summer at the mill doing engineering work side by side with
our employees. And so it's a great opportunity for them
financially and experientially. In addition, I've been
involved. As a matter of fact, just last year, I went in to
speak at the Liberty-Eylau High School and talked to a
classroom about leadership and what it means to be a leader,
not just in the workplace, but in society at large because we
need that. Our country needs that in both realms.
Chairman Hall. I thank you. My time's expired.
Ms. Johnson, I recognize you.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much. Thanks to all of you for
being here. I know that population wise this is not the fastest
growing area, but yet you have thriving businesses. And, of
course, we'll always have a need for health facilities. So I'm
interested in how early you get involved, and I think some of
that's been answered with internships, in attracting young
people to be anchored to the area with the proper background
and STEM education and their excellent education facilities
here. And to do that, you almost have to touch the parents, of
course, and the K through 12 teachers. What activities do you
have that would be inclusive of students coming through the
primary and secondary education and their parents and teachers?
Anybody.
Well, we all say that you've got to involve parents. You
are in businesses that must continue to attract qualified
people in the STEM areas for your success. And it's in an
area-- now, in my area, we'd like to share some people. We are
growing. We are the fastest growing area in the country in the
Dallas-Fort Worth area, but we know that as we grow other areas
are losing some population. And yet, we want to be certain that
when products, whether they be for healthcare or paper, we want
to feel certain that they are coming from areas that are
equipped with the best minds as well, not that we have any--we
don't have any kind of over supply of good minds just because
we have a lot of people. But I'm very concerned about the
survival and the quality survival of areas that have a
diminishing population, and how you are beginning to address
that or how you have addressed that beyond the traditional
involvements, which must include teachers' experience in what
the workplace is like, rather than just the classroom, and our
parents understanding the changing demands on the educational
process and how important it is. And I just thought you
mentioned some internships. Does that include teachers? Give me
an idea of how you are fertilizing the whole area to make sure
you have a supply of qualified people.
Ms. Kennedy. I think one of our biggest things that we've
done is working with Junior Achievement. And we actually have
people from the hospital who go out and teach classes with the
young students, like elementary type students, teaching them
math, reading to them and engaging them at a very early age. We
also have our on-site job fairs, and we do invite the teachers
to come and participate as part of that so that they understand
what healthcare offers. I mean, it's more than just nurses.
There's a lot of different venues that they can go into, and
the teachers then can take that back to the classroom and share
that appropriately.
Ms. Johnson. Um-hmm. And the tremendous changes that are
taking place with technologies in the delivery of healthcare,
too.
Ms. Kennedy. Well, everything now is automated. We continue
to grow more toward technology, and I think as Mr. Barnett
stated, talking about smartphones, and I mean, there's so many
things in healthcare you can actually do with a smartphone now.
But it is challenging because we have to keep up with that
technology and have the people to be able to do that to advance
us forward in the healthcare industry.
Mr. Karam. Ms. Johnson, we also have 2100 associates, 300
physicians on our medical staff. We go out in the community, do
regular community health screenings and other activities,
involved in almost every health-related fundraiser out there.
And what I see the biggest exposure for young people is that
ripple effect. Those folks recognize that while they're talking
to those folks they respect and they talk about healthcare as a
career and that's where we get a lot of people excited about
coming into the healthcare career.
Ms. Johnson. Um-hmm.
Mr. Washington. I believe one thing, too, that we have to
realize is that in order for--it really depends upon how we
sell our community. And one of the greatest things that has
happened to us has been the introduction of Texas A&M
University in our community and opportunities passed on to
students to stay at home but also for continuing education.
Many times we're looking at new businesses that are coming to
the TexAmericas Center, they're people that are coming in are
interested in our education system. They're looking at the
culture things that's available to them.
So it's really a community as a whole that we must sell to
entice them to feel that this is a very good place for their
kids. What happens to those that graduate from college and
decide to come back here, I think those are going to be the
challenges that we can't go against in places like Dallas and
Houston and things that young people desire, but one thing we
do offer is a great place to live. We offer a good education
system to continue their postgraduate work, as well as to live
in this area. So those are things that we must harp on to try
to attract and retain our students to come back and our
children to come back here to live.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much. Let me just comment that
what I've heard since I've been here this morning, I have been
very, very impressed. First, I've seen a very clean city that
seems to have all of the ingredients, including the arts and--
and the job picture and the diversity of the educational
offering and the healthcare. I would say thank you for even
accepting--did we ask or did they ask us or whatever--for us
being here because I see some uniqueness, and I want to applaud
this entire community for that. And I think that as long as you
continue that, you won't have to worry about too many of them
not coming back. Thank you.
Chairman Hall. Eddie Bernice and I thank you, and thank you
for those kind remarks because these are the same people and
this is the same area when we were about to lose Red River, we
talked the Chairman of that Committee into coming here and
their vote, out of a group of nine, they had six votes too
close us. At that time, all your State representatives, some of
the representatives from Arkansas, and us urged the Chairman
just to come here and see the facility. And I'll tell you what
did it for him. When he drove that ten miles from where you
leave the highway and you get over there, they were probably
10,000 people there with signs saying, ``God bless you, Mr.
Chairman, thank you, Mr. Chairman, God bless you for coming to
Bowie County,'' and that just turned him around. He changed his
mind then when he saw what kind of people, and that's what
people's for. That's the thrust of good people that cared. And
they're here today because they care. And this is a good
meeting. And we will have other questions to ask you and submit
them to you. And Eddie Bernice can offer those, and she can
offer her people on her side of the aisle the opportunity to
ask questions if they need to. They will go into the record,
and we'll see that that's done. This has been a good recording.
It's been a good attendance. You've given good answers. I hope
we've asked proper questions.
We're honored to be here, but the round of questions is
completed, and we've completed them on time. And I don't know
if it's over budget or under budget, but we have completed
them. We thank you, and we thank all the witnesses on both
panels. And thank Eddie for her attendance here and for her
questions. And Members that are not in attendance may have
additional questions. We'll keep the record open for two weeks
for additional comments from the Members. And once again, thank
you very much. The witnesses are excused and this hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:48 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Cora Marrett, Deputy Director, National Science
Foundation

Question submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Responses by Mr. James Henry Russell, President, Texarkana College

Question submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1.  How do both two-year and four-year institutions cope with the
fast-paced changes in modern technological advances and the specialized
requirements for many 21st century technical jobs when it comes to
keeping the curriculum current to meet the needs of employers?

A1. This would be a great topic for a Doctoral Thesis. I will attempt
to share a few things that are going on with the Texarkana PK-16
council that attempt to move in this direction. The most important
thing you can do to ensure that all educational institutions are
keeping in tune with the needs of employees is for there to be great
communication between all parties involved. In many communities, the
four year institution does not get along that well with the two year
and neither one talks very much to the Pk-12 institution. Also, no one
even considers involving the business sector in this discussion. This
system of a lack of communication used to be the case in this area too.
While we are certainly far from perfect, I think the Texarkana area has
moved ahead of the pack in the area of fostering great PK-16
collaboration that is reaching out to the business community, listening
to what they have to say, and designing the curriculum to meet their
needs. Not only are all parties involved in the design stage, but they
are also involved in the process along the way to monitor and adjust.
This can best be shown by a tour of the STEM PK-16 alignment that
exists in Texarkana between the Texarkana Independent School District,
Texarkana College, Texas A&M Texarkana, and various industries
throughout the area. A real need for employees in the STEM area has
driven the PK-16 education delivery model in this area. The PK-16
institutions provide business and industry properly educated and
trained employees. This model is now being moved to other areas
including workforce education. Again, I believe the key is for open and
honest communication and feedback to be constantly occurring between
PK-16 institutions and the business and industry sector. It sounds
easy. I think in most places you will find that it does not happen
often and openly.

Q2.  Which partnerships that you have established with local, regional,
state, federal government and non-government entities have proved to be
the most challenging to form? Why were they challenging, and how were
you able to overcome them?

A2. The partnership with the most potential for success in the near
future is our brand new TC@TexAmericas Site. This is a branch location
of Texarkana College located adjacent to the Red River Army Depot
Headquarters and on TexAmercias property. TexAmericas is the entity
that has received thousands of acres from the most recent base
realignment and closure process. This facility is meant to be able to
quickly adjust to the training needs of the army depot or the next
industry that TexAmericas is recruiting to bring in to their available
sites. TC at TexAmericas required partnerships to be formed between the
Federal Government, U.S. Army, State of Texas, TexAmericas Center,
Texas A&M Texarkana, Texarkana College, and various other governments
and agencies. The TexAmericas center is a win- win for all concerned.
We are poised well for the next BRAC (if there is one). We are also
prepared to meet the needs of the next business wanting to locate on
this site and needing trained employees and to train government workers
on the latest methods and techniques to improve quality and efficiency
and to provide a safer workplace. The challenges are still there. This
is a huge investment by Texarkana College and is not yet making a
profit which is currently the most challenging part of this venture.
The training provide by the TexAmericas Center is the spark needed to
encourage innovation and new business along with keeping an existing
entity (Red River Army Depot) operating efficiently. The challenge is
finding funding when everyone is facing a shrinking budget to
adequately fund workforce development. Everyone knows training is the
key to future success, but it is hard to spend money in these times. We
feel like this will be a bragging point in the very near future and a
model for a successful partnership between education, industry, and
government.

Q3.  Beyond teacher training, please expand on what your institution is
contributing to K-12 education, particularly to middle school youth.
Does your institution provide faculty and students as mentors to local
classrooms?

A3. Texarkana College is providing low cost dual credit opportunities
throughout our entire 1,800 square mile service area in north east
Texas. The cost for a three hour college class is roughly $85.00. A
typical student can easily graduate from high school with twenty to
thirty hours of college credit for as low as $1,700 to $2,550 of an
investment by the family. Anyone that has a student off at college can
quickly do the math and see that the family has saved thousands of
dollars in tuitions, fees, room and board by the efficient dual credit
opportunities that are available. Texarkana College partners with local
PK-12 institutions to start at a young age establishing the realization
that a college education is much more than a dream. It is a reality.
While Texarkana Colleges reaches out to students in middle school
through programs such as the Federal Trio, we actually believe that you
must start even younger. We host events at the Texarkana College that
bring elementary, middle, and high school students to the campus. We go
to these campuses for various visits and motivational talks. We
emphasize that what a student does when they are in any grade has an
impact on what they will be doing when they are twenty five years old.
We firmly believe that it is critical for a young person to establish
the belief and hope at a very young age that they will one day be a
college graduate. Once a child has that vision and that hope, we
believe the greatest obstacle has been overcome. The Kids at Hope
National Model is a great one for working with youth to establish that
vision of the future. In this model, a youth at an early age will
establish measurable goals in the area of Education and Career, Home
and Family, Community Service, and Hobbies/Recreation. Once those
positive mental images are put in place at an early age, it is hard for
anyone to ever remove them. I am a firm believer that the greatest
thing a student needs in our country today is HOPE for a bright future.
Once they have that there are plenty of opportunities available to make
it happen.
Dr. Brad Johnson, President, Northeast Texas Community College

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1.  How do both two-year and four-year institutions cope with the
fast-paced changes in modern technological advances and the specialized
requirements for many 21st century technical jobs when it comes to
keeping the curriculum current to meet the needs of employers?

A1. We depend on the cooperation of business and industry through
various means. The most localized is the use of advisory committees.
These teams are made up of local private business Members who typically
employ persons with the skills we are training. These individuals keep
us informed about their needs, new technologies they are adopting, and
the appropriate standards of learning needed to deliver trained
individuals to their workforce.
We also depend heavily on national industry groups which often
validate the particular skills associated with various programs of
study. Sometimes these groups actually accredit our programs by
examining our curriculum and the learning outcomes of students, and
then granting us the right to use their external validation in our
recruitment efforts. Other times the industry groups simply provide
information and we are responsible for meeting those standards
voluntarily.

Q2.  Which partnerships that you have established with local, regional,
state, federal government and non-government entities have proved to be
the most challenging to form? Why were they challenging, and how were
you able to overcome them?

A2. Multi-institutional collaborations have proven most difficult
recently. While all public institutions are eager to work together in
principle, the local political realities often create competition which
most of our college leadership in East Texas have not learned how to
completely overcome. When combined with the frequent appearance of
other challenges which distract from a multi-college collaboration, it
results in the belief on the part of many that the extra effort
required to make such collaborations work is simply not worth the
headaches.
I would say we have not yet overcome many of these challenges. Our
own collaboration with Texas A&M University--Texarkana is one major
exception to my comments here. That partnership has resulted in a
University Center on the campus of Northeast Texas Community College
which delivers baccalaureate degrees to our local community, more than
one hour from the TAMU-T main campus.
I would have to say the reasons this one works include 1)TAMU-T has
stationed full time staff on our campus who live locally and are highly
motivated to keep the programs viable; 2) university leadership has
chosen to make the project a priority and so is personally involved;
and 3) my college has no desire to offer baccalaureate degrees
ourselves, but believe strongly that access to such degree options are
part of our mission. So all of us work hard to make it succeed.

Q3.  Beyond teacher training, please expand on what your institution is
contributing to K-12 education, particularly related to middle school
youth. Does your institution provide faculty and students as mentors to
local classrooms?

A3. We do not have a program for this purpose per se. However, we share
instructors and other staff with the TAMU-T Education program to meet
the needs in our local area for teacher training.
NTCC does provide a large number of ``pipeline'' activities to
students as young as elementary school which are designed to raise the
awareness of parents and children of the need to go to college and of
the preparation in Junior High and High School needed to be successful
in college. Examples of these activities include campus visits for
college activities like theatre productions, guest speakers, campus
tours, and visits to particular programs like Dental Hygiene or
Welding. The college also has a program in partnership with all 11 of
our regional ISDs in which each graduating high school senior is
mentored through the college admission process, assisted with selection
of a college major, and all other necessary steps. The result is that
every graduating senior in our region has been admitted to college and
has a ``post-high school'' plan.

Q4.  Please expand on the SMART (Science, Math, and Related
Technologies) Girls and the WISE (Working in Science and Engineering)
Guys programs.

A4. These programs are targeted to at-risk young people and designed to
raise their interest in science and math careers, as well as other
careers which might go unnoticed by the typical boy or girl. Students
participate in various activities (for example, robotics contests)
which demonstrate the practical uses of math and science, as well as
providing exposure to people who work in these career areas.

Q5.  Please explain the award winning ``Regional Advanced Manufacturing
Academy''. What return on investment are you expecting to achieve in
the number of new jobs andadditional income for the community.

A5. This program, known locally as ``RAMA,'' brought together the
training capabilities of three regional community colleges--Texarkana
College, Paris Junior College, and Northeast Texas Community College,
as well as the financial and logistical assistance of Workforce
Solutions of Northeast Texas. The program was built on the training
needs requested by the region's largest industrial employers and served
incumbent workers, as well as persons seeking entry into this field.
When an employer had a need, they requested the training, assisted
in determining the particular curriculum they wanted, and released
their employees to participate in the training. Areas of training
expertise were divided among the 3 colleges and the courses were
delivered by which ever college was most well-equipped/staffed in that
subject area. This meant that the training delivered to a company in
one college's service area might be delivered by a different college.
The strategy worked quite well from the perspective of business and
industry. The employer feedback was strongly positive. However, the
sudden and precipitous economic downturn resulted in area industries
reducing their workforce dramatically. Those remaining on the job were
working much overtime and the companies were reluctant to release
workers from the job to take training. So when the term of the initial
project was completed, the project was suspended for the time being.
All three colleges have indicated our interest in reestablishing
this model, with some modifications, when industry indicates they are
again able to make employees available for training.

Q6.  Please describe any challenges or particular successes you have
encountered in dealingwith Federal dollars allocated through grants for
your institution.

A6. First, let me say that our college is grateful for the federal
grant support we have received in the past, both through direct grants,
as well as money flowing through the State of Texas (Texas Workforce
Commission, etc.). These funds have certainly gone to worthy projects
and have improved the lives of our region's citizenry.
However, since you ask, I must acknowledge that the bureaucratic
burden that comes with federal grants (and to a lesser degree, state
grants) often saps much-needed funds and reduces their impact.
Specifically, the rules are usually quite inflexible. But the reality
on the ground is quite fluid and requires a high-degree of flexibility
in today's economic environment. We often find that federal program
directors do not understand our business, thus we live with rules that
are irrelevant or even silly, when compared to the intended purpose of
the grants.
And lastly, the ``accountability'' that is required of us often
amounts to ``busy work'' rather than actually assuring the public that
the intended purpose of the grant is accomplished. Sometimes we already
have accountability requirements from another federal agency or from
the State of Texas which assure the public we are maintaining fiscal
integrity. But the federal accountability method will differ enough to
necessitate a second administrative report.
So the reality on the ground is that every programmatic dollar
(money actually spent delivering the educational purpose) ends up
costing $6 dollars (after the federal bureaucracy takes its cut and I
have to pay staff at the college to track a seemingly endless sets of
data). The federal government would get far more for the same
investment if it simply gave the money directly to the colleges, and
required a particular outcome (``Here's $50,000--produce 20 certified
electricians '').

Using Electrical Trades as an example, consider this:

To have a program in electrical trades we have already
met the State of Texas' standards and the program curriculum has been
approved;

To keep the program open we are already required to track
our graduates and assure they get jobs in the fields they trained for;

To keep our institutional accreditation, we are already
required to prove our instructors are appropriately trained/educated;

To participate in federal financial aid, we must already
prove that our students are making satisfactory progress toward their
educational goals;

And annually, we are required to have an independent
audit to assure that we spent money in legally stipulated ways--in
other words, that we did what we agreed to do when we accepted the
funds.
Why must we prove many of these things (and much more) to the
federal government--again--and in slightly different ways? The
differences in oversight requirements are important because they mean
we must go through the entire reporting process as if we hadn't already
done it for the state or the Dept. of Education. So the resulting
growth in administrative staff adds cost, slows our responsiveness, and
limits resources that could be put into the classroom.
In closing, our task is so important to the long-term economic
viability of our nation, and local resources are so hard to come by,
that we will continue to be grateful for any federal assistance we can
receive. These comments are only an observation ``on the ground'' of
the fact that federally-administered programs are a particularly
expensive way to get things done.
Dr. C. B. Rathburn, III, President, Texas A&M University-Texarkana

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1.  How do both two-year and four-year institutions cope with the fast
paced changes in modern technological advances and the specialized
requirements for many 21st century technical jobs when it comes to
keeping the curriculum current to meet the needs of employers?

A1. This is a major challenge for higher education in terms of cost for
the acquisition and maintenance of the technologies as well as the cost
of training and retraining faculty and staff to make effective
utilization of these resources. The disconnection between academia and
the workplace is a major concern especially as it relates to the
utilization of various technologies. In academia we are too often
forced to ``demonstrate'' the technology as opposed to really training
the student use these technologies in a productive environment. The
answer is a simple one--expand and incent higher education, the student
and the employer to expand cooperative education and internship
opportunities. Through these opportunities the students are afforded
the opportunity to work in real time and real production with the
current technologies of the chosen profession.
In addition to providing access to the current technologies of the
field, internship and cooperative education opportunities provide a
direct link for academia from a curricular perspective to the demands
of today's employers. This link is critical in insuring that the proper
input is acquired and utilized from the employers to mold and guide
curricular decisions. Neither academia nor the workplace should dictate
curriculum as each party has their own unique and valuable role.
Academia should push the employers to explore new uses of technology
and new methods of operation that can lead to enhanced quality and
productivity. The employers should push academia to demonstrate,
evaluate and guarantee that the graduates completing a degree have the
required knowledge, skills, abilities and soft skills to immediately
provide value to the workplace.
At Texas A&M University-Texarkana we are proud of the involvement
and impact of our curriculum advisory committees including our overall
Business Advisory Committee. Leaders from the regional business
community give of their time and expertise to annually advise the
university on our program offering, curriculum alignment as well as the
quality of our graduates in the workplace. This counsel is critical to
the success and growth of the university and the future success of our
students.

Q2.  Which Partnerships that you have established with local, state,
regional, federal government and non-government entities have proved to
be the most challenging to form? Why were they challenging and how were
you able to overcome them?

A2. Educational partnerships across state lines have become much more
difficult to develop and maintain in recent years. Texas A&M
University-Texarkana is located in a bi-state community with the state
lines of three other states within 50 miles. Due to the lack of
national accreditation and certification criteria we have found it
difficult to meet the needs of the students and prospective employers
simultaneously.
No field is this more challenging than public education. Variance
in teacher certification requirements across state lines has made the
operation of teacher education programs extremely challenging when you
have students planning to teach in a variety of states. Recently the
state of Arkansas overhauled their requirements for principal and
superintendent certifications and removed the reciprocal arrangement
with Texas to recognize certification from another state. This means a
student who completes our administrative certifications at Texas A&M
University-Texarkana cannot be employed in the Texarkana, Arkansas
school district five miles to the east. The lack of national
reciprocity in teacher and administrative certification as we find in
medicine and engineering will have a profound negative impact on both
universities and school districts.
This ``state to state'' competition is present in a number of
fields. To address this challenge the university proposed a plan to
create a crosswalk based on curricular alignment between the two state
administrative certification requirements and then provide additional
course work necessary to address the gaps in the alignment. While this
plan is in the discussion stages we are optimistic of success.

Q3.  Beyond teacher training, please expand on what your institution is
contributing to K-12 education, particularly related to middle school
youth. Does your institution provide faculty and students as mentors to
local classrooms?

A3. Though programs such as Club 21:11, the university is engaged in a
variety of stay in school efforts at the middle school level that focus
on addressing the organization, motivation and character building
aspects of middle school education. Although not in middle school, our
Professional Development School operated at Westlawn Elementary School
is a prime example of the integration of higher education and public
education. Our master teacher students along with full time university
professors are assigned to this school on a daily basis. The university
professor supervises the master teacher students who have full time
classroom assignments in a yearlong ``medical model'' teacher
certification effort similar to a residency. The master teachers gain
valuable classroom effectiveness skills while the students benefit from
state of the art curriculum and classroom instructional strategies. In
the end we gain a better prepared teacher and a better equipped and
motivated student. At present we are exploring the possibility of
transiting this model of master teacher training to the middle school
STEM academy as well as the Perot STEM Academy at Texas High School.

Q4.  Please expand on the Texas Middle School STEM Academy

A4. The Middle School STEM academy is the logical extension of the well
recognized and very successful Martha and Josh Morris Engineering and
Mathematics magnet school. The middle school STEM academy continues the
educational philosophy of an entire comprehensive curriculum taught in
the language of engineering and math. The middle school STEM academy
articulates the elementary programs at the Morris school into the Perot
STEM academy at Texas High School and the STEM College at Texas A&M
University-Texarkana to produce a world class Pre-K through
baccalaureate degree vertically aligned STEM curricular program.
Ms. Pam Kennedy, Vice President of Human Resources, CHRISTUS St.
Michael health System

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1.  1.What percentage of your workforce is being provided by the local
colleges?

A1. Approximately 40%, including ADN nurses (2 year).

Q2.  What is the average length of employment for your locally educated
workforce verses those you have to recruit from outside the community?

A2. Approximately ten years plus or minus, compared to 2-5 years of
those whom we recruit outside of the community. I attribute it is much
longer because of the associate's family ties within the community.

Q3.  If not for the local workforce being supplied by the community
colleges and the close proximity of Texas A&M-Texarkana, would CHRISTUS
St. Michael still be operating in Texarkana?

A3. Yes, I strongly believe we would still be operating in Texarkana,
but recruitment would be much more challenging and costly to recruit
from outside of our community if we did not have local colleges and
Texas A & M-Texarkana.

Q4.  For your organization, would you believe that you have job
opportunities available, but no talent to fill them, or a combination
of both?

A4. Normally, the challenge of recruiting hard-to-fill positions is
because of the needed experience from comparable organizations for
administrative level type positions. However, there are technical/
medical positions such as Physicist, Dosimetrist, and IT specific
positions that require a higher level STEM type education that we have
only begun to focus on within the last few years in our community.

Q5.  What do we as a Nation need to do to solve this problem?

A5. Mandate educational opportunities for STEM in the early, formative
years to instill the importance of the future demands. By mandating, we
as a Nation will need to provide funding to ensure this is
accomplished.

Q6.  Please expand on CHRISTUS St. Michael's job shadowing program for
local high schools.

A6. The increase in healthcare opportunities combined with the
decreasing number of individuals pursuing careers in healthcare, has
led to staffing shortages in many areas, including Nursing, Therapy,
and Laboratory. In an effort to encourage High School and College
students to enter healthcare, CHRISTUS St. Michael established a Career
Exploration--Job Shadowing Mentorship Program. The program design
started in July 2008, and kicked off in January 2009. The program was
established to provide an opportunity for participants to explore, with
first hand observation, the area(s) in which they have an interest. The
goal is to encourage individuals to not only enter the healthcare
industry, but to also assist them in choosing which area they want to
pursue, if they have not already decided. To date there have been
approximately 250 participants, that have shadowed in various areas,
including, Women's & Children's, Radiology, Laboratory, Respiratory,
and Physical Therapy to name a few.
The long-term goal of the Career Exploration/Job Shadowing
Mentorship Program is to add value to our community with regard to
addressing future healthcare needs and employment, particularly those
where we are experiencing staffing shortages. Through Service
Excellence and Stewardship the program plants the seeds with High
School and College students, tomorrow's workforce, with minimal local
resources. Our goal is to ``grow our own,'' to reinforce the CHRISTUS
Health Mission and Vision, and to extend the healing ministry of Jesus
Christ, throughout the Ark-La-Tex region by providing these young
students with a meaningful experience. We want to share not only with
patients and visitors, but with other Members of the community and
surrounding areas the incredible, deep rooted, culture that CHRISTUS
St. Michael has. It also allows them the opportunity to experience
first-hand why we have been chosen as one of the Best Places to Work in
Texas five years in a row (ranking #6 in large industries in 2010), #3
in the nation by Modern Healthcare Top 100 Best Companies to Work in
Healthcare, and most recently Becker's Review Top 100 Best Places to
Work in Healthcare!
According to Forbes, Texarkana is predicted to increase 28.57% in
GMP by 2012 making Texarkana the second fastest growing small metro
area in the country. To meet the service and employment needs of the
community, and to ensure that CHRISTUS St. Michael can continue to
offer a substantial line of current and future services, the Career
Exploration/Job Shadowing Mentorship Program was developed and
implemented to meet these needs through ``planting the seeds'' of the
future workforce early on. To date, CHRISTUS St. Michael has partnered
with three local High Schools, and several Colleges and Universities
within a 300 mile radius to work with students that are either enrolled
or in the application process to participate in healthcare programs.
As a means to enhance the program, CHRISTUS St. Michael has offered
an on-site Career Fair the past four years for area students. The first
year, five High Schools attended (170 students) and approximately
twenty-one departments within CHRISTUS St. Michael participated. To
expand on this, in February 2010 a second Career Fair was held and a
total of twelve High Schools attended (450 students), nineteen
departments and one College participated. In 2011, we expanded the
program exponentially. These events give us an opportunity for the
students to experience our facility and to educate them about the
variety of healthcare occupations that exist. There is also an
opportunity to educate them on our benefits, general salary
information, and tuition reimbursement and/or scholarship
opportunities. The feedback has been extremely positive and many
students have expressed an interest in returning to CHRISTUS St.
Michael for employment opportunities.

Q7.  What other opportunities does CHRISTUS offer for young students?
Are they mostly geared toward high school students, or do you also work
with elementary and middle school youth?

A7. Another enhancement to the program is our involvement in the local
Junior Achievement program. Our Human Resources Recruiter was elected
to their Board last summer and has been actively involved in the
programs offered by Junior Achievement to 2nd and 8th graders at local
elementary and middle schools in our area. The program lasts for a
total of five weeks (one visit per week) and the topic is ``How does a
Community work?'' It covers what some of the different businesses are
that exist in a community, and we discuss the needs and services they
provide and why they are important. The classes also cover how to
manufacture a product, and how money flows within a community. This
exposure also gives them an opportunity to meet someone from CHRISTUS
St. Michael to begin ``growing our own'' early!
Mr. Myron Barnett, Human Resource Manager, International Paper

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall

Q1.  What percentage of your workforce is being provided by the local
colleges?

A1. Less than 5%

Q2.  What is the average length of employment for your locally educated
workforce versus those you have to recruit from outside of the
community?

A2. Don't have this data

Q3.  If not for the local workforce being supplied by the community
colleges and the close proximity of Texas A&M  Texarkana, would IP
still be operating in Texarkana?

A3. Yes

Q4.  For your organization would you believe that you have job
opportunities available, but no talent to fill them, or a combination
of both?

A4. We have a number of positions open, but must search outside the
Texarkana area to fill a number of production and maintenance jobs due
to the lack of qualified candidates in the area.

Q5.  What do we as a nation need to do to solve this problem?

A5. Put a strong focus on STEM education beginning with our primary
aged children and continuing through High School.

Q6.  Do you find that the difficulty IP is having with recruiting local
employees to fill the production and maintenance side of your company,
which requires computer and technical skills, is due to the fact that
there are not enough graduates to fill your positions or is it that
local schools are not providing the types of employee specific needs of
the Texarkana Mill? If the latter, what efforts is IP taking to rectify
this problem?

A6. At this time, we see that there aren't enough graduates to fill a
number of the positions open at the mill. Currently, we are working on
a partnership with Texarkana College and have begun funding STEM
education programs through our foundation dollars.
Mr. Denis Washington, Chairman, TexAmericas

Questions submitted by Chairman Ralph Hall


