- STEM EDUCATION IN ACTION: LOCAL SCHOOLS, NONPROFITS, AND BUSINESSES DOING THEIR PART TO SECURE AMERICA'S FUTURE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STEM EDUCATION IN ACTION:
LOCAL SCHOOLS, NONPROFITS, AND
BUSINESSES DOING THEIR PART
TO SECURE AMERICA'S FUTURE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND SCIENCE EDUCATION

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MONDAY, APRIL 30, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-81

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
78-481                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              PAUL D. TONKO, New York
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
Tennessee                        VACANCY
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            VACANCY
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Research and Science Education

HON. MO BROOKS, Alabama, Chair
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       PAUL D. TONKO, New York
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana               SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               VACANCY
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
C O N T E N T S

Monday, April 30, 2012

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Mo Brooks, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Research and Science Education, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................     8
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Daniel Lipinski, Ranking Minority
Member, Subcommittee on Research and Science Education,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    11
Written Statement............................................    13

Witnesses:

Dr. Camille H. Wright, Director of Secondary Education, Madison
City Schools
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    18

Dr. Robert A. Altenkirch, President, University of Alabama-
Huntsville
Oral Statement...............................................    21
Written Statement............................................    23

Dr. Marilyn C. Beck, President, Calhoun Community College
Oral Statement...............................................    31
Written Statement............................................    33

Dr. Neil Lamb, Director of Educational Outreach, Hudsonalpha
Institute
Oral Statement...............................................    43
Written Statement............................................    45

Mr. Andrew Partynski, Chief Technology Officer, Science
Applications International Corporation
Oral Statement...............................................    54
Written Statement............................................    57

Discussion                                                           67

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Camille H. Wright, Director of Secondary Education, Madison
City Schools...................................................    82

Dr. Robert A. Altenkirch, President, University of Alabama-
Huntsville.....................................................    85

Dr. Marilyn C. Beck, President, Calhoun Community College........    86

Dr. Neil Lamb, Director of Educational Outreach, Hudsonalpha
Institute......................................................    87

Mr. Andrew Partynski, Chief Technology Officer, Science
Applications International Corporation.........................    89

STEM EDUCATION IN ACTION:

LOCAL SCHOOLS, NON-PROFITS, AND

BUSINESSES DOING THEIR PART

TO SECURE AMERICA'S FUTURE

----------

MONDAY, APRIL 30, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Science Education,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Bob Jones High School, 650 Hughes Road, Madison, Alabama, Hon.
Mo Brooks [chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.005

Chairman Brooks. The purpose of today's hearing is to
highlight local science, technology, engineering and
mathematics, or STEM, education programs and partnerships, and
to examine the impact on the next generation of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics professionals, local
jobs, and the United States economy.
In front of you are pamphlets containing the written
testimony, biographies, and Truth in Testimony disclosures for
today's witnesses.
At this point, the Chair recognizes himself for an opening
statement.
I would like to welcome everyone this morning to the
Subcommittee on Research and Science Education field hearing,
``STEM Education in Action: Local Schools, Non-Profits and
Businesses Doing Their Part to Secure America's Future.''
It is a privilege to be with you to highlight and discuss
local STEM education programs and partnerships and to examine
their impact on the next generation of STEM professionals,
local jobs, and the United States economy.
It is also my pleasure to welcome my colleague on the
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology and Ranking Member
of the Subcommittee on Research and Science Education, Democrat
Congressman Dan Lipinski, of the great State of Illinois. I
have enjoyed working with him the past 15 months and am
grateful for his willingness to travel to be here with us
today.
I also want to thank Bob Jones High School and the Madison
City Schools for hosting us this morning and providing this
wonderful facility, as well as each of our witnesses for taking
time out of their busy schedules to testify before us on issues
of importance to our community and to America.
I remember hearing the loud roar and ground shaking from
Saturn V rocket testing on Redstone Arsenal in the 1960s. Many
of you have probably attended space camp. These and other
science-based events have shaped the fabric of this community
and America. I have had the privilege of serving Alabama's
Fifth Congressional District for the past 15 months and am
proud of the science and technology achievements that Alabama
has provided to American exceptionalism.
NASA and the Marshall Space Flight Center have led American
exceptionalism in space. We were instrumental in putting
Americans into space and onto the moon. We were instrumental in
the development of the space shuttle, a three-decade workhorse
unmatched by any nation on Earth. Redstone Arsenal's numerous
commands have played a key role in developing the gee-whiz-bang
weapons that helped make America's warfighters' military
successful with minimal loss of American lives.
Tennessee Valley businesses and top-of-the-line schools and
research institutions give our citizens high-tech education and
employment opportunities as good as any offered in America.
As of May 2010, there were over 202,000 occupations in the
metro Huntsville, Alabama, community, and the median annual
wage was $48,000. Eighteen percent, or 35,500 of those
occupations, were in STEM fields. The median wage for those
jobs was $86,000, nearly twice the average of occupations
overall.
Further by way of background, Federal STEM education
funding by the United States is $2.9 billion. That $2.9 billion
comes from entities such as the Departments of Agriculture,
Commerce, Defense, Homeland Security, Education, Energy,
Environmental Protection Agency, Health and Human Services,
Interior, NASA; in addition, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
the National Science Foundation, and the Department of
Transportation.
Given our background in the STEM fields, North Alabama is
an ideal place to promote science, technology, engineering and
mathematics education, and it does not hurt that our district
can serve as a model for the rest of America in this regard. As
you may know, our Subcommittee has jurisdiction of essentially
all non-defense and non-medical research and development
activities of the Nation. This includes oversight of agencies
like NASA; the Department of Energy's Office of Science; the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which includes
the National Weather Service; portions of the Department of
Homeland Security; the National Institute of Standards and
Technology; and the National Science Foundation, which provides
approximately 40 percent of all non-medical basic research at
American colleges and universities, including support for STEM
education.
The research these agencies spans is important to our
Nation's economic success, but at the same time it is also
critical to note that America faces unsustainable budget
deficits that constitute our greatest economic and national
security threat. By way of emphasis, Admiral Mike Mullen,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, testified before the
House Armed Services Committee last year that our Nation's
biggest national security threat is our deficit and accumulated
debt.
Mr. Lipinski and I may disagree on certain policy issues,
but I am confident that he would agree with me that we must do
more to alleviate our deficit and accumulated debt. Likewise, I
am sure he would agree with me that an essential element of
future United States economic prosperity is a competent,
skilled workforce, one that we cannot achieve without strong
STEM education efforts, particularly on the local level.
Today we will take a closer look at a few of the STEM
education partnerships and initiatives being executed by
Tennessee Valley schools, businesses, and non-profit
organizations. Also noteworthy are the efforts of other local
schools and organizations not testifying before us today.
For example, this Subcommittee had the privilege of hosting
Christine Stratton, a teacher at Grissom High School in the
District of Columbia, last year to discuss Grissom's robust
cybersecurity curriculum. In addition, Aerojet, through the
GenCorp Foundation, is strongly committed to STEM education in
the Huntsville community, and as most of the Nation knows, the
Space and Rocket Center with its space camp has been a sterling
example of what museums and other non-profits can do to help
the STEM education.
Our commitment to STEM education is exemplified by
contributions to STEM programs in the community by the
University of Alabama-Huntsville's Propulsion Research Center
and related scholarships. I could cite numerous other examples,
but it is clear that STEM education is a top priority for many
in our area. I am proud of what this community has been able to
accomplish and look forward to learning more about these
remarkable initiatives.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Brooks follows.]

Prepared Statement of Subcommittee Chairman Mo Brooks

Good morning. I want to welcome everyone this morning to the
Subcommittee on Research and Science Education field hearing, ``STEM
Education in Action: Local Schools, Non-Profits, and Businesses Doing
Their Part to Secure America's Future.'' It is a privilege to be with
you to highlight and discuss local STEM education programs and
partnerships and to examine their impact on the next generation of STEM
profesisonals, local jobs, and the U.S. economy.
It is also my pleasure to welcome my colleague on the Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology and Ranking Member of the Subcommittee
on Research and Science Education, Congressman Dan Lipinski of
Illinois. I have enjoyed working with him the past 15 months and am
grateful for his willingness to travel to be here with us today.
I want to thank Bob Jones High School and Madison City Schools for
hosting us this morning and for providing this wonderful facility, as
well as each of our witnesses for taking time out of their busy
schedules to testify before us on issues of importance to our community
and to America.
I remember hearing the loud roar and ground shaking from Saturn V
rocket testing on Redstone Arsenal in the 1960s. Many here probably
attended Space Camp.
These and other science-based events have shaped the fabric of this
community and America.
I have had the privilege of serving Alabama's Fifth Congressional
District for the past 15 months and am proud of the science and
technology achievements North Alabama has provided to American
exceptionalism.
NASA and our Marshall Space Flight Center have led American
exceptionalism in space. We were instrumental in putting Americans into
space and onto the Moon. We were instrumental in the development of the
Space Shuttle--a three-decade workhorse unmatched by any other Nation
on Earth.
Redstone Arsenal's numerous commands have played a key role in
developing the gee-whiz-bang weapons that help America's warfighters
achieve military success with minimal loss of American lives.
Tennessee Valley businesses and top-of-the-line schools and
research institutions give our citizens high-tech education and
employment opportunities as good as any offered in America.
As such, North Alabama is an ideal place to promote science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics--or STEM--education, and it is
my hope that our district can serve as a model for the rest of America
in this regard.
As you may know, our Subcommittee has jurisdiction of essentially
all non-defense and non-medical research and development activities of
the Nation. This includes oversight of agencies like NASA; the
Deparment of Energy's Office of Science; the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, which includes the National Weather
Service; portions of the Department of Homeland Security; the National
Institute of Standards and Technology; and the National Science
Foundation, which provides approximately 40 percent of all non-medical
basic research at American colleges and universities, including support
for STEM education.
The research these agencies fund is important to our Nation's
economic success, but at the same time, it is also critical to note
that America faces unsustainable budget deficits that constitute our
greatest economic and national security threat. By way of emphasis,
Admiral Mike Mullen, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, testified
before the House Armed Services Committee last year that our Nation's
biggest national security threat is our deficit.
Mr. Lipinski and I may disagree on certain policy issues, but I am
confident he would agree with me that we must do more to alleviate our
deficit. Likewise, I am sure he would agree with me that an essential
element of future U.S. economic prosperity is a competent, skilled
workforce--one that we cannot achieve without strong STEM education
efforts, particularly on the local level.
Today, we will take a closer look at a few of the STEM education
partnerships and initiatives being executed by Tennessee Valley
schools, businesses, and non-profit organizations.
Also noteworthy are the efforts of other local schools and
organizations not testifying before us today. For example, this
Subcommittee had the privilege of hosting Christine Sutton, a teacher
at Grissom High School in DC, last year to discuss Grissom's robust
cybersecurity curriculum. In addition, Aerojet, through the GenCorp
Foundation, is strongly committed to STEM education in the Huntsville
community.
Our commitment to STEM education is exemplified by contributions to
STEM programs in the community by the University of Alabama-
Huntsville's Propulsion Research Center and related scholarships and
the U.S. Space and Rocket Center's summer camp, as well as many other
local initiatives supporting STEM programs for students ranging from
elementary through high school.
I could cite numerous other examples, but it is clear that STEM
education is a top priority for many in our area. I am proud of what
this community has been able to accomplish and look forward to learning
more about these remarkable initiatives. Thank you all again for
joining us today.

Thank you all again for joining us today, and at this time
the Chair recognizes Mr. Lipinski of the great State of
Illinois for an opening statement.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Chairman Brooks.
I thank the witnesses for being here today. I thank Bob
Jones High School for hosting us and everyone who has come here
to hear about this critical issue for our country.
I am very happy to be down here. I came down on Saturday. I
actually went to the--my wife came with me, went to Space and
Rocket Center on Saturday. We enjoyed our visit there, going
through the Wernher von Braun, the history of his biography,
the history of the great things that he did for our nation. I
have my ``What Would Wernher von Braun Do?'' bracelet that I
have on here with me right now.
I got to land a space shuttle at space camp, and I enjoyed
that very much, and all of that is a very important part of
STEM education.
But I want to thank Chairman Brooks for holding this
hearing. You would probably be surprised at how much we--yes,
there are things that we disagree on policywise, but for a
Chicago Democrat, you might be surprised how much I agree with
many things with Chairman Brooks, although that might not be a
good thing for me to say down here for him.
Actually, I am not your typical Chicago Democrat. We will
just say that. We will leave it at that.
My background is in STEM education, I have two degrees in
engineering. My wife has a degree in math. I have served as the
Co-Chair of the House STEM Ed Caucus for the past six years. So
I am very happy that Chairman Brooks has made it a priority to
emphasize STEM education and what can we do for STEM ed in our
country.
It is alarming that so many American students perform
poorly in science and math. On the most recent National
Assessment of Educational Performance, only 21 percent of high
school seniors performed at or above the proficient level in
science. When compared internationally, our student performance
is even more alarming. In the most recent Program for
International Student Assessment administered to 15-year-olds,
the U.S. ranked 17th in science and 25th in math out of 34
countries surveyed.
Poor performance in science and math not only limits the
students' job opportunities, but taken together, the poor
performance of so many of our students is also the first in a
series of falling dominoes that are dulling our Nation's
competitive edge in technology and innovation. The lack of a
strong K-12 foundation in STEM disciplines is a major factor in
the high attrition rates in STEM subjects at the post-secondary
level as well.
Fewer than 40 percent of students who state as college
freshman that they want to major in a STEM discipline actually
end up receiving a Bachelor's degree in their desired field.
That is 3 out of 5 who do not follow through, do not make it
all the way through college to get the Bachelor's degree. This,
in turn, is creating a shortage in the supply of skilled
workers, the demand for which will grow rapidly in the coming
decades.
At the same time, other countries are seeing an increase in
the number of students receiving degrees in STEM fields and
preparing for the high-tech jobs that will shape the global
economy in the 21st Century.
These two factors are placing the United States in a
position from which we could very easily lose our historical
advantage in innovation and technology, possibly within our
lifetimes. I know there is no silver bullet that will solve
this problem and that we need to attack the STEM education
crisis from multiple angles using a number of strategies.
That is why I am pleased that we have a panel of witnesses
that represent significant stages of the STEM pipeline--high
schools, community colleges, four-year universities, non-
profits, and industry.
I already mentioned the importance of a quality K-12
education in STEM. I also want to mention about how community
colleges play a vital role in preparing students for highly
technical jobs upon graduation. In addition, community colleges
can provide a pathway for students in STEM fields in our
Nation's world-class universities, such as the University of
Alabama-Huntsville.
One other area of STEM education, as I mentioned earlier,
is informal STEM education, STEM ed that takes place outside of
the classroom. This was always something very important to me
growing up. We had some great museums in Chicago, especially
the Museum of Science and Industry. That really helped to spur
my interest and get me excited and want to pursue engineering.
As I mentioned, space camp is certainly a place where this
takes place and gets kids interested in pursuing a STEM field
in science, technology, engineering, math.
So right now, the strain is being placed on U.S. companies
and non-profit research institutions that rely on students with
STEM degrees, on getting students with STEM degrees. Our
nation's deficiency in STEM education is making it increasingly
difficult to fill vital positions.
So I look forward to hearing from everyone on our panel
about what you perceive to be the problems and the potential
solutions from your unique vantage points. I think it is a
great panel that has been put together here to really hit from
all these different angles about what we can do about STEM
education.
As I said, I know there is no silver bullet, but that does
not mean that we should not be doing all that we can in making
sure something that I think is very important, having public-
private partnerships. We really need to get the private sector
involved, but always education will be a very critical public
priority and a priority for our government and for elected
officials.
So with that, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski
follows.]

Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Daniel Lipinski

Thank you, Chairman Brooks, for holding this hearing, and I'd like
to thank the witnesses as well for being here today. I'm delighted to
be here in Madison to discuss an issue that is not only of great
importance to our Nation and our ability to compete in the 21st century
global economy, but it is also one that is of particular imterest to
me. As a former engineer, I understand all too well how much better we
need to do in STEM education, and I am glad that the Subcommittee
continues to make improving the teaching and learning of STEM
disciplines at all levels a top priority.
It's alarming that so many American students perform poorly in
science and math. In the most recent National Assessment of Educational
Performance, only 21 percent of high school seniors performed at or
above the ``proficient'' level in science. When compared
internationally, our students' performance is equally alarming. In the
most recent Program for International Student Assessment administered
to 15-year-olds, the U.S. ranked 17th in science and 25th in math out
of 34 surveyed countries.
Poor performance such as this is the first in a series of falling
dominoes that are dulling our competitive edge in innovation and
technology internationally. The lack of a strong K-12 foundation in
STEM disciplines is a major factor in the high attrition rates in STEM
subjects at the postsecondary level as well. Fewer than 40 percent of
students who state as college freshmen that they want to major in a
STEM discipline actually end up receiving a bachelor's degree in their
desired field. This, in turn, is creating a shortage in the supply of
highly skilled workers, the demand for which will grow exponentially in
the coming decades. At the same time, other countries are seeing an
increase in the number of students receiving degrees in STEM fields and
preparing for the high-tech jobs that will shape the global economy in
the 21st century. These two factors are placing the U.S. in a position
in which we could very easily lose our historical advantage in
innovation and technology, possibly within our lifetimes.
I know there is no silver bullet that will solve this problem and
that we need to attack the STEM education crisis from multiple angles
using a number of strategies. That is why I'm pleased to have a panel
of witnesses that represents significant stages of the STEM pipeline:
high schools, community colleges, four-year universities, non-profits,
and industry. I already mentioned the importance of a quality K-12
education in STEM. Community colleges also play a vital role in
preparing students for highly technical jobs upon graduation. In
addition, community colleges can provide a pathway to pursuing STEM
fields at our Nation's world-class universities, such as the University
of Alabama in Huntsville.
Finally, I'm aware of the strain that is being placed upon U.S.
companies and non-profit research institutions that rely on students
with STEM degrees. Our Nation's deficiencies in STEM education are
making it increasingly difficult to fill vital positions. I look
forward to hearing from each of you about what you perceive to be the
problems, and potential solutions, from your unique vantage points. And
with that, I yield back.

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
I also want to thank the Space and Rocket Center and Dr.
von Hart for treating Dan to such a swell visit at the Space
and Rocket Center. We were also able to get him to jog about
six or seven miles yesterday on Auburn Street down in South
Huntsville. He tells me he is not used to the southern heat. We
have plenty of that this year if you want any up north. A visit
down to Alabama would not be complete if my wife and I did not
take him to Greenland Barbecue. So welcome to Greenland. You
won't get barbecue like that up north.
Mr. Lipinski. That is some of the best barbecue I have ever
had. I would just say, I lived in Durham, North Carolina, for
seven years, so I do know barbecue.
Chairman Brooks. That having all been said, if there are
other Members of Congress on the Subcommittee who wish to
submit additional opening statements, their statements will be
added to the record at this point.Now I would like to introduce
the witnesses for today's Research and Science Education
Subcommittee hearing.
Our first witness is Dr. Camille H. Wright, who is the
Director of Secondary Curriculum and Instruction for Madison
City Schools. Dr. Wright has worked in public education for
over 28 years, ranging from the classroom to the administrator.
Our second witness is Dr. Robert A. Altenkirch, the
President of the University of Alabama in Huntsville. Prior to
his appointment, he served as President of New Jersey's
Institute of Technology for nine years, as well as a number of
other universities and faculty.
As an aside, I have a little bit of fondness for UAH. My
wife went there and was Math Student of the Year, after having
gone to that other university in Tuscaloosa that is better
known for football, where she got a CPA or accounting degree,
but also got a math degree and was a math teacher involved in
the STEM fields, and she was able to do that because of UAH.
Now my son is there seeking a Master's in the engineering
school. So please be kind to him, Dr. Altenkirch, if you get
the chance.
Our third witness is Dr. Marilyn C. Beck, the President of
Calhoun Community College. Before coming to Calhoun, where she
was the first female president, she also served 15 years at
Lord Fairfax Community College in Virginia, where she was also
the first female president, and I am sure you are going to
share with us a lot of interesting things about Calhoun, the
campus, along with the robotics facility that is right across
the street. That is a wonderful addition to the Tennessee
Valley.
Our fourth witness is Dr. Neil Lamb, the Director of
Educational Outreach for the HudsonAlpha Institute for Guided
Technology. Dr. Lamb formerly served as Director of Education
in the Department of Human Genetics at Emory, and HudsonAlpha
is a wonderful, different kind of addition to our high-tech
community. So thank you so much for being here, Mr. Lamb.
And our final witness is Mr. Andrew Partynski, the Chief
Technology Officer for the Science Applications International
Corporation, Assistant in Technology Solutions Business Unit,
more commonly known as SAIC, their acronym. Prior to SAIC, Mr.
Partynski worked for DOS Technologies, where he served as
President for Homeland Security and Defense for the C41 sublet.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited
to five minutes, after which the Members of the Subcommittee
will ask questions. I might be a little bit lax on that five-
minute rule. Traditionally in Washington, we are not so lax. So
please understand there will be a little bit of leeway, but if
you start acting like United States Senators with a filibuster,
I might have to shorten things just a little bit to try to get
it back under control, since we in the House of Commons, as
opposed to the House of Lords, we tend to be brief. I remember
my first speech on the House Floor was 120 seconds. But we are
not demanding that kind of brevity from you.
With that having been said, I now recognize our first
witness, Dr. Wright, for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. CAMILLE H. WRIGHT,

DIRECTOR OF SECONDARY EDUCATION,

MADISON CITY SCHOOLS

Dr. Wright. Thank you. Chairman Brooks and Ranking Member
Lipinski, Members of the Subcommittee on Research and Science.
My name is Camille Wright, Director of Instruction for Madison
City Schools. Welcome to Bob Jones High School. Thank you for
inviting me to participate in this important hearing to discuss
STEM education programs and partnerships in Madison City and
its importance to the future workforce in Alabama and the U.S.
economy.
STEM education is critical to the future of our nation's
economy. The mastery of STEM subjects is a vital component in
being able to successfully navigate the 21st century global
environment. This goes far beyond being a scientist, a
physician, an architect or an engineer. Understanding the world
in which we live and how to make critical decisions relies on a
base in science, engineering, and mathematics. Certainly in our
technology-driven society, students need to be comfortable
interacting with and utilizing technology, and their ability to
secure high-wage, high-demand jobs and maintain those jobs
depends on this.
Madison City School System places a strong emphasis on STEM
education. We are sitting in the Mecca of STEM careers. Eighty-
eight percent of Madison City graduates enroll in post-
secondary. They are more likely to go into a STEM field than
any other occupation. It is important that we use all our
available resources in the area to keep our STEM education
relevant and rigorous.
Madison City Schools offers a vast array of courses, clubs,
and after-school activities in the STEM fields. We offer nine
Advanced Placement courses just in science, technology and
mathematics. About 35 percent of our students take an advanced
placement course. We have over 90 percent of our graduates with
a career and technical education course. Our state-recognized
Career and Technical Education programs in the STEM fields
include engineering, biomedical sciences, health science, and
computer science.
In most of these career and technical education programs,
the terminating course includes some type of internship in the
field. For example, in our Level Three Engineering this year,
we had about 60 students that interned in businesses such as
Boeing, Adtran, Aegis, AMTEC, SAIC, Raytheon, HudsonAlpha,
NASA, and many other companies. In the STEM areas, we have a
100 percent placement rate at the post-secondary level.
Additionally, our engineering teacher has received the national
Milken Award for educational excellence.
In every elementary and middle school in Madison City that
is an AMSTIS school or an Alabama Math, Science, and Technology
Initiative school, we use an integrated philosophy to teaching
the STEM courses. Research shows that students learn better
when they think, when they plan, reason, compute, and evaluate
as a means to solve problems in order to learn the content.
One of the greatest limitations to high student achievement
in the STEM areas, though, is the level of knowledge of the
classroom teacher. Whether it is due to a lack of content
knowledge, a lack of understanding of real-world application,
or a lack of knowledge of the available resources, the
classroom teacher is the key to improving achievement in the
STEM fields. In fact, in the book Team to Teach, author and
educator Anne Jolly states that the single most important
factor in improving student achievement is the classroom
teacher. If we want to improve K-12 math and science education,
we have to invest in our educators.
Alabama has largely adopted the National Common Core
Standards. We need new resources for our teachers to align to
the Alabama College and Career Ready Standards. However, this
year the state legislature will likely fund textbooks at only
$35 per child, even though an average cost of a textbook is
about $75. Teacher professional development money has been cut
as well. This is money that we have used in the past to help
our teachers become knowledgeable of best practices, current
research, and the industry standards.
In order to maintain student interest in math and science,
we have to show the linkage between the concepts taught in
school and their application to life. For too long, our
students have viewed science as just a set of facts that does
not apply to their daily routines. So connecting to health, to
food, to their environment is critical to answering their
question, ``Why do we need to know this?''
In a Southern Region Educational Board report, ``New Vision
for the Middle Grades,'' they state, ``Recent evidence makes
clear that each middle grader's personal, individual engagement
in school is essential to their success.'' Studies repeatedly
show that students who lose interest in school in the middle
grades are likely to flounder in the ninth grade and then drop
out. Yet developmental and brain research confirms that by the
middle grades, students are capable of making these connections
between their academic work, their personal interests, and
their career aptitudes. Middle-grade professionals can use
these connections to help students prepare for high school and
post-secondary studies.
If we can connect what they are learning in math and
science and use their natural affinity and love of technology
to make their learning relevant to their world, we can keep
students' love of STEM alive throughout their educational
career. Additionally, they need participation in programs such
as rocketry and robotics competitions, Destination Imagination
programs, science fairs that truly focus on scientific
investigation and have real-world, hands-on learning
opportunities in the community, much like we are doing with our
career and technical education programs.
In order to maintain our current level of excellence, it is
critical to Madison City to have partnerships with post-
secondary, business and industry, and non-profit organizations.
We partner with local colleges and universities, those at the
table, in a multitude of ways. In addition to dual enrollment
and articulated credit, post-secondary institutions in our area
provide competitions, they provide transitional outreach, and
have summer camps in the STEM areas.
Our partnerships with business and industry are extensive.
The business community funds a wide variety of programs in our
schools. They provide guest speakers, job shadowing
opportunities, and internships that I previously talked about.
Organizations such as HudsonAlpha offer free professional
development to our teachers and educational experiences to our
students.
We also partner with a number of non-profit organizations
that provide a wide variety of services, from counseling to
professional development. One of the most notable is the
Alabama Best Practice Center. This organization has provided
hundreds of hours of training, free training, for our district.
In our global, rapidly changing world, the most important
gift we can give our students is the understanding of the need
to be a lifelong learner. Our education doesn't stop once we
have a diploma in hand. In today's fast-paced world, so many of
our jobs that our students will hold, we know they don't exist.
This means that our students must exit high school with the
ability to think, to collaborate, to make decisions, and to
innovate, all those skills that they gain in the STEM areas.
The basic skills are still important, but our students must
be able to use those skills as a foundation, not as an end
point. It is important to develop a culture that embraces the
community of learning from the schools to the family, to
industry, throughout the community. This is an area of great
strength for the Huntsville/Madison City/Madison County area,
and we place a premium on education and lifelong learning.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Wright follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.008

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Wright.
The Chair next recognizes Dr. Altenkirch for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. ROBERT A. ALTENKIRCH,

PRESIDENT, UNIVERSITY OF ALABAMA-HUNTSVILLE

Dr. Altenkirch. Thank you, Congressman. I want to thank the
Members of the Subcommittee on Research and Science Education
for this opportunity to address them, for your service, and
also your interest in our area of STEM education and to see it
in action.
The University of Alabama in Huntsville is a top-tier
national research university as ranked by U.S. News & World
Report, and we have achieved the highest classification in
research activity by the standards established by the Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. Our campus serves
as the anchor tenant of Cummings Research Park, the second
largest university-related research park in the United States,
with nearly 300 companies and 25,000 employees. Adjacent to
Cummings Research Park is the Redstone Arsenal, where NASA's
Marshall Space Flight Center and several U.S. Army laboratories
and commands are located.
So it is in this environment that we find ourselves in the
center of workforce development that is heavily dependent on
research, technology, science, engineering and mathematics. So
it is obvious that the success of this community and the
success of the federal agencies at the Redstone Arsenal in
addressing their missions, and the success of corporations
located here to support the Army and NASA are heavily dependent
on creating a pipeline of intellectual and creative talent in
the so-called STEM fields.
Last year our campus supplied the local workforce with more
than 630 graduates possessing degrees of a technical nature.
Nearly half of the graduates earned a degree in science or
engineering. We are the single largest contributor of
professional degrees for the STEM workforce in the greater
Huntsville area.
We recognize the need for our university to provide
leadership in promoting STEM education and create a pipeline of
intellectual and creative talent, and we take this
responsibility seriously. We have made a lot of strides in
teaching the teachers in STEM education. Our campus was the
pilot site for the AMSTI program that Dr. Wright mentioned, the
Alabama Math, Science, and Technology Initiative. A recent
multi-year study by the U.S. Department of Education credited
AMSTI with providing the equivalency of an additional 28 days
of traditional classroom instruction per year.
AMSTI is a program for elementary and middle school
teachers, implementing hands-on or inquiry-based learning in
classrooms. During the past five years, we have trained more
than 4,000 teachers and have had an impact on more than 120,000
students. AMSTI schools out-perform non-AMSTI schools in
middle-grade science, math, and reading significantly. The
percentile rank difference on the SAT-10 math test between
schools that adopted AMSTI and a control group increased from
three percentile points to eight percentile points from Grade
six to eight, and from three to nine percentile points in
reading.
This summer at UAH marks the beginning of a new Master's
degree in STEM education, the Master of Science in Integrated
Science Technology, Engineering and Mathematics. This program
is targeted at in-service secondary school science and math
educators, seeks to advance their content knowledge and command
of subject matter, which in turn have been proven to impact
student learning positively in the STEM areas. It is the only
program of its nature in Alabama and one of only three in the
Southeastern United States.
We are working with local corporations on a middle school
through high school STEM pipeline aimed at, one, engaging
students in STEM activities during a two-week summer science
and engineering camp at the critical time before eighth grade,
where research shows that interest in STEM disciplines suffers
a precipitous decline; two, keeping them engaged in STEM
activities, education and career opportunities throughout the
academic year; three, sustaining both the summer camp and
academic year experience in subsequent years through Grade 11,
and this pipeline culminates with their admission to UAH in a
STEM major.
We are also using the Innovative Systems Project for
increased recruitment of emerging STEM students or InSPIRESS,
which is an outreach activity that engages high school students
in an open-ended design activity that piques their interest and
gives them a better understanding of what scientists and
engineers do.
The University of Alabama in Huntsville also provides
leadership as the regional coordinator for 10 North Alabama
high schools to better prepare Alabama students for engineering
careers through the Alabama Engineering Academy Initiative.
These academies are embedded in high schools and provide
specific, multi-year curricula geared toward prospective
engineering students.
Once they enroll as students on our campus, we prepare our
engineering students for transition to the workforce by having
them work in teams to solve large-scale systems problems for
real-world applications. Also, our cooperative education
program is one of the largest in the Southeastern United
States, and partners with scores of local companies and
government agencies to give experience to students in the
workforce.
So each of these steps helps prepare students for a robust
education at UA-Huntsville and for preparation for their lives
after being a student, and helps them add value to their
employer from the first day they walk in the door.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Altenkirch follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.016

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Altenkirch.
Next, the Chair recognizes Dr. Beck for her five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. MARILYN C. BECK,

PRESIDENT, CALHOUN COMMUNITY COLLEGE

Dr. Beck. I would like to thank Chairman Brooks and Ranking
Member Lipinski for inviting me to speak about Calhoun's role
in STEM education and preparing our graduates for the challenge
of an ever-increasing high-tech workforce.
Community colleges play an important role in the U.S.
economy, and Calhoun is a great example. We have more than 450
students with declared majors in pre-engineering, science, or
math, and approximately 4,500 students enrolled in various
technology programs.
The College is a member of a post-secondary consortium with
UA-Huntsville and Alabama A&M University, which allows our
students to transfer to one of these universities and, upon
graduation, pursue employment with the Missile Defense Agency
or other employers that require the same types of knowledge,
skills, and abilities.
Calhoun launched the State's first and only associate
degree programs in biotechnology and clean energy technology.
Biotechnology majors transfer to four-year institutions or
immediately enter the workforce as biotechnicians. HudsonAlpha
partners with Calhoun by providing scholarships for our
students, as well as internships for those who have completed
one year in the biotechnology program. Through a $3.4 million
grant awarded by the U.S. Department of Labor, Calhoun created
the Alabama Center for Excellence in Clean Energy Technology,
the first accredited training center for renewable energy
technicians in Alabama.
Calhoun offers short-term training certificates, Associate
of Applied Technologies, and Associate of Science degrees, and
these classes are offered at the main campus in Decatur and the
research campus in Huntsville, and also online through a
significant number of distance education and hybrid courses.
The College has many established partnerships in our
Workforce Solutions Department, which works very closely with
businesses and industries to provide customized, flexible, and
cost-effective training to businesses and industries. In
return, the College secures feedback, which keeps our
technology curriculums on the leading edge.
Calhoun also works with area non-profits and schools, such
as Bob Jones High School, and institutions of higher learning.
The college received a $5 million grant from the U.S.
Department of Labor. It was referred to as the WIRED program, a
regional initiative to develop and strengthen partnerships
throughout North Alabama and South-Central Tennessee. A total
of 23 counties participated in the project, nine from Tennessee
and 14 from Alabama, with 16,021 STEM education students
reached through scholarships and training.
A current very successful Regional Workforce Development
Council project is the Career Coaches initiative. Calhoun's
Career Coaches go out into the middle and high schools and work
with students to help them determine their educational and
career goals and to familiarize them with post-secondary
educational opportunities in the State. Calhoun and the Alabama
Industrial Development and Training Institute are partners in
the Alabama Robotics Technology Park Initiative, a one-of-a-
kind, state-of-the-art training, research, development, and
entrepreneurship park that trains students and incumbent
workers in the use of robotics technology ranging from
manufacturing to unmanned air vehicles for space and defense.
To date, training has been provided for 551 workers and more
than 1,856 students, and Committee Members have toured the RTP.
Student retention is a major issue in the Nation. Our
retention rate is higher than the national average. However, we
must continue to increase retention by providing students with
financial aid, tutoring services, open labs, and other forms of
support.
Calhoun uses the Statewide Transfer Articulation and
Reporting System, known as the STARS system, to ensure that
students follow the correct curriculum for transfer to Alabama
universities. This system assures the seamless transfer of all
credits.
Calhoun prepares students to enter the workforce upon
completion of their academic program by encouraging and
offering students the opportunity to take exams for nationally
recognized industry credentials. In partnership with businesses
and industry, Calhoun offers apprenticeships and co-op
opportunities for students.
Education and training should be affordable for all
students. As we have all seen in the past few years, the days
of working for one industry for a lifetime are over. Today's
workforce must be willing and able to adapt to the changing
needs of industry. Calhoun is excited to have an active role in
helping to educate, train, and develop the workforce our region
needs to successfully compete in the global marketplace.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Beck follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.026

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Beck.
The Chair next recognizes Dr. Lamb for his five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. NEIL LAMB,

DIRECTOR OF EDUCATIONAL OUTREACH,

HUDSONALPHA INSTITUTE

Dr. Lamb. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Lipinski. My name is Neil Lamb, and I am the Educational
Outreach Director for the HudsonAlpha Institute for
Biotechnology here in Huntsville, and I am pleased to be before
the Committee today testifying about ways that non-profit
organizations can play a role in our nation's STEM education.
As all of you noted, STEM skills are of vital importance to
national prosperity, security, and the health of our citizens.
The United States has long been a leader in scientific
achievement and in using those discoveries for innovation.
With fierce competition for information seeking to overtake
our leadership position, sustained national support of STEM
education is critical. Industry and non-profit organizations
have an important supporting role in nurturing budding
scientists and engineering professionals.
HudsonAlpha, a not-for-profit research institute, has a
threefold mission of conducting genomics research, sparking
economic development, and providing educational outreach.
HudsonAlpha's research faculty use genomics to understand
how organisms function at a molecular level in both health and
disease. This research takes place under the same roof as more
than 20 biotechnology-related companies, demonstrating our
belief that proximity between research and industry builds
collaboration and moves discovery into commercialization at a
faster pace.
Part of the attraction to Huntsville is the culture of
innovation and the emphasis on STEM education. This creates
those ``aha'' moments that move research forward and turn ideas
into products.
Jim Hudson and Lonnie McMillian, the founders of
HudsonAlpha, each created and matured successful businesses
here. The opportunity to impact STEM on a broad scale was a
driving reason why education is a critical component of the
mission of HudsonAlpha.
From an educational point of view, our programs are
organized around preparing the future biotechnology workforce
and building awareness about the influence of genetics on the
lives of all citizens. We partner with educators, policymakers,
corporations and civic groups to connect academic learning with
real-world application. Our activities are incorporated into
middle and high school classrooms across the State. We have
school trips to the Institute during the summer months, and we
provide summer camps and internship opportunities, as well as
professional development workshops for teachers.
In the four years since the opening of the Institute,
HudsonAlpha has invested more than $2 million into Alabama
education programs, impacting more than 200,000 students,
teachers, and members of the public. We are serious about
improving genetics education and are continually on the lookout
for ways to translate the scientific discoveries into
educational experiences.
That is why HudsonAlpha collaborates with a wide array of
partners. Some assist in programmatic development and
implementation, while others provide needed funding. Our
collaborators include national agencies like the Department of
Labor and the National Institutes of Health, two- and four-year
universities and K-12 education systems across Alabama. In
fact, HudsonAlpha has a relationship with every group providing
testimony to you at today's meeting.
If I can go off script for a second, I think the key
message you will hear from all of those at the table is the
importance of partnerships in creating networks, each
supporting each other. None of us is able to function on our
own in order to be successful for STEM education.
Whether it is in partnership with statewide programs like
the Alabama Math, Science, and Technology Initiative, or the
newly formed Illinois Pathway Initiative, industry and non-
profit organizations across the country have a critical role in
providing content support and links to student career
opportunities.
Based on HudsonAlpha's experience, a few key points have
emerged that are critical to non-profit success in this area.
First, we have become familiar with the education scaffold
across primary, secondary, and higher education. We look for
those areas that are a natural fit with HudsonAlpha's content
expertise and identify when the topics are generally taught.
This is at the middle school, the high school, or not until
graduate-level training. Knowing when a content area is taught
allows us to approach the appropriate educational partner.
Second, we identify ways we can support existing
educational requirements. This may range from providing guest
speakers or background material for a classroom discussion to
creating materials and teacher training for a statewide
initiative.
Third, we have to realize that the narrow, highly technical
details that are HudsonAlpha's area of expertise may not match
classroom concepts and instead need to focus on a more
foundational topic within the field. I cannot stress how
important this point is to success in education in the STEM
field. Industry and non-profits have great knowledge to share,
but often attempt to force fit an overly detailed lecture or
activity into a classroom. This can inadvertently cause more
harm than good.
Finally, we have learned that any successful collaboration
is going to require a serious investment. This may or may not
be financial in nature, but will almost certainly require an
investment of time. This relationship must go beyond simply
writing a check or dropping off surplus equipment.
A motivated and skilled workforce pipeline requires a solid
education that continually grows over time. As a society, we
must support approaches that best facilitate the pursuit of
this knowledge. Our citizens need to embrace learning, and our
society needs to reward those who give their time, effort, and
passion to that pursuit.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Representative Lipinski, for
the opportunity to appear before you today.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lamb follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.035

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Lamb.
The Chair next recognizes Mr. Partynski.

STATEMENT OF MR. ANDREW PARTYNSKI,

CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER,

SCIENCE APPLICATIONS INTERNATIONAL CORPORATION

Mr. Partynski. Good morning, Chairman Brooks and Member
Lipinski. Let me first say I am honored to have the opportunity
to appear before you today, and I would also like to thank Bob
Jones High School for your wonderful hospitality.
SAIC is a Fortune 500 scientific, engineering, and
technology applications company that uses its deep domain
knowledge to solve problems of vital importance to the Nation
and the world in national security, energy and environment,
health and cybersecurity. SAIC employs approximately 41,000
personnel worldwide, with approximately 10,000 employees with
advanced degrees and over 20,000 employees with security
clearances.
I am the regional coordinator of STEM initiatives in
Huntsville, and I am also part of a corporate committee that
focuses on STEM. A major focus of SAIC's STEM program is to
help provide our employees meaningful opportunities to
volunteer in their communities. Our employees' actions will
inspire students directly through their interactions with SAIC,
will ignite a peer-to-peer spread of interest in volunteering
within the SAIC employee population, and indirectly can
stimulate viral student-to-student interest in STEM.
The current environment in Huntsville when recruiting
candidates requires that we compete for the same existing
finite pool of talent. Due to the current growth in Huntsville
and attendant job opportunities, we have had to recruit and
relocate qualified people from across the country because of
the shortages of available and technically skilled engineers.
The difficulty to recruit these candidates in a timely manner
has been specifically acknowledged by our customers on Redstone
Arsenal. Our experience shows that talent of all ages self-
selects into working on big technical problems. The bigger the
problem, the more inspired and attracted talented people become
by that challenge.
To prepare for this current and future need, SAIC has
initiated several thrusts. First, we have established a
relationship with UAH by working on creating and tailoring some
degree programs, bidding on cooperative research projects,
providing scholarships to identify key talent, and working to
provide internships at SAIC and ultimately hiring the
graduates. Our stated goal with UAH is to help it be recognized
as a national go-to school for the disciplines needed by our
customers and the Huntsville community.
We also understand that to inspire our younger generation
to get into STEM fields, we have to attract them early. To do
this, SAIC has strategically selected to support FIRST
robotics, Project Lead the Way, and also Alabama A+ College
Ready.
FIRST robotics offers elementary, middle, and high school
students a series of popular extracurricular activities
structured around robotics competitions, and includes contests
at the local, regional, and national levels. Locally we support
a dozen teams from elementary through high school, and we are
only one of a dozen SAIC entities that have similar support
efforts across the country.
SAIC also selected Project Lead the Way as one of its
strategic initiatives because the program produces demonstrated
results, it offers a ready-made infrastructure already present
in schools and districts across the country, and it offers many
ways for SAIC employees to engage in their communities.
As part of SAIC's Project Lead the Way regional strategy,
we funded the startup of Project Lead the Way engineering
curriculum at New Century Technology High School.
We volunteered to co-chair the Tennessee Valley Project
Lead the Way strategy under ASMDA and NDIA. The goal of this
joint committee is to gain synergy in supporting all three
school district superintendents that are piloting Project Lead
the Way in a high school.
SAIC volunteers are working to create an environment where
best practices for deploying the curriculum can be shared
across all three school systems. They are also creating a one-
stop-shop capability to support the needs of Project Lead the
Way teachers, including finding sponsors to fund courses,
recruit and place mentors for the classroom, and set up
industry and government internships for students to explore
STEM career fields. The strategy focuses on providing these
Project Lead the Way support services for high schools first,
but will expand to support K-8 schools in the coming years.
SAIC coordinated and deployed a 10-week cyber curriculum
called CyberNEXS to eight schools in the Huntsville City school
district. SAIC organized mentors both within SAIC and external
to work with the eight schools in Huntsville, and two of the
schools that went through this cyber training have qualified
through two levels of National Cyber Patriot competitions run
by the Air Force Association.
SAIC also worked with Project Lead the Way to develop
technologies for the upcoming cyber curriculum. Huntsville's
Grissom High School was chosen as one of two schools nationally
to pilot this new cyber security curriculum at the high school
level.
SAIC also contributes to Alabama's A+ College Ready as part
of a $1 million commitment by the community in Huntsville and
Madison County to implement AP programs in 10 local high
schools, making this an exemplary public-private partnership.
After just one year in the A+ College Ready program, 43 Alabama
high schools showed an average 108 percent increase in AP
qualifying scores, 13 times the national average of 8.1
percent. Alabama's percentage increase in qualifying scores on
AP exams from 2008 to 2011 ranks Alabama number one among all
50 States in qualifying scores on exams and minority qualifying
scores on exams.
In closing, one of the greatest challenges for any company
in the technical fields today is finding and attracting top
talent in all technical areas. Our greatest method of
attraction is inspiration in the mission and to the
contribution to our Nation and society.
Our government was able to achieve this rallying vision
under President Kennedy when he announced the national
challenge to go to the moon. This vision created the largest
increase in enrollment in STEM fields in U.S. history. Today we
need an equally visionary challenge that inspires the
imagination and passion of our young people. This challenge
needs to go beyond typical rhetoric and stimulus and strike at
the hearts and minds of the generation that uses technology
transparently and can multiplex many activities at once. Once
inspired, this generation, these young people, will rise to the
challenge with passion and innovation that will make us proud
to be Americans.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Partynski follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.045

Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Partynski.
I want to thank all the witnesses.
The Chair at this point will open the round of questions.
Typically our questions on the Hill are limited to five
minutes, but the Chair is going to exercise the Chair's
prerogative and grant additional leeway with respect to our
timing.
The Chair recognizes himself for his questions. The first
question I have is for Mr. Partynski, and Dr. Lamb, if you also
will respond after Mr. Partynski has done so.
In order to produce a competent STEM workforce for the
future, communications between universities and industry are
imperative. How does industry communicate its workforce needs
to the education community, and how would you grade industry's
efforts in communicating to universities their workforce needs,
both current and future?
Mr. Partynski. Well, first of all, we find that in order
for us to communicate our needs with universities, we have to
form partnerships with universities. We have to work
collaboratively, as we have attempted to do with our strategic
university alliance. We have actually formed seven university
alliances across the Nation. One of them is with UAH. And those
alliances allow us not only to focus our investments at
universities but also focus our needs.
For example, we work with universities to develop specific
curricula so that they can actually fill the requirements that
we see today and forecast for the future. So they are
critically important.
As far as having the university work with us to produce
these candidates, we actually go to the universities and we
recruit. We actually provide scholarships to identify students
that have what we consider critical thinking, and we actually
provide the university with funding to accelerate some of those
efforts.
Chairman Brooks. How would you grade industry's
communication skills, inasmuch as universities and community
colleges, K-12, they all want to educate kids in such a fashion
so that once they are graduated, they will be market ready,
they can get a job? How would you grade industry's ability to
communicate the high-tech needs to K-12, community colleges and
universities?
Mr. Partynski. I think our communication still requires a
lot of work. It is not adequate where we are today. What we are
finding is that there is a balance between communication of
needs and having a skilled and experienced workforce,
especially in Huntsville. One of the areas that we are working
with the university on is to provide internships and summer job
programs to get the students, their experience base up a little
higher, because the customer base in Huntsville requires
primarily experienced people that they want to hire as opposed
to direct college graduates.
So we still have a lot of work to do to work with
universities to actually communicate needs and what type of
students we need.
Chairman Brooks. Dr. Lamb, you are sitting in a little bit
of a different chair because of the hybrid nature of
HudsonAlpha, on the one hand research and innovation, and on
the other hand you partner with industry. So how would you
answer those questions?
Dr. Lamb. I would say that we have to do a better job
directly communicating with our education network, whether that
is K-12 or our two-year or four-year schools. We historically,
at least in our field, have ended up with an enormous number of
students who have been told that in order to go into research,
into the health sciences, that you have to have an advanced
degree. I think that we have a number of students that have
come out with a Bachelor's, Master's, or Ph.D., and the field
has changed so that it doesn't necessarily support that.
There are an ever-increasing number of positions that are
available at the sub-baccalaureate level, and we have to have
better communication with our education partners to help them
understand that and to recognize the skill set that we are
looking for, that it isn't simply individuals that know a great
deal of book-based facts but also have hands-on skills.
I think here in Huntsville you have seen more of those
direct connections, more of the intern programs that Mr.
Partynski talked about, more of those hands-on opportunities
building skills as well as knowledge. But I think historically
it has been a challenge, and there hasn't been the needed
communication between the bioscience industry and our education
partners.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you.
The next question will be for Dr. Wright, Dr. Altenkirch,
and Dr. Beck, the flip side of the first question.
There is nothing worse for a young person to have a high
school diploma or the two-year degree or the four-year degree,
or even advanced degrees, yet not be able to get a job because
the education doesn't match the science, technology,
engineering and math requirements of industry. In that vein, do
you seek industry input when developing curriculums for your
students, and do they in turn assist with the academic-to-
workforce transitions? If so, how?
And you can--whoever wants to answer first, go for it. Dr.
Wright? Or is it going to be Dr. Beck? All I saw was Dr.
Altenkirch shift the mic.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Brooks. Who wishes to go first?
Dr. Beck. At Calhoun Community College, we have good
partnerships with business and industry, and we have advisory
committees, and the membership on those committees is provided
by businesses and industries in this region. So they work with
us to ensure that our curriculums do match the needs of the
business and industry in this region.
Also, another way that we are served is by co-op and
internship positions of businesses and industries throughout
the region.
I do think that certainly we are making headway and
ensuring our students have the appropriate skills for the jobs
in this workforce, and really I believe Dr. Wright said this is
a Mecca. It is a Mecca for jobs, from here to many areas of our
Nation.
So we are endeavoring every day to reach out to business
and industry and to involve business and industry in helping us
ensure our curriculums are leading edge.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Beck. I have seen some of
that firsthand over at your Limestone County campus.
Dr. Wright, are you going to take the next stab at it?
Dr. Wright. Sure.
Chairman Brooks. All right. Thank you.
Dr. Wright. Additionally at the K-12 level, we do try to
establish numerous partnerships with business and industry for
advisement. So we have an advisory council for career and
technical education that is about 12 members, and we meet
regularly, and they advise on the new directions for career and
technical education, how to really make that--put the edge to
the academic so that we have that hands-on experience in the
learning.
We have those internships with all of our career tech
programs, but we also have a lot of community outreach with the
businesses in all of our programs. For example, the
Homebuilders Association may partner with our engineering or
one of our other classes to help them build a sign for Bob
Jones Hospital, things that are really that practical, hands-on
application.
I think we do a better job here than maybe is happening
across the State. I know that Dr. Bise, the state
superintendent, has just hired a new director for career and
technical education whose job is outreach also with post-
secondary and workforce development. But we are trying to get
more involved with workforce development councils, and then we
have articulated credit with the post-secondary institutions,
and all of that comes directly from the business and industry
advisement.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Wright.
Dr. Altenkirch, you are in a little bit of a different
situation, inasmuch as UAH is the brainchild of Wernher von
Braun, Marshall Space Flight Center, NASA, national defense
needs and industry needs--if my memory serves me correctly,
back in the early '60s. So UAH was born in response to industry
needs.
But today, what is UAH doing to try to ensure that there is
this flow of communication that enhances UAH's ability of
producing graduates with the knowledge that our workforce
needs?
Dr. Altenkirch. Thank you. I wasn't trying to avoid the
question. I just wanted to demonstrate that chivalry is alive
and well.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Brooks. Ladies first. I understand.
Dr. Altenkirch. It is a good point. Let me step back and
give a little bit of a broad perspective on this, and that is
that in college curricula, they are compartmentalized. You have
to divide things up in some way. And so we teach mathematics,
we teach chemistry, we teach mechanical engineering, et cetera.
But at some point, all those have to be integrated, because
they are not separated when you go out into an industrial
environment.
And so our communication is a lot, if you listened to the
testimony carefully, is to interact with industry and the
Arsenal and NASA through summer camps, through integrated
projects, teams of people from all across the technical
disciplines, and high school students that are integrated into
those teams, and also students from other universities are
integrated into those teams.
So by taking the compartmentalized university instruction
and then eventually integrating it together so that people
don't believe that these things are all separate. So if you
study mathematics, you don't necessarily at the Bachelor's
level go out in industry and do mathematics. You do right-
scaled projects in which you use mathematics.
So that has to happen at some point along the educational
process. We think these interactions with industry and
internships, these design projects, et cetera, are a very good
way to communicate that importance.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Dr. Altenkirch.
The Chair is going to exercise his prerogative to have a
second round of questions for both Mr. Lipinski and myself. But
at this point, I am going to defer to Mr. Lipinski from the
great State of Illinois for questions that he may have.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Chairman Brooks.
I sometimes have--this is an area that is of great interest
to me, and I also have to admit that I have two degrees in
engineering. I left the STEM fields. I had one colleague of
mine say during a hearing once that I went to the dark side. I
got a Ph.D. in political science.
Chairman Brooks. But it was from a good university.
Mr. Lipinski. Yes, Duke University. I think that is a
pretty good university.
But as we are going through this, my mind is going in a
million different directions. Let me see if I can narrow this
down to a few specific questions.
I want to start with Dr. Lamb. Is there anything--and I am
not suggesting--I am not just playing the role of the Democrat
here and suggesting that the Federal Government does
everything, but what we are here about is what we do in
Congress, what can the Federal Government do.
So first, what can the Federal Government do, if anything,
to promote more entities like the HudsonAlpha Institute? Is
there anything that can be done to promote such entities?
Dr. Lamb. Aside from providing financial incentives for
groups to enter into this field?
Mr. Lipinski. Whatever you --
Dr. Lamb. So let me start by commenting on what you just
said about your own personal history, about starting with a
STEM field and then moving out. There is a recent study by
Georgetown University that notes that there is this big
discussion that we are losing individuals in the STEM arena, we
don't have enough STEM workers. The Georgetown study noted that
we actually start out with enough STEM workers, but they are
pushed away to other fields because our STEM students display
the important skills that other industries and other companies
need. So I would posit that your STEM background actually
provided you a great foundation for moving over.
Mr. Lipinski. I like to state that all the time. I think
that we have less than 10 engineers in Congress, and we could
use a lot more. I won't say anything about what we could use a
lot less of, but there are over 250 attorneys.
[Laughter.]
Chairman Brooks. Would it help that my father and two sons
are engineers? Do I get some credit for that?
Mr. Lipinski. Yes, you get a lot of credit for that.
Dr. Lamb. That is right. Those who grow up in STEM
households, I think you also imbibe that as well.
I think that one of the most important ways--and this is
true for industry as well. One of the most important roles for
industry and non-profit is recognizing that they are content
experts and that they have a very important role to play in
informing education, linking what students are learning with
real-world applications.
Mr. Lipinski. Let me roll into my next question. Is there
anything the Federal Government can do to encourage the
collaboration you talked about? This is something that I have
always emphasized and I never see enough of. I was teaching
political science, and I did not see universities doing enough
to interact with industry. I don't see enough of--and it seems
that this is coming on a little bit more, but we have the
Department of Energy, national labs, a couple in the Chicago
area, the universities. I always encourage them to collaborate,
taking the research that is being done, industry taking that,
creating products, jobs. That is our future. But also
collaboration with all levels of education and industry, the
Federal Government, whether it is the energy labs or NASA. I
know NASA does a lot of work on this, but more needs to be
done.
So what can be done to entice and encourage, incentivize
this type of cooperation? I think this is something that
everyone probably may have an answer to.
Dr. Lamb. I think that there should be requirements in
funding opportunities when groups write funding proposals.
There should be requirements to make sure that industry and
education are at the same table, and I think those can be
funding requirements for education-related grants as well as
things like small business grants, that there is a connection
to education.
But I think you have to be very specific. This needs to be
more than simply having them at the same table, having someone
write on a proposal, ``Yes, I have this advisory committee, and
look, it involves people from industry and it involves people
from education.'' We need to spell out what these partnerships
potentially can look like.
These are not easy to develop. They do not naturally flow.
We often speak different languages. We often come with
different perspectives. People in industry and non-profit
generally do not have any sense of the challenges from the
world of education. It is a different language. It is a
different set of backgrounds. And it takes time. It takes much
more time than simply showing up at a quarterly meeting where
we all have a boxed lunch and we nod at each other.
I am not sure how you actually try to knit these groups
together, but there needs to be a better expectation of what
these partnerships potentially can look like. They can be
incredibly fulfilling, and once you begin to build them, then
other ideas and projects flow naturally out of them, and it
becomes very engaging and encouraging on both ends.
But it is not always easy to get them to the table and to
get them on the same page.
Mr. Lipinski. Anyone else have anything they can add about
how we can encourage the collaboration?
Dr. Wright. Well, you asked about what the Federal
Government could do, and I would like to emphasize that if we
had a decreased focus on accountability--for example, with No
Child Left Behind, there has been such a focus on the reading
and math, and even though it is probably an unintended
consequence, it causes us to put our resources in areas that
are singularly focused, as opposed to broad-based programs that
really do integrate and apply the knowledge that we are
learning.
So when there is legislation that causes that kind of
singular focus, I think that is something that we need to take
a look at and try to--whatever the legislation is, that is what
we are going to do. So as an unintended consequence, that is
where the money is going to go. So if we can put our money--if
we can have federal legislation that really focuses on the
integration of the academic, as opposed to a singular focus of
passing some level of reading.
Dr. Lamb. And if I could add, I think in adding to Dr.
Wright's point, AYP has intentionally put the focus on math and
reading to the exclusion of science. So in many of our schools,
science has been shifted off to the side or is used as a way to
teach, to remediate in math and reading, with very little
science focus, and I think that has done enormous harm to how
we look at science and how we teach science in our schools
across the country.
Mr. Lipinski. If I could go on to another question here, I
am always looking to the Chairman as to when he is going to
pull the plug on this round, but let do one more question.
Dr. Beck, how many of the students who receive Associates
degrees, what will they do with Associates degrees in these
STEM fields? How many of them will go into--can get a job with
that in a STEM field? How many go on to a four-year degree--
finish up and go on to a Bachelor's degree? What are you seeing
in that regard?
Because the big question that came up, and I probably
shouldn't attach it to another one, but I think we have to look
at the whole breadth here. The question is, what do students
need to learn? And there are different types of jobs. That was
brought up. There are different types of jobs that you have.
There are some STEM jobs that you just need an Associate's
degree for, there are some STEM jobs you need a Ph.D. for, and
there is a real--it depends. Not everyone is--we are not
teaching STEM, just the way one goes to get a Ph.D. in STEM.
That is not what we want, that is not what we need.
But how many of them, how many students--and has there been
an increase in the number of students who get an Associate's
degree in a STEM field that can step right in? Are there more
jobs available for them or not?
Dr. Beck. At Calhoun, about a third of our students are
coming to the college to upgrade skills or to re-skill. About a
third of the students are seeking an Associate's degree in a
variety of fields with the intent to go into the labor force.
The other third are transfer students. They intend to transfer
to the college and universities.
We find that our students who are in the health careers and
the technology careers that involve STEM fields get jobs in our
community. In fact, one of the issues we have is that some of
the students who are really good students and who acquire
technical skills may opt out for a job before they complete
their Associate degree. So we are working very hard to keep
them associated with the college even though they have gone to
work so that they will complete their Associate degree.
Our students in the transfer curriculums, when they
transfer we get data from UA-Huntsville and other universities.
They do as well or better when they transfer as the native
students do at the university. So they are pretty well
prepared.
Our two-year degree students, as I said, in the STEM areas
are almost 100 percent placement. If they just stop out after
they have completed two years of a possible Gen Ed or transfer
curriculum, they have challenges in the job market. They have a
two-year degree but their skills don't enable them to compete
as effectively in this workforce. But our students that are in
that upper third do go on to the universities at a high rate,
and they do pursue Master's and Doctor's degrees in the various
STEM and other fields.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you.
Chairman Brooks. As you are probably aware, our youth have
faced significant challenges with the unemployment rate, and
for folks who are in their upper teens or low 20s, there is a
very significant disparity between their unemployment rate and
the rest of the Nation as a whole, and this is for any witness
who may want to address this.
Can you explain to the best of your ability why many
students graduate in STEM fields and yet still are unable to
find jobs, even though the United States is a leader in science
and technology, and efforts to educate our students in STEM
fields are well underway? Would you attribute this to our
Nation's current economic conditions or to an actual lack of
STEM opportunities?
Mr. Partynski. I will take a stab at that, since industry
does most of the hiring for STEM-educated students.
I believe a major factor currently is the economy. There
are periods in our history where we can't graduate enough STEM
students. I remember that when I graduated, I had 12 job offers
before I finished school. I have a son who is going to graduate
this year, and he doesn't have any job offers yet.
The challenge that I am learning is really a problem is
education alone today isn't enough. Experience is necessary. So
co-ops, internships, some level of experience in the field that
they are interested in is critical. So that is the challenge.
The economy is the driver, and the desire today is to have
people with some level of experience.
Chairman Brooks. While I have you, Mr. Partynski, do you
have a judgment as to whether those individuals who graduate in
the STEM fields are doing any better or worse than community
and university graduates who have degrees in non-STEM fields?
Mr. Partynski. Unfortunately, I can't answer for non-STEM
fields since our primary focus is in the sciences. But my
opinion is that the challenge is even larger for those that
aren't graduating in the STEM fields, again owing to the
economy.
Chairman Brooks. And perhaps one of the folks who are in
higher ed can address that to a greater degree. But
notwithstanding, would any of you all be in a position to
respond to either the first question or the follow-up?
Dr. Altenkirch. I don't suspect that the jobless rate among
graduates in the STEM fields is greater than the average. I
would suspect that it is less because of the fact that if you
are prepared in those subject areas, you are able to do those
subject areas, but you are also able to do a lot more. So you
are educated in problem-solving, whereas if you opted out of
those fields, I think your opportunities are limited.
Congressman Lipinski was well prepared to get a Ph.D. in
political science.
So I think my point is that the engineering and mathematics
and science fields are really broad based and allow you to do a
lot of things. I don't think that the graduates should limit
their horizons to ``if I get an engineering degree, I have to
do engineering.'' I think it is much more open than that.
Chairman Brooks. Dr. Wright, Dr. Beck or Dr. Lamb, do you
all have any insight you wish to share on either the first or
the second question?
Dr. Wright. We find it--we have limited data, but we find
it quite interesting that our students at Bob Jones, we have 88
percent that go to college, and of that 88 percent we have
about 56 percent who actually get a four-year degree in five
years. You see on the news the high cost of student loans.
So we have seen, in the limited amount of time that we have
had these career tech programs in the STEM fields, that
students who do the level three or level four internship--so if
you have a biomedical student in year four that is doing those
internships in different areas, or the engineering student who
is out at SAIC seeing what the opportunities are, they are much
more likely to go to college and finish a four-year degree in
four years or five years than their counterpart who hasn't done
that.
So again, it is limited data, but we really feel like those
students who have an opportunity to have hands-on application
of the learning are much more prepared and are going through
college at a faster rate because they know what they want to
do, because they have seen all those opportunities out there.
So we feel like that has been a strong point here.
Chairman Brooks. Dr. Beck or Dr. Lamb, do you have anything
you wish to add?
Dr. Lamb. The Georgetown study that I mentioned earlier has
actually found that there is a lower unemployment rate for
individuals that are STEM graduates, in part because they tend
to be poached by other industries based on the skill sets that
they have developed that translate so well.
We run a summer intern program at HudsonAlpha. We bring
about 30 interns in at the high school and undergraduate level
from across the state, and we have over 300 applicants
routinely for these 30 positions. The words that we hear over
and over are ``I have to have hands-on experience to make me
more attractive as a job candidate.'' So I think that that is
what separates many of these students from who rises to the top
of the stack, who has hands-on experience, and I think we have
to do a better job of providing more of those real-world
opportunities for our students.
Chairman Brooks. Mr. Partynski, I have your written remarks
which, as is normally the case, differ from your oral remarks
because of time limitations, and I am going to read from a part
of it. It says, ``The 2010 American Community Survey performed
by the Census confirms that the Huntsville metro area has the
highest per capita concentration of engineers in the country,
with 11,392 engineers making up six percent of the total
employed residents. San Jose/Sunnyvale/Santa Clara is second at
5.1 percent.'' So we are at 6, they are at 5.1.
SAIC is in somewhat of an interesting position because you
are in business, of course, to make a profit for the owners of
the business. That is what free enterprise and capitalism is
all about. Nonetheless, you all seem to be diverting some of
your profits or resources to STEM efforts.
Can you share with us what the cost is to SAIC of engaging
in STEM efforts that, at least on the surface, have no apparent
direct profit motive to SAIC? And then finally, why does SAIC
do it? What is the benefit?
Mr. Partynski. Well, it will be hard for me to give you an
exact number of what our investment is. I can give you one
example. We nationally sponsored Project Lead the Way and First
Robotics at $1 million, and that is just because of our
interest in that area.
What was the second part of your question?
Chairman Brooks. What is the benefit to SAIC? What is the
motivation for you to invest this money that you do not get a
direct return on?
Mr. Partynski. Well, actually, it is an investment in the
future. The motivation is to actually stimulate the growth of a
segment of our market that we see need in the future. We cannot
graduate enough U.S. citizens with advanced degrees to fill the
needs that we are projecting for national security in the
future. So we have a long-term vision on the needs of what this
nation needs to provide, and we see a shortage. Therefore, we
are investing in our own future.
Chairman Brooks. And is SAIC, in your experience, alone in
this endeavor, or do your competitors also participate, as SAIC
does, in this investment in STEM education?
Mr. Partynski. Well, from the folks that I have talked to,
it is a communitywide effort. It is not a single company. All
the companies, at least in the Huntsville area, are
contributing, are doing STEM initiatives of their own in a very
big way. As a matter of fact, in answer to Congressman
Lipinski's question earlier, what can the government do, as a
matter of fact we are showing kind of a dichotomy here. We are
saying that STEM is important, the government wants to promote
STEM, but yet the government has cut back on all R&D spending.
If you think about where a lot of the STEM workforce goes,
it is into R&D. So one of the things the government can do
maybe is to relook at the cuts in research and development
spending across the board.
One of the biggest challenges in research and development
is that it is research. It isn't a product development. When
you do research, you can't be penalized for failure. As a
matter of fact, you may find success in finding a way to show
how not to do something as opposed to always showing that this
is how you do it.
So there needs to be a different thought process in how we
perceive research and development, how we account for the
results of research and development, and the amount of funding
that we are providing for it, because that is what drives the
entire technical market.
Chairman Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Partynski.
At this time, the Chair will defer to Mr. Lipinski for the
final set of questions.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. I want to thank Mr. Partynski,
first of all, for emphasizing the importance of federal funding
for R&D. I think that is very critical for the future of our
country. I also want to thank you and SAIC for what you do, and
that is part of we are fortunate that we do have private
industry, we do have non-profits who are willing to make that
investment, because it is obviously not going to all come from
government. It shouldn't come all from government. But it is a
special role that you play in doing that, in helping our
nation.
It is funny that the Chairman just read off that paragraph
from Mr. Partynski's written statement. I had circled that
earlier on. I was going to say that is why I felt so welcomed
here in Huntsville, is all of the engineers. Seeing as it is
the highest per capita engineers, I now completely understand
that.
I want to ask--well, let me say this before I ask my one
final question. I want to thank Chairman Brooks. I want to
thank Mo and his wife, Martha, for their hospitality here. My
wife, Judy, and I very much enjoyed our time here, not just
because it was 30 degrees warmer here than in Chicago right
now, but very much enjoyed, had a good time down here, and I
look forward to coming back to visit.
I had questioned--I have been to 45 or 46 states, and I was
never sure if I could count Alabama. I drove through a corner
of Alabama once. I don't think I ever set foot in the State
before. But I will be back here, and I want to thank everyone
here, and our witnesses, for being here today.
My last question is the importance of K-12 educators in
STEM certainly has been emphasized, so what can we do to have
better--to reward the good STEM educators, to encourage more
good people to come in and be STEM educators in K-12? I mean,
that is a big question that we have out here. What really can
we do to make that possible?
I think Dr. Wright may want to start, and then we will hear
what anyone else has to say on that.
Mr. Partynski. Well, I will start because I don't have a
vested interest in education because I am in industry, but we
all have a vested interest in education as a Nation.
The challenge I see for educators is continuously shrinking
budgets. One of the things that I find perplexing is we have
mandated requirements without funding which drives educational
institutions to cut programs, to cut things that they used to
do in teaching in order to meet those requirements.
And so again, it boils down to available funding, and I
think most educational institutions and communities are
underfunded at this point. I think if we provided them adequate
funding, they would really excel at what they do.
Dr. Wright. Hear, hear.
I think the other issue is you have got to attract good
people, but then once you have good people, you have got to
sustain their training. So we have great teachers on staff, but
we need the funding for current technology so that they can
integrate the current technology and stay abreast of what has
happened, and that is the biggest challenge that we have, is we
want them in the classroom teaching, but how do we keep them
trained in current technologies and industry standards.
So partnering with business and industry for our teachers'
sake so that they can get into business and industry and find
out what industry standards are is a real need because I think,
again, we need to invest in those people that we currently
have, in addition to attracting others. We have a bright,
bright teaching force here in Madison City, but there is still
that constant problem of how do you keep them current, how do
you keep them current.
So repositories of information that they can go to to
learn, which could be developed at the federal level or the
State level, and then obviously the money to be able to help
them with their training. Online and Web resources are so great
now, but finding enough time and giving them opportunities to
do that is a challenge.
So I think we have got to train and retrain the people that
we do have, in addition to attracting the new folks.
Dr. Altenkirch. I think, too, on the training or education
side, it is important to realize that if you are going to teach
a subject, you have to know where it is going to lead you. So,
for example, for people who teach algebra, they have to know
much more than algebra because they have to know where algebra
is going to take you. Algebra is not an end in and of itself. I
am not convinced that all of the STEM teachers in the classroom
have that sort of perspective or that education or training
that is beyond what they are teaching, and I think that is very
important. Otherwise, everything seems so compartmentalized and
so much of an end in and of itself that you can't see the big
picture, and working in industry, you have to be able to
integrate all these things on large-scale projects.
Mr. Lipinski. Anyone else? Dr. Beck?
Dr. Beck. I personally went to school in mathematics from
the baccalaureate degree to the doctorate with scholarships,
and had it not been for those programs at that time, which is
post-Sputnik, I probably wouldn't have been able to complete
those degrees.
So I say that to say that we really do need scholarship
money for STEM students. We have a grant right now at the
college, a $450,000 grant for four years, but we could probably
use three times that much to recruit the good students into the
STEM fields. The good students can choose any field because
they are capable, but the scholarship funds will influence them
and encourage them into the STEM fields.
Then beyond that, the graduate scholarships to train
teachers to teach mathematics so that they indeed do have
training well above the skills that they are teaching in the
high schools. And then second, the information about
professional development. Even after they are trained and get
their degrees, they must continue to be updated in their fields
to be fine teachers.
Dr. Lamb. Just to round out the panel, I think we have to
find ways to reduce the barriers between individuals in
industry who are into education and individuals in education to
understand the concepts from industry.
So you have heard bits and pieces of that already. We want
to recruit individuals from our STEM industries to come into
the classroom, but we put an enormous number of educational
barriers in front of them. Certainly I am not saying that you
should be able to take someone straight out of industry and
plop them right in the middle of a classroom, but there are a
number of incredible challenges, both financial and in terms of
their time and their required course work, that right now stand
in their way that cause many of them to pause before they
decide they want to go into education.
And on the flip side, I think we have to find ways for
industry and for non-profits to learn to package information
about real-world applications in ways that classroom teachers
can grasp them, so that the algebra teacher understands how
algebra gets used in a host of other ways, and so that the
biology teacher who got his or her degree 20 years ago is able
to be updated on all the new discoveries and how this is
important and how this links back to the careers.
It is about reducing the boundaries and about increasing
the communication between both sides of that equation.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you. I thank all our witnesses here
today, and I also just want to--I should have said this at the
beginning, but I think this shows that there are critical
issues that are facing our country, and I believe we need to
work together, and we showed here today we are Democrat and
Republican, we are not fighting, we are working together, and I
want to thank Mo Brooks for, as he took this position as Chair
of the Subcommittee, being willing to do that, and it is a
pleasure to work with him as we work together to try to solve,
do what we can to try to solve some of these big problems.
Chairman Brooks. I would like to thank all the witnesses
for your valuable testimony and insight, and Congressman
Lipinski for his participation and questions. I would also like
to thank Bob Jones High School and the City of Madison for
being such wonderful hosts for this Congressional hearing in
the Fifth Congressional District of Alabama, which could very
well be one of the first, if not the first, in the Tennessee
Valley, certainly the first in the City of Madison.
I also want to thank our Committee staff and my
Congressional staff. They had some hard choices to make, as you
can see from this panel, some excellent individuals. We have an
abundance of talent in the Tennessee Valley that we could have
selected here in order to glean the insight and expertise.
There are so many different folks. It could have been people
from NASA and the Marshall Space Flight Center, any of our
national defense commands, any other entities that are in the
private sector. It could have been the Space and Rocket Center,
Side Quest, non-profits, you name it.
But the panel that we have representing K-12 and the
community colleges and higher institutions, four-year colleges
on the one hand, industry and then hybrid research and industry
on the other, I think that was a good combination, given the
issues that we face with STEM nationally and what we have to do
to make sure that America continues to be number one in STEM
education, which, in turn, has made us number one in
exceptionalism.
The Members of the Subcommittee may have additional
questions for any one of you, and we will ask you to respond to
those in writing, not just the two that came but others who are
on the Committee. The record will remain open for two weeks for
additional comments from the Members.
Chairman Brooks. The witnesses are excused, and this
hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] 78481.053



