- ENERGY CRITICAL ELEMENTS: IDENTIFYING RESEARCH NEEDS AND STRATEGIC PRIORITIES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ENERGY CRITICAL ELEMENTS:
IDENTIFYING RESEARCH NEEDS AND
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
ENVIRONMENT

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 7, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-56

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

72-167 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2012

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
Tennessee                        FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       VACANCY
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Energy and Environment

HON. ANDY HARRIS, Maryland, Chair
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               PAUL D. TONKO, New York
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               ZOE LOFGREN, California
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              JERRY McNERNEY, California
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,
Tennessee
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Wednesday, December 7, 2011

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Andy Harris, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    19
Written Statement............................................    20

Statement by Representative Brad Miller, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    20
Written Statement............................................    22

Witnesses:

The Honorable David Sandalow, Assistant Secretary for Policy and
International Affairs, Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    24
Written Statement............................................    25

Dr. Derek Scissors, Research Fellow, Heritage Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    28
Written Statement............................................    31

Dr. Robert Jaffe, Jane and Otto Morningstar Professor of Physics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    39
Written Statement............................................    41

Dr. Karl Gschneidner, Senior Materials Scientist, Ames National
Laboratory
Oral Statement...............................................    46
Written Statement............................................    48

Mr. Luka Erceg, President and CEO, Simbol Materials
Oral Statement...............................................    51
Written Statement............................................    53

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

The Honorable David Sandalow, Assistant Secretary for Policy and
International Affairs, Department of Energy....................    76

Dr. Derek Scissors, Research Fellow, Heritage Foundation.........    86

Dr. Robert Jaffe, Jane and Otto Morningstar Professor of Physics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology..........................    88

Dr. Karl Gschneidner, Senior Materials Scientist, Ames National
Laboratory.....................................................    89

Mr. Luka Erceg, President and CEO, Simbol Materials..............    90

ENERGY CRITICAL ELEMENTS:
IDENTIFYING RESEARCH NEEDS AND
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES

----------

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 7, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy and Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy
Harris [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. Good morning. The Subcommittee on Energy
and Environment will come to order.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``Energy Critical
Elements: Identifying Research Needs and Strategic
Priorities.'' In front of you are packets containing the
written testimony, biographies and Truth in Testimony
disclosures for today's witness panel. I now recognize myself
for five minutes for an opening statement.
Good morning, and welcome to today's hearing. The purpose
of this hearing is to examine the importance of and issues
surrounding energy-critical elements, particularly as they
relate to the government's role in supporting research and
development.
Energy-critical elements are elements, including rare
earths, which are of increasing importance to energy-related
technology areas from high-performance magnets to photovoltaic
solar cells to next generation batteries and fuel cells. They
are also important to high-tech applications such as computers
and cell phones and key defense uses such as jet engines and
weapons systems.
While energy-critical elements encompass a broader set of
elements beyond just rare earths, the growing demand for rare
earths amidst a volatile market warrants particular attention
and concern. China currently produces 97 percent of the global
supply of rare earths. This is a result of a deliberate and
decades-long strategy to develop its geologic reserves,
undercut market price and drive out competition. The strategy
succeeded, and China has recently reduced export quotas and
increased levies on exported rare earth oxides in an attempt to
exploit its position and manipulate the market. As a result,
the rare earth marketplace of the last two years has suffered
from instability, wild price swings, and uncertain supplies.
There are indications, however, that price spikes resulting
from China's behavior have triggered positive market
developments. In light of higher prices, producers in the
United States and ally nations have announced plans to develop
rare earth reserves around the world, and companies such as
Toyota and General Electric are pursuing demand reductions
through R&D on recycling, substitute materials and increased
use efficiencies. This led one investor analyst to conclude
that ``the principal customer for rare earth metals is a global
automotive industry using rare earth permanent magnets. That
industry will engineer this stuff out.''
While a responsive market will continue to drive toward
solutions, there are reasonable and proper steps the Federal
Government can and should pursue in this area. I believe
Representative Hultgren's Energy Critical Elements Advancement
Act sets forth the appropriate structure and direction to this
end.
For example, a national resource assessment of potential
geologic reserves would deliver key information to the market
and benefit both producers and consumers of energy-critical
elements. With respect to R&D, focusing federal efforts in
basic material science and chemistry related to energy-critical
elements will complement private sector efforts and enable
accelerated innovations. By focusing limited taxpayer resources
on basic science research, we can secure the greatest return on
investment, while avoiding the common problem of picking
technology winners and losers.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today on these
and other policy issues related to this important topic.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Harris follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chairman Andy Harris
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the importance of and
issues surrounding Energy Critical Elements, particularly as they
relate to the government's role in supporting research and development.
Energy Critical Elements are elements, including rare earths, which are
of increasing importance to energy-related technology areas from high-
performance magnets to photovoltaic solar cells to next generation
batteries and fuel cells. They are also important to high-tech
applications such as computers and cell phones and key defense uses
such as jet engines and weapons systems.
While energy critical elements encompass a broader set of elements
beyond just rare earths, the growing demand for rare earths amidst a
volatile market warrants particular attention and concern.
China currently produces 97% of the global supply of rare earths.
This is a result of a deliberate and decades-long strategy to develop
its geologic reserves, undercut market price and drive out competition.
The strategy succeeded, and China has recently reduced export quotas
and increased levies on exported rare earth oxides in an attempt to
exploit its position and manipulate the market. As a result, the rare
earth marketplace of the last two years has suffered from instability,
wild price swings, and uncertain supplies.
There are indications, however, that price spikes resulting from
China's behavior have triggered positive market developments. In light
of higher prices, producers in the U.S. and ally nations have announced
plans to develop rare earth reserves around the world and companies
such as Toyota and General Electric are pursuing demand reductions
through R&D on recycling, substitute materials and increased use
efficiencies. This led one investor analyst to conclude that, ``the
principal customer for rare-earth metals is a global automotive
industry using rare earth permanent magnets. That industry will
engineer this stuff out.''
While a responsive market will continue to drive toward solutions,
there are reasonable and proper steps the federal government can and
should pursue in this area. I believe Representative Hultgren's
``Energy Critical Elements Advancement Act'' sets forth the appropriate
structure and direction to this end.
For example, a national resource assessment of potential geologic
reserves would deliver key information to the market and benefit both
producers and consumers of energy critical elements. With respect to
R&D, focusing Federal efforts in basic materials science and chemistry
related to energy critical elements will complement private sector
efforts and enable accelerated innovations. By focusing limited
taxpayer resources on basic science research, we can secure the
greatest return on investment, while avoiding the common problem of
picking technology winners and losers.

Chairman Harris. I yield back the balance of my time and
recognize Mr. Miller for his opening statement.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank you for
calling this hearing.
When the Committee first looked at shortages in rare earths
in 2010, we had hearings in the Subcommittee on Investigations
and Oversight, which I then chaired, we were concerned because
China had made it very clear that they would use their monopoly
supply position to manipulate markets, to capture manufacturing
jobs and extract excessive profit from a world that was just
then discovering the critical nature of rare earth elements.
We wrote a bill that established the Office of Science and
Technology Policy as the center for an interagency process
designed to establish a continuing research effort. We wanted
to ensure that our country and our employers and our consumers
would not be held hostage by the Chinese government's
manipulation of rare earth markets. The Department of Energy
was also an important part of the response with
responsibilities for research and for producing a new
generation of experts who could contribute to work in this
area.
That bill was introduced by my then-Vice Chair, Kathy
Dahlkemper from Pennsylvania. It was marked up in Committee. It
was passed by the House with 332 votes, obviously a bipartisan
vote. And in this Congress, I have introduced that bill again,
the bill introduced by Kathy Dahlkemper, with minor changes,
and I hope that the Committee can take this matter up and
consider that bill as well as Mr. Hultgren's and we can move
forward in time for Senate action.
As I said, I am not the only member with a bill in this
Congress or even on this Committee. My colleague, our colleague
from Illinois, Mr. Hultgren, also has a bill, and there are
some broad areas of agreement between us. We both put DOE at
the center of a research effort. His bill is stronger than mine
in its definition of critical materials and I prefer his
language on that point. But my bill has some advantages as
well, for example, its assignment of interagency responsibility
to OSTP. I strongly believe that we would work out a compromise
bill on an issue that affects every American and does not
appear to straddle any of the many partisan fault lines in
American politics. Surely neither party would want our leading
frenemy to have a stranglehold on materials critical to our
national security and to our economy.
I am glad that we are having this hearing, but I am
surprised it has taken so long.
If we don't act, it may not matter in the short run. The
Obama Administration deserves credit for quick and effective
steps to establish an interagency planning and coordination
process. They have also asked the Department of Energy to look
aggressively at steps it can take to spur research and support
emerging American supplies of critical materials. I am
confident that the President, Dr. Holdren, and Secretary Chu
are doing all they can in this area.
But my concern is what happens moving forward. Our
government is sometimes quite good at responding to a sudden
crisis. What we need is an ability to keep watch on critical
materials, anticipate problems and create policies that head
off rather than respond to a crisis only after it is upon us. I
think that both Mr. Hultgren and I agree on this, though we
structure the authorities for standing watch somewhat
differently.
And there is ample evidence of market failure here. The
argument that the market is working is based on the fact that
prices for various rare earths have dropped, but we have seen
that before. In the 1990s, prices dropped because the Chinese
government was controlling its production and setting global
prices to drive competitors, and the price rose because the
Chinese government began to exploit the monopoly it had gained
by pricing out competitors and then immediately drove prices up
and used that stranglehold on supplies to coerce manufacturers
who needed the materials to set up their manufacturing in
China.
Even if current price drops were not mainly the result of a
global recession, there is no reason to think that if we are
not smart about how we support those industries, the Chinese
government won't just make the same moves all over again. To
believe that markets can work, when the greatest player in a
particular industry is a hybrid Communist-capitalist state, a
mixture of command and a market economy, is to cling to
ideology in the face of ample evidence that it just ain't so.
I hope we can all work together to move a bill in this
area. This Committee now has no bills that have been passed the
House. Zero. None. And for this Committee, that is
unprecedented. I encourage the majority to consider working on
a bipartisan bill on critical materials as a strong candidate
for markup and for being the first bill that this Committee
gets passed by the House.
I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member Brad Miller
I want to thank the Chairman for calling this hearing. When the
Committee first looked at shortages in rare earths in 2010 we were
concerned because China had made it plain that they would use their
monopoly supply position to manipulate markets, capture manufacturing
jobs and extract excessive profit from a world that was newly
discovering the critical nature of rare earth elements.
We wrote a bill that established the Office of Science and
Technology Policy as the center of an interagency process designed to
establish a continuing research effort. We wanted to ensure that our
country and our employers and our consumers could not be held hostage
by the Chinese government's manipulation of markets. The Department of
Energy was also an important part of the response with responsibilities
for research and for producing a new generation of experts who could
contribute to work in this area.
That bill, introduced by my then-Vice Chair, Kathy Dahlkemper, was
marked up in Committee and passed by the House with 332 bipartisan
votes in support. In this Congress, I have introduced that bill again,
with minor changes, and I hope that the Committee can take this matter
up and move it forward again in time for Senate action.
I am not the only Member with a bill in this Congress or even on
this Committee. My colleague from Illinois, Mr. Hultgren, also has a
bill. There are some broad areas of agreement between us. We both put
DOE at the center of a research effort. His bill is stronger than mine
in its definition of critical materials and I prefer his language on
that. However, my bill has some advantages, for example, in its
assignment of interagency responsibility to OSTP. I strongly believe
that we could work out a compromise bill on an issue that affects every
American and does not appear to straddle any of the many partisan fault
lines in American politics. Surely neither party would allow our
leading frenemy to have a stranglehold on materials critical to our
national security and to our economy. I am glad we are having this
hearing, but I am surprised it has been so long in coming.
If we don't act, it may not matter in the short run. The Obama
Administration deserves credit for the quick and effective steps it has
taken for establishing an interagency planning and coordination
process. They have also asked the Department of Energy to look
aggressively at steps it can take to spur research and support emerging
American supplies of critical materials. I am confident that the
President, Dr. Holdren, and Secretary Chu are doing all they can in
this area.
However, my concern is what happens going forward. Our government
is sometimes quite good at responding to a sudden crisis. What we need
is an ability to keep watch on critical materials, anticipate problems
and create policies that head those off rather than respond to a crisis
only after it is upon us. I think that both Mr. Hultgren and I agree on
this, though we structure the authorities for standing watch somewhat
differently.
And there is ample evidence of market failure here. The argument
that the market is working is based on the fact that prices for several
rare earths have dropped. Of course we have seen prices drop before. In
the 1990s the prices dropped because the Chinese government was
controlling its production and setting global prices in such a way as
to drive competitors out of business. And then the price rose because
the Chinese government began to exploit its monopoly position to drive
prices up and use its strangle-hold on supplies to coerce manufacturers
who needed these resources to set up their manufacturing in China.
Even if the current price drops were not mainly the result of the
global recession, there is no reason to think that if we are not smart
about how we support these industries the Chinese government won't just
make the same moves all over again. To believe that markets can work,
when the biggest player in a particular industry is a hybrid Communist-
capitalist state, is to cling to ideology in the face of ample evidence
that it just ain't so.
I hope we can all work together to move a bill in this area. I
would just close by noting that this Committee currently has zero bills
that have been passed by the House. Zero. None. For this Committee,
that is unprecedented for the first session of a Congress, at least
going back to Chairman Roe. I would encourage the Majority to consider
a bipartisan bill on critical materials as a strong first candidate for
markup and passage on the floor of the House.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Miller, and I
assure you that in the tradition of the Science Committee that
we look forward to working with you and the minority on
crafting a bipartisan deal to deal with this very important
issue.
If there are members who wish to submit additional opening
statements, your statements will be added to the record at this
point.
At this time I would like to introduce our witness panel.
Our first witness today is the Hon. David Sandalow, Assistant
Secretary for Policy and International Affairs for the
Department of Energy. Prior to being confirmed as Assistant
Secretary, he was an Energy and Environment Scholar and a
Senior Fellow in the Foreign Policy Studies Program of the
Brookings Institution as well as the Energy and Climate Change
Working Group Chair at the Clinton Global Initiative.
Our next witness is Dr. Derek Scissors, Research Fellow at
the Heritage Foundation. Dr. Scissors is also an Adjunct
Professor at George Washington University, where he teaches a
course on the Chinese economy. Before joining Heritage in
August 2008, Dr. Scissors was an Economist at Intelligence
Research with a specialty in Chinese economics.
Our third witness today is Dr. Robert Jaffe, Jane and Otto
Morningstar Professor of Physics at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology. He is a fellow of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science and the American Physical Society,
where he chairs the energy and environment subcommittee of the
APS Panel on Public Affairs. In 2010 to 2011, Professor Jaffe
chaired a study, ``Energy Critical Elements: Securing Materials
for Emerging Technologies,'' jointly sponsored by the APS and
the Materials Research Society.
Our fourth witness is Dr. Karl Gschneidner, Senior
Materials Scientist at Ames National Laboratory. He is
considered the world's foremost authority of rare earth
science, technology, application and utilization. He has
published over 488 papers in peer-reviewed journals, holds 15
patents, and given 303 invited presentations.
Our final witness today is Mr. Luka Erceg, President and
CEO of Simbol Materials. Prior to founding Simbol Materials,
Mr. Erceg worked in the oil and gas industry. He brings 12
years of transaction advisory experience, predominantly in the
energy and energy technology sectors.
Thank you all for appearing before the Subcommittee today.
As our witnesses should know, spoken testimony is limited to
five minutes each after which the members of the Committee will
have five minutes each to ask questions.
I now recognize our first witness, the Hon. David Sandalow,
Assistant Secretary for Policy and International Affairs at the
Department of Energy.

STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID SANDALOW,

ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR POLICY AND

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS, DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Hon. Sandalow. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Ranking Member Miller and members of the Subcommittee. I
appreciate the opportunity to testify today. I would like to
take the opportunity to speak about critical materials and the
work that the Department of Energy is doing on this topic.
Earlier this year, I visited the Mountain Pass Mine in
southern California. I was impressed by the facility and its
potential to provide a domestic source of rare earth metals.
According to the mine's owners, the mine will have a production
capacity of about 19,000 tons of rare earths by the end of 2012
and 40,000 tons by early 2014 using modern technologies at a
globally competitive cost. That is an important step in the
right direction.
Now, the issue of critical materials is important and needs
priority attention in the months and years ahead. The
Department of Energy shares the goal of establishing a stable,
sustainable and domestic supply of critical minerals, and we
look forward to discussions with the Congress on ways to
address this issue as we move forward.
Last year, the Department of Energy released its first
Critical Materials Strategy. The report found that four clean
energy technologies--wind turbines, electric vehicles,
photovoltaic cells and fluorescent lighting--use materials at
risk of supply disruptions in the next five years. In the
report, five rare earth elements--dysprosium, neodymium,
terbium, europium and yttrium--as well as indium, were assessed
as most critical in the short term, and for this purpose,
criticality was a measure that combined importance to the clean
energy economy and the risk of supply disruption.
Now, our 2010 Critical Materials Strategy highlighted three
pillars to address the challenges associated with critical
materials in the clean energy economy. First, substitutes must
be developed. Second, recycling, reuse and more efficient use
can significantly lower global demand. And third, diversified
global supply chains are essential, and within diversified
global supply chains, domestic sources are the most important.
With all three of these approaches, we must consider all
stages of the supply chain from environmentally sound material
extraction to purification and processing, the manufacture of
chemicals and components, and ultimately end uses.
Now, DOE's research and development with respect to
critical materials aligns with these three pillars of our
strategy. In the past year, the department has increased its
R&D investment in magnet, motor and generator substitutes
focused on reducing the rare earth usage in these applications.
In September of this year, the department's Advanced
Research Projects Agency for Energy, known as ARPA-E, announced
funding in a 36-month program for 14 early-stage technology
alternatives that reduce or eliminate the dependence on rare
earth materials by developing substitutes in two key areas:
electric vehicle motors and wind-generators. DOE's Vehicle
Technologies and wind energy programs have also issued relevant
funding opportunity announcements this year.
These activities build on DOE's longstanding expertise on
these topics. For example, our Office of Basic Energy Sciences
has funded research at Ames Laboratory on the production of
high-quality rare earth magnets, magnetic technology, synthesis
technologies and superconductors for many years.
Now, an important point: R&D is also an excellent route
toward developing the next generation of human capital and
technical knowledge required for a sustainable rare earth
supply chain. To succeed in the global marketplace, we need to
develop not only our mines but also our minds.
Developing expertise in these areas depends in part on
private and public sector research support. The research
programs supported by DOE and other organizations provide
valuable opportunities for post-docs, for graduate students,
for mid-career scientists and more.
This month, DOE will issue its 2011 Critical Materials
Strategy. In that report, DOE will update its analysis in light
of rapidly changing market conditions. DOE will also report on
the results of our analysis on rare earth elements in petroleum
refineries and other applications not addressed in last year's
report. Our 2011 Critical Materials Strategy will include
updated criticality assessments and market analyses to assist
in addressing critical materials challenges, and it will also
include the R&D plan that we have discussed.
Now, I want to stress that DOE's work is closely
coordinated with other federal agencies and, as mentioned, the
White House Office of Science and Technology Policy leads an
interagency effort on critical materials within the
Administration. The Administration is currently reviewing H.R.
2090, and DOE has no comments on the specific content of this
bill at this time but we share the goal of improving
assessments and supporting a research agenda for materials
critical to our future energy economy, and we look forward to
discussing with Congress ways to address any issues as we move
forward.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sandalow follows:]
Prepared Statement of The Hon. David Sandalow, Assistant Secretary for
Policy and International Affairs, Department Of Energy
Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. The
Administration is currently reviewing H.R. 2090 and has no specific
comments on it at this time, but I would like to take this opportunity
to speak about the critical minerals that underpin the transition to a
clean energy economy and the Department of Energy's (DOE) ongoing work
on this topic.
Earlier this year I visited the Mountain Pass Mine in southern
California. I was impressed by the facility and its potential to
provide a domestic source of rare earth metals. According to the
owners, the mine will have a production capacity of about 19,000 tons
of rare earths by end of 2012 and 40,000 tons by early 2014, using
modern technologies at a globally competitive cost. That's an important
step in the right direction.
The issue of critical minerals is important and needs priority
attention in the months and years ahead. The Department shares the goal
of establishing a stable, sustainable and domestic supply of critical
minerals, and we look forward to discussions with the Congress on ways
to address this issue as we move forward.

GLOBAL CLEAN ENERGY ECONOMY

The world is on the cusp of a clean energy revolution. Here in the
United States, we are making historic investments in clean energy. The
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act was the largest one-time
investment in clean energy in our nation's history--more than $90
billion. At DOE, we're investing $35 billion in Recovery funds in
electric vehicles; batteries and advanced energy storage; a smarter and
more reliable electric grid; and wind and solar technologies, among
many other areas. We are aiming to double our renewable energy
generation and manufacturing capacities from 2008 to 2012. We are
working to deploy hundreds of thousands of electric vehicles and
charging infrastructure to power them, weatherize a million homes, and
help modernize our grid.
Other countries are also seizing this opportunity, and the market
for clean energy technologies is growing rapidly all over the world.
For example, over $50 billion was invested in China in clean energy
last year. They are launching programs to deploy electric cars in over
25 major cities; connecting urban centers with high-speed rail; and
building huge wind farms, ultrasupercritical advanced coal plants and
ultra-high-voltage long-distance transmission lines. India has launched
an ambitious National Solar Mission, with the goal of reaching 20
gigawatts of installed solar capacity by 2020. And Japan is introducing
feed-in tariffs to support the scale-up of electricity from renewable
sources.
In Europe, strong public policies are driving sustained investments
in clean energy. Denmark earns more than $10 billion each year in the
wind energy sector. Germany and Italy are the world's top installers of
solar photovoltaic panels, accounting for nearly three-quarters of a
technologies are growing, helping create jobs, promote economic growth
and fight climate change. These technologies will be a key part of the
transition to a clean energy future and a pillar of global economic
growth.

DOE STRATEGY

Last year, DOE released its first Critical Materials Strategy. The
report found that four clean energy technologies--wind turbines,
electric vehicles, photovoltaic cells and fluorescent lighting--use
materials at risk of supply disruptions in the next five years. In the
report, five rare earth elements (dysprosium, neodymium, terbium,
europium and yttrium), as well as indium, were assessed as most
critical in the short term. For this purpose, ``criticality'' was a
measure that combined importance to the clean energy economy and the
risk of supply disruption.
The 2010 Critical Materials Strategy highlighted three pillars to
address the challenges associated with critical materials in the clean
energy economy. First, substitutes must be developed. Research and
entrepreneurial activity leading to material and technology substitutes
improves flexibility to meet the material demands of the clean energy
economy. Second, recycling, reuse and more efficient use can
significantly lower global demand for newly extracted materials.
Research into recycling processes coupled with well-designed policies
will help make recycling economically viable over time. Finally,
diversified global supply chains are essential. To manage supply risk,
multiple sources of material are required. This means encouraging other
nations to expedite alternative supplies and exploring other potential
sources of material in addition to facilitating environmentally sound
extraction and processing here in the chain: from environmentally-sound
material extraction to purification and processing, the manufacture of
chemicals and components, and ultimately end uses.
DOE's research and development (R&D) with respect to critical
materials is aligned to the three pillars of the DOE strategy:
diversifying supply, developing substitutes and improving recycling.
R&D is not the primary mechanism to encourage supply diversification.
However, environmentally sound separation and processing innovations
will require research and development. R&D plays a more central role in
developing substitutes, which represents a large share of the current
critical materials R&D portfolio. R&D challenges can also help to
improve recycling and reuse. Across the three pillars, there is also
the need for fundamental research--developing the modeling, measurement
and characterization capability that is the basis for future
innovations. Systems level engineering approaches--which would help
inform R&D priorities apply throughout the supply chain. As DOE is
ramping up its work in this area, critical materials R&D is integrated
with other research objectives that are focused on clean-energy
technologies or fundamentals. DOE's R&D plan is informing an
interagency R&D roadmapping effort led by OSTP.
In the past year, the Department has increased its R&D investment
in magnet, motor and generator substitutes, focused on reducing the
rare earth usage in these applications. In September of this year, the
Department's Advanced Research Projects Agency--Energy (ARPA-E)
announced funding in a 36-month program for 14 early-stage technology
alternatives that reduce or eliminate the dependence on rare earth
materials by developing substitutes in two Energy Programs have also
issued relevant Funding Opportunity Announcements this year.
In batteries and photovoltaic materials, DOE has historically
supported broad technology portfolios including those that incorporate
abundant materials. Investments in these core competency areas have
continued. This diversity of materials makes over-reliance on
particular materials less likely.
Moving forward, additional R&D opportunities are present in:
separations and processing; substitution for critical materials in
phosphors for lighting; and recycling. DOE is already taking the first
steps in this direction. The FY 2012 DOE Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) solicitation has several topics relevant to Rare Earth
Elements (REE)--specifically improving separation and processing.
Anticipated R&D could support the first steps toward improving
separation and processing technologies.
These activities build on DOE's longstanding expertise on these
topics. For example, the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES) has
funded research at Ames Laboratory on the production of high quality
rare earth magnets, magnetic technologies, synthesis technologies and
superconductors for a number of years. The Office of Energy Efficiency
and Renewable Energy (EERE) has funded several projects at Ames
Laboratory and Oak Ridge National Laboratory addressing alternate
magnet and motor designs.
R&D is also an excellent route toward developing the next
generation of human capital and technical knowledge required for a
sustainable rare earth supply chain. Developing expertise in these
areas depends, in part, on private-and public-sector research support.
The research programs supported by DOE and other organizations provide
valuable opportunities for post-doctoral researchers and graduate
students. They can also incentivize mid-career scientists in related
disciplines to develop research programs which are relevant to critical
materials. R&D funding not only supports innovation in clean energy
technology, it also enables the development of the next generation of
scientists and engineers.
DOE will issue its 2011 Critical Materials Strategy this month. In
that report, DOE will update its analysis in light of rapidly-changing
market conditions. DOE will also report on the results of our analysis
on rare earth elements in petroleum refineries and other applications
not addressed in last year's report. The 2011 Critical Materials
Strategy will include updated criticality assessments and market
analyses to assist in addressing critical materials challenges. It will
also include the R&D plan described above.
In support of this year's analysis, DOE issued a Request for
Information that focused on critical material content of certain
technologies, supply chains, research, education and workforce
training, emerging technologies, recycling opportunities, and mine
permitting. We received nearly 500 pages of responses from 30
organizations, including manufacturers, miners, universities, and
national laboratories. Many organizations shared proprietary data on
material usage that will help us develop a clearer picture of current
and future market conditions.
Managing supply chain risks is by no means simple. At DOE, we focus
on the research and development angle. From our perspective, we must
think broadly about addressing the supply chain in our R&D investments,
from extraction of materials through product manufacture and eventual
recycling. It is also important to think about multiple technology
options, rather than picking winners and losers. We work with other
Federal agencies to address other issues, such as trade, labor and
workforce, and environmental impacts. The White House Office of Science
and Technology Policy has been convening an interagency effort on
critical materials and their supply chains.
The Administration is currently reviewing H.R. 2090, and the DOE
has no comments on the specific content of this bill at this time. We
share the goal of improving assessments and supporting a research
agenda for materials critical to our future energy economy. We look
forward to discussions with the Congress on ways to address any issues
as we move forward.

CONCLUSION

One lesson we have learned through experience is that supply
constraints aren't static. As a society, we have dealt with these types
of issues before, mainly through smart policy and R&D investments that
reinforced efficient market mechanisms. We can and will do so again.
Strategies for addressing shortages of strategic resources are
available, if we act wisely. Not every one of these strategies will
work every time. But taken together, they offer a set of approaches we
should consider, as appropriate, whenever potential shortages of
natural resources loom on the horizon.
So in conclusion, there's no reason to panic but every reason to be
smart and serious as we plan for growing global demand for products
that contain critical minerals. The United States intends to be a world
leader in clean energy technologies. Toward that end, we are shaping
the policies and approaches to help prevent disruptions in supply of
the materials needed for those technologies. This will involve careful
and collaborative policy development. We will rely on the creative
genius and entrepreneurial ingenuity of the business community to meet
an emerging market demand in a competitive fashion. With focused
attention, working together we can meet these challenges.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize our second witness, Dr. Derek Scissors from
the Heritage Foundation.

STATEMENT OF DR. DEREK SCISSORS, RESEARCH FELLOW, HERITAGE
FOUNDATION

Dr. Scissors. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
Committee for this opportunity. I want to especially thank the
ranking member, Mr. Miller, because I am now going to skip my
whole introduction and toss out my presentation because he has
quite correctly gone to what for me is the heart of the matter,
which is how this market works. Congressman Miller and I have
points of agreement, and we have points of sharp disagreement,
and I think it would be useful for the Committee to hear those.
The points of agreement--the Congressman is absolutely
right that short-term price movements are not what we should be
looking at. Prices are going up, prices are going down. That
should not be driving our decision making. This is a long-term
issue. I would actually extend that and say that government
intervention on the basis of short-term price movements is also
a terrible idea. So when the Committee hears about how prices
are spiking and we must do something, that is not a good
argument, just like when prices are dropping, it is not like,
``okay, everything is fine, we don't have to do anything
anymore.'' That is not what we should be evaluating.
I have completely thrown out my presentation, so pardon me
for winging it here, but it is the ranking member's fault for
jumping ahead in where I was going to go.
To get to his point, it is not that we trust the Chinese. I
am going to talk a little bit about Chinese behavior in a
second. It is that markets work on their own when new firms can
enter. We are not trusting the Chinese, we are trusting the new
firms that have come in in response to higher prices. We are
not trusting the Chinese, we are trusting market clearing.
Higher prices cause demand conservation. They cause
substitution of other elements. They cause expansion of
existing production. That is what we are trusting.
Mr. Miller is exactly right about Chinese predatory
behavior. The market was created in a sense, not created, but
it was radically altered by Chinese undercutting prices, making
everything rare earth cheaper, but simultaneously driving
everyone out of the market. They then discovered right after
they drove everyone out of the market that there is an
ecological problem here and so we can't export as much as we
used to. This is just predation. There is no question about it.
So there is no disagreement that the Chinese are predatory
pricers in rare earths. The disagreement is, their market power
is temporary. The chairman quoted 97 percent of rare earth
production being Chinese. That number is probably closer to 90
now and it is dropping, and it is dropping for two reasons.
One, the Chinese are restricting their own output because they
want to charge everyone more money but also we are slowly
getting more production from everywhere else, and the market is
anticipating more production so that is what is driving prices
down.
On fundamentals, we have an issue here of where rare earths
and ECEs are located. It is a rapidly changing market. You have
to do a lot of survey work, which is exactly something Congress
should mandate. But we know that Chinese holdings of rare earth
deposits are far below their production level. That is
unsustainable. You can't produce more than you have for an
extended period. So we know the Chinese market position is
unsustainable. We know it is going to erode just on basics.
Now, that is the situation in the market. What should the
government do? I am going to start with what the government
should not do. The market is working fine. We are getting
substitute and demand. We are getting expansion and supply,
exactly what we want. That makes subsidies, government
interference immediately a bad idea. Loan guarantees are a bad
idea too. Loan guarantees cost the government less. That is
important. But the point is, they alter market conditions. They
bias the technology path. They pick out firms that shouldn't be
picked out except by competition. So the difference between
subsidies and loan guarantees is cost, which matters, but the
interference in the market is the same.
And now I am going to play my role as a Heritage Foundation
market fundamentalist and say that even applied research can be
subsidy. If applied research picks out a particular firm or
picks out a particular technology, it is acting as a subsidy.
That compromises technological dynamism and it compromises
efficiency.
So what should the government do? First, there is basic
research that the private sector cannot do at present. The
government should support that. Second, and I think all the
bills do this and they are quite correct, it is a crucial role
for the government to provide information, especially in a
rapidly changing market where some of the information is not
available to private firms. Private firms can't just go survey
global rare earth and ECE deposits around the world. The U.S.
Government has to do this, and here is another point where Mr.
Miller and I agree. This is a long-term process. We don't need
one survey. We need a long-term process where the government is
providing needed information to market participants in a
reliable and consistent fashion down the road so they know what
is coming and they can operate accordingly. And the third thing
the government might do is beyond my area of expertise but I
will just throw it out there. Because this market is working
properly, extending the market will bring a commercial return.
That involves opening federal land to ECE exploration. I know
there are many factors. I am not arguing for that. I am just
saying it will bring a commercial return to do so, and the
Committee will have to decide on those other factors.
Finally, I have a closing point to make. Thirty-five years
ago, the supply of strategic minerals was threatened by
conflict in southern Africa and apparent monopolization by a
non-market economy, the Soviet Union. The private sector
created rare earths as the response. When you are touting the
importance of rare earths, you are touting the importance of
private sector innovation. Now, as then, the market worked and
we should let it work again. I am sorry for going ten seconds
over.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Scissors follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Derek Scissors, Research Fellow, Heritage
Foundation

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. That is okay. Thank you very, very much.
I now recognize our third witnesses, Dr. Robert Jaffe of
MIT.

DR. ROBERT JAFFE, JANE AND OTTO MORNINGSTAR

PROFESSOR OF PHYSICS,

MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Dr. Jaffe. Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, thank
you for the opportunity to testify today.
As Mr. Harris mentioned, I recently chaired a study of
energy-critical elements sponsored by the American Physical
Society and the Material Research Society. Today I will
highlight a few of our key findings and recommendations.
Despite calls to the contrary, the sky is not falling. We
will not run out of any chemical element any time soon.
Nevertheless, the problem of availability of certain key
elements is serious and very real. While rare earths are the
flavor of the month, or perhaps the flavor of last month, a
host of other elements are poised to present problems in the
future. We are in this for the long term.
If appropriate steps aren't taken, we may face disruptive
short-term constraints on supply of some elements that are not
presently mined or refined or traded in large quantities but
are critical to the deployment of potentially game-changing
technologies. Casualties might range from important petroleum
refinery catalysts to state-of-the-art wind turbines.
Constraints on the availability of ECEs would limit the
competitiveness of both U.S. industries and the domestic
scientific enterprise, disrupting both innovation and
investment.
I describe five types of constraints in my written
testimony. Let me mention just two now. First are geopolitical
constraints. Some ECEs exist only in one or two large or rich
deposits in the world which are not in the United States. In
other cases, economic or political forces have allowed one or
few countries with particularly rich or abundant ECE resources
to manipulate the market, as we have just heard.
A second constraint is the risk associated with joint
production. Some ECEs are only recovered as byproducts in
extraction of more common metals. While they are in low demand,
these ECEs may be abnormally cheap only to become far more
expensive when byproduct production is exhausted.
The study I chaired recommends a comprehensive approach to
the ECE problem based on information, research and recycling.
It is our view that with careful stewardship by the government
coupled with the imagination of fundamental research and the
initiative of U.S. Government, the problem of ECEs can be
managed for the foreseeable future.
In developing our recommendations, we took a lesson from
industry. General Electric had for many years tracked the
market for an exceptionally rare metal, rhenium, which is
critical to its advanced turbines in modern natural gas-fired
power plants. In 2005, GE predicted a demand for rhenium that
would soon outpace worldwide supply. Instead of stockpiling, GE
reduced its immediate need for new rhenium by a wide-ranging
recycling program and a multi-year research program aimed at
developing an alternative alloy. By 2010, they had found,
tested and certified several low-rhenium alloys. Meanwhile, the
price of rhenium had jumped tenfold to over $10,000 a kilogram.
GE succeeded, but smaller U.S. companies, universities and
national labs, one, don't have the information-gathering
network needed to recognize an impending supply disruption;
two, can't afford to carry out substitutional research; and
three, can't engage in extensive recycling. Consequently, in
general, we recommend the following:
First, the government should gather, analyze, and
disseminate information on ECEs across the lifecycle supply
chain including resources, production, use, trade, disposal and
recycling. Accurate information about availability will allow
scientists, entrepreneurs and investors to see beyond the price
spikes and plan for the future.
Second, the government should promote fundamental research
aimed at the twin goals of increasing supplies and decreasing
our dependence on ECEs. It is especially important to support
fundamental research on earth-abundant substitutes for ECEs.
Third, cell phones and iPods end up discarded at the back
of sock drawers, yet often they contain ECEs in concentrations
that exceed all but the richest ores. We need to develop
technology and awareness to promote recycling of these elements
that are often and truly more precious than gold. Here again,
both government and industry have a role to play. I believe our
report's recommendations can be implemented with a budget-
limited approach that respects the distinction between
activities that belong in the private sector and those that
fall to government.
You have asked me to comment on the Energy Critical
Elements Advancement Act of 2011 introduced by Representative
Hultgren. The Hultgren bill, which shares many features with
Mr. Miller's bill, has provisions on the full triad that we
recommend: information, research and recycling. It also
reflects our view that these important actions can be addressed
in a budget-limited or, in some cases, a budget-neutral manner.
The Hultgren bill recognizes the need for careful stewardship
by the government without unnecessary overreach. It couples the
imagination of fundamental research and the initiative of U.S.
industry so that the problem of ECE availability can be managed
for the foreseeable future.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to testify, and
sorry for running over.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jaffe follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Robert Jaffe, Jane and Otto Morningstar
Professor of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Harris. No, thank you, Dr. Jaffe.
I now recognize our fourth witness, Dr. Karl Gschneidner of
the Ames National Laboratory.

STATEMENT OF DR. KARL GSCHNEIDNER, SENIOR MATERIALS SCIENTIST,
AMES NATIONAL LABORATORY

Dr. Gschneidner. Thank you very much for giving me the
opportunity to speak this morning in testimony. I also want to
thank the Hon. Mr. Harris and the Hon. Mr. Miller for the very
nice introduction to my talk. I can probably cut out half of
it, but I won't. And also, the other speakers were a very nice
preface.
The rare earth elements comprising scandium, yttrium and
the 15 lanthanides are vitally critical to both our military
and energy securities. In the military sector, all of our
weapons systems are especially dependent on rare earths, and
permanent magnets, which are utilized in electric motors,
computers, guidance systems, etc., sensors, capacitors,
resistors, phosphors for optical displays, lasers, aircraft
engines, communication devices such as filters, tuners, phase
shifters, radar antenna and optical devices, camera lenses and
fiber.
In the energy sector, we are especially dependent on rare
earths in permanent magnets for electric motors, cars, trucks,
wind turbines, nickel-metal-hydride batteries, petroleum
refining catalysts, fluorescent and LED lighting, oxygen and
electrical sensors to control combustion in automobiles, to
improve fuel consumption and reduce pollution, and high-
temperature alloys for turbines for generating electricity.
The Ames Laboratory has a long tradition of research on
rare earth-related elements going back to World War II when
Ames Laboratory developed a low-cost process for preparing
uranium metal for the first atomic nuclear fusion reactor in
Chicago. Subsequently, they developed the ion exchange process
for separating and purifying the rare earth elements which is
still utilized today to produce the highest purity individual
elements. They also contributed together with other Department
of Energy laboratories to commercialize the liquid-liquid
solvent extraction process, which is used today for separating
the rare earths on a large scale.
From 1950 through the 1970s, the Ames Laboratory scientists
prepared high-purity metals and studied the magnetic, physical
and chemical properties, discovered many new compounds and
measured their fundamental properties. Much of this new
information contributed to the eventual discovery of the
lanthanum nickel hydrogen battery, the giant magnetorestrictive
material, Terfenol-D, and the samarium-cobalt neodymium-iron
permanent magnets.
Currently, most of the research on rare earth carried out
at the Ames Laboratory is funded by the U.S. Department of
Energy's Office of Basic Energy Sciences, BES, some lesser
support from the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, EERE,
and Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy, ARPA-E. Other
research is supported by CRADAs and work for industry.
The BES research involves both experimental and theoretical
studies on novel materials, which is the giant magnetocaloric
effect, colossal magnetoresistance and giant magnetorestriction
and also correlated electron systems. The ARPA-E and the EERE
research includes studies on the anisotropic sintered permanent
magnets for automobile traction motors. Rare earth CRADA and
work for industry efforts include magnetic refrigeration
materials, recycling and development of low-cost processes for
making metal.
Most of the critical needs in the future research for us
are: One, improving high-temperature magnetic strength of the
neodymium iron-boron permanent magnets. Two, new host materials
for phosphors and reduced amounts of europium and terbium
activators for most efficient lighting. Three, designing of
recycling processes recovering the metallic elements without
converting them to chemicals and then back to metals and
improving recovery techniques for rare earth phosphors. Four,
improve the effectiveness of rare earths and stabilize zeolite
cracking catalysts and designing new catalysts and catalytic
processes for bond cleavage and bond formation of hydrocarbons.
And five, a more vigorous investment in new advanced energy
technology including fuel cells and magnetic refrigeration.
These goals cannot be accomplished without replacing the
rare earth intellectual capital. It is imperative to educate
and train the next generation of engineers, scientists and
technical managers. This can be best accomplished through the
National Research Center for Rare Earths and Energy
established. Finally, our country will fail if we do not
rebuild the rare earth industry especially beyond mining.
Thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to
testify on this vitally critical topic.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Gschneidner follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Karl Gschneidner, Senior Materials Scientist,
Ames National Laboratory

Introduction

The rare earth elements, comprising of scandium (Sc), yttrium (Y),
and the lanthanides [the most important ones regarding this theme are:
lanthanum (La), cerium (Ce), praseodymium (Pr), neodymium (Nd),
samarium (Sm), europium (Eu), gadolinium (Gd), terbium (Tb), dysprosium
(Dy), erbium (Er), ytterbium (Yb), and lutetium (Lu)], are vitally
critical to both our military and energy securities.
In the military sector, all of our weapon systems are especially
dependent on: Nd, Pr, Sm and Dy in permanent magnets which are utilized
in electric motors, computers, guidance systems, etc.; Y, Ce, and Nd in
sensors, electronic materials, e.g. capacitors, resistors; Y, La, Nd,
Eu, Tb, and Dy in phosphors for optical displays and lasers, etc.; Y
and Gd in aircraft engines and turbines; Y and Gd in communication
devices such as filters, tuners, phase shifters, radar antennas; and Y,
La, Gd, and Lu in optical devices, camera lenses, fiber optics.
In the energy sector: Nd, Pr, Sm, and Dy are used in permanent
magnets for electric motors (cars, trucks, wind turbines); La and
mischmetal in nickel-metal-hydride batteries; Ce, La, and mixed rare
earths in petroleum refining catalysts; Y, Ce, Eu, Tb, and Dy in
fluorescent and LED lighting; Y, Ce, and Nd in oxygen and electrical
sensors to control combustion in automobiles to improve the
efficiencies of fuel consumption and reduce the environmental
pollution; Y, La, and Ce in high temperature alloys for turbines for
generating electricity; and Gd as a nuclear reactor moderator.

Rare Earth Research at the Ames Laboratory

History

The Ames Laboratory has a long tradition of research on the rare
earth related elements, going back to World War II when the Ames
Laboratory developed a low cost process for preparing uranium (U) metal
for the first atomic nuclear fusion reactor in Chicago. The process is
still being used today. The Ames Laboratory also supplied two tons of U
(1/3 of the fuel needed) for the reactor to be self sustaining.
Subsequently scientists at the Ames Laboratory developed the ion
exchange process for separating and purifying the rare earth elements,
which is still utilized today to produce the highest purity individual
elements. They also contributed together with other Department of
Energy laboratories to the commercialization of the liquid-liquid
solvent extraction processes which are used today for separating the
rare earth elements on a large scale; tens of thousands of tons per
year per mine, or about 140,000 tons in 2010 worldwide, 90% coming from
China. In the late 1940s to early 1950s Ames Laboratory scientists
developed processes for making pure rare earths by the metallothermic
process, and during the 1950s through 1970s developed new processes for
purifying the metals from 99 to 99.99 wt.% pure by casting, zoning,
sublimination, distillation and solid state electrolysis methods.
During this same period they studied the fundamental properties of the
elementary metals--magnetic, electrical, thermal, elastic, mechanical,
chemical, etc.--and prepared and discovered many new intermetallic,
inorganic and organic compounds. Much of this new information
contributed to the eventual discovery of the electrical properties of
the LaNi5Hx battery electrode; the magnetic behaviors of Terfenol-D
(Tb0.3Dy0.7Fe1.9) a giant magnetostrictive material; the magnetically
very strong Sm
2
Co
17
, SmCo
5
,
Nd
2
Fe
14
B and Pr
2
Fe
14
B
permanent magnets; and the electrical conductivity of yttria-stabilized
zirconia (Zr
1-x
Y
x
)O
2
electrical
sensors. One of the co-discoverers of the Nd2Fe14B permanent magnets
carried out his Ph.D. graduate research at the Ames Laboratory.
Analytical chemists devised new schemes, techniques and procedures
for analyzing the purity of individual rare earth elements for other
rare earths, and also non-rare earth impurities. Modifications of these
methods are still utilized today.

Current Research Activities

Most of the research on rare earth carried out at the Ames
Laboratory is funded by the U.S. Department of Energy through the
Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES), with some lesser support from
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE), and Advanced Research
Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E). Other research is supported by CRADAs
(Cooperative Research and Development Agreements) and work for
industry.
The BES research includes several projects (7) and these are as
follows. (1) Extraordinary Responsive Magnetic Rare Earth Materials,
such as R
5
(Si
1
-xGex)
4
,
RAl
2
, and RCo
2
, which exhibit unusual magnetic,
electric, thermal, and elastic behaviors when stimulated by external
changes of temperature, applied magnetic fields, or pressure. These
include the giant magnetocaloric effect, colossal magnetoresistance and
giant magnetostriction (Pecharsky and Gschneidner). (2) Novel Materials
Preparation and Processing Methodologies research includes
quasicrystals (Cd
84
Yb
16
), RFeAsO
1-x

superconductors (polycrystalline and single crystals), reactive metal
crystal growth (GdNi)(Lograsso, McCallum, Anderson and Jones). (3) Work
in the Innovative and Complex Metal-Rich Materials Project has a small
rare earth component, which includes (R,M)-M'X giant multiply
endohedral clusters (Miller and Corbett). (4) Complex States, Emergent
Phenomena and Superconductivity in Intermetallic and Metal-like
Compounds research involves correlated electron systems (Yb-based
materials), superconductors (RNi
2
B
2
C, RFeAsO),
and ferromagnets (Nd
2
Fe
14
B, CeAgSb
2
)
(Canfield and Prozorov). (5) Research in the Correlations and
Competition between Lattice, Electrons and Magnetism Project involves
X-ray and neutron scattering of various materials including
Gd
5
(Si
2-x
Gex)
4
,
RNi
2
B
2
C, GdBiPt, and RFeAsO (McQueeney, Kreyssig,
Goldman). (6) The Magnetic Materials Discovery research on
LaNi
2
Ge
2
and LaNi
2
P
2

mixtures, RV
4
O
8
, and EuM
2
Sb
2

(M = Pd, Rh) was carried out in this Project by David Johnston. (7) In
addition to these experimental efforts there is a considerable amount
of theoretical work going on overlapping several of the condensed
matter physics research projects tying this research together (Harmon,
Duane Johnson).
The EERE-Vehicle Technologies research project includes studies of
anisotropic bonded and sintered R
2
Fe
14
B
(R=Nd+Y+Dy) permanent magnets with high temperature stability for
automotive traction motors with little or no Dy content. Also this
research was expanded to include scientists and engineers from
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, University of Maryland, Brown
University, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and Arnold Magnetic
Technologies to enable a fully coupled theoretical and experimental
effort to develop non-rare-earth magnets for advanced traction motors
(Anderson, McCallum, Kramer).
There is one funded ARPA-E project which involves developing high
energy permanent magnets for hybrid vehicles and alternative energy.
The lead organization for this effort is the University of Delaware
(G.C. Hadjipanayis). The Ames Laboratory's research is headed by
McCallum.
A new ARPA-E project on Ce-based permanent magnets for automotive
traction motors was funded to begin in FY2012. The Ames Laboratory is
the lead organization and there are three industrial partners--Molycorp
Minerals, General Motors and Nova Torque. McCallum is the lead project
manager and is joined by his Ames Laboratory colleagues Antropov,
Gschneidner, Johnson, Kramer and Pecharsky.
CRADA rare earth related research is concerned with recycling
magnetic materials and developing new low cost processes for making
rare earth metals for various industrial uses. A work for other project
involves research on magnetic refrigerant materials.

Materials Preparation Center (MPC)

The MPC was established in the 1970s to provide high purity rare
earth metals, intermetallic compounds, inorganic compounds, alloys,
etc. to research scientists, not only at the Ames Laboratory but also
all over the world to promote and assist scientific investigations,
both basic and applied; and under certain conditions to assist the
commercialization of certain materials. In addition to supplying
polycrystalline materials, they also grow single crystals and
directional preferred oriented polycrystals of many of these materials,
and also make very high purity rare earth and related metals by
advanced metallurgical processing techniques. The MPC is a world-
renowned national resource treasure. The MPC works on a cost recovery
basis.

Future Research and Other Needs

(not just the Ames Laboratory but the entire USA)
Magnets - Nd
2
Fe
14
B

Reduce the amount of Dy

Improve the high temperature magnetic strength

Improve the processing technology

Lower cost Nd, Pr metals

Reduce the rare earth content

Non-rare earth magnets - new, improved existing ones

Phosphors

Improved, lower cost, more efficient separation
technologies

New host materials - more efficient light emitting
phosphors

Reduce amount of activators (Eu, Tb) for same lumen
output

Development of up-conversion phosphors

Production and Separation

New improved extractants and complexing reagents

Design of better separation techniques, and/or equipment

New advanced chemistries - combinational and biometric

Catalysts

Improve the effectiveness of the rare earths in
stabilizing the zeolite cracking catalysts

New catalysts and catalytic processes - for bond-cleavage
and for bond-formation of hydrocarbons

New diesel exhaust catalysts

Recycling

Design processes for recovering the metallic materials
and placing them directly in production schemes as metallic materials
without converting them to chemicals (oxides or halides), separating
the rare earths, then reducing them to the metals and finally alloying;
especially important for magnets, battery and metallic alloying agents.

Better recovery techniques for rare earth phosphors from
CFC (compact fluorescent lamps), long tubes, color TVs and monitors,
color display units

Design phosphor applications for reusing recycled, but
unseparated rare earth phosphors

Recovery of rare earths from cracking catalysts,
especially the heavy lanthanides Tb and Dy

Develop value-based lifecycle models

Sustainability

Improve manufacturing efficiency--reduce waste.

Design end-of-life products to easily recover the rare
earth materials

Develop green chemistry and environmentally friendly
processing technologies

New Advanced Energy Technologies

Fuel cells

Magnetic refrigeration

Rare-earth Information Center (RIC)

Re-establish RIC to help promote rare earth research and
technology, and commercialization of these elements via the RIC News
and RIC Insight, respectively, the quarterly and monthly RIC
newsletters; and answering information inquiries.

Rebuilding the Rare-Earth Industry Beyond Mining

Loan guarantees for small mining companies, producers of
intermediate products (metals, magnets, phosphors, catalysts, etc.) and
OEMs (Original Equipment Manufacturers) who manufacture hard drives,
electric motors, cell phones, i-pods, CFLs, wind turbines, sensors,
etc.

Tax incentives for same.

Replacing Rare Earth Intellectual Capital - It's Imperative to Educate
and Train the Next Generation of Engineers, Scientists and Technical
Business Managers

Requires 60 to 110 Ph.D., M.S., and B.S. degree students
per year for the next ten years

Promote rare earth courses at educational institutions--
via distance learning; semester long courses, short courses

Research projects funded by NSF, DOE, DoD, NIST

National scholarships

Establish a National Research Center of Rare Earths and
Energy
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize our final witness, Mr. Luka Erceg of Simbol
Materials.

STATEMENT OF MR. LUKA ERCEG, PRESIDENT AND CEO, SIMBOL
MATERIALS

Mr. Erceg. Good morning, Chairman Harris, Ranking Member
Miller and members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today regarding the important
legislation before you. I would also like to thank our
Congressman, Mr. McNerney, for his support and leadership on
these important issues.
My name is Luka Erceg and I am the President and CEO of
Simbol Materials, a California-based producer of critical
materials. It is exciting that this Committee has taken up
energy-critical materials, broadening the discussion to more
than just rare earth elements. Critical materials are the
backbone to U.S. innovation, supporting job creation and
competitiveness in clean technology, defense, agriculture and
many other industry segments.
Simbol is commercializing an innovative and sustainable
process to produce the critical materials lithium, manganese
and zinc domestically that are being currently produced from a
demonstration plant in California. We are permitting our first
facility, and when complete, we will, one, be the only U.S.
producer of certain manganese compounds, and two, we will
double U.S. lithium production in 2013. This will continue to
create high-value jobs.
We believe the U.S. Government can drive investment and job
creation by establishing a clear policy for critical materials
through a well-coordinated and consistent effort. Without
prescription, the definition of critical materials should be
based on strategic importance and domestic production that
supports policy objectives, ensuring consistency across all
federal agencies. Definitions of critical materials should
recognize the elemental, compound and derivative forms as
appropriate.
Lithium has been recognized as critical in the proposed
legislation. Its compounds and derivatives are a critical
component in advanced batteries for electric vehicles and other
energy storage applications. Due to a lack of domestic
production, the U.S. imports approximately 76 percent of its
lithium needs.
Manganese, however, has not been recognized as critical in
the proposed legislation, while it too supports strategic
energy and defense priorities, and the lack of U.S.-based
production is substantial. Manganese metal is essential for
producing specialty steels for defense applications and
manganese dioxide is critical to advanced batteries for
electric vehicles. The U.S. is 100 percent reliant on foreign
sources of manganese and 95 percent of the world's manganese
metal production comes from China. Two federal entities have
demonstrated the importance of manganese to U.S. policy
initiatives. The Defense Logistics Agency has classified
manganese metal as a critical material and the Department of
Commerce has protected domestic manganese dioxide production
against unfair Chinese and Australian trading practices.
The preceding illustrates that without a clear definition,
a critical element such as manganese can be inadvertently
overlooked. This demonstrates the need for clarity and policies
and definitions of critical materials across the U.S.
Government. Critical materials should not be viewed through
only an end-use lens. Critical materials themselves are an
important industry. The interagency process led by OSTP has led
to a greater focus on the whole of critical materials but work
remains and a whole of government approach is required.
Underlying a consistent policy for critical materials is
federal support for R&D, which is a powerful driver for private
investment into this important industry. Federal support in R&D
helps to de-risk new technologies coupled with commercial
sector investments that send loud market signals and encourage
follow-on investing in areas of policy interest. These signals
lead to job creation. For example, in 2009, the DOE's
Geothermal Technologies Program announced a $3 million grant to
Simbol to demonstrate its processes, building on our
relationship with the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
Following the grant announcement, Simbol raised a further $35
million in capital prior to ever receiving the first federal
grant dollar. The government's validation of Simbol sent a
clear signal to the market that stimulated commercial
investments 14 times the grant itself. With this support, we
have grown our workforce from 16 to 62 and will reach 80 or
more by yearend 2012, and we will continue job creation through
further expansion.
Small companies are the economic growth engine of America,
and as such, grant dollars and R&D support should be targeted
to small, innovative and disruptive companies, creating greater
leverage for job creation than through support of larger
corporations. When a market does not exist, government funding
can encourage the development of one. R&D also creates
opportunities for universities to train the next generation of
scientists and engineers needed to reduce the six to nine
months we are experiencing in trying to find qualified
candidates. The lack of a domestic critical materials supply
chain and industry has resulted in the erosion of our talent
pool and the departure and decline of important industries to
countries such as but not limited to China. Supporting critical
materials closes the loop on education, R&D and
commercialization in this important area, and we hope that our
testimony will help you improve upon the important legislation
before you.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Erceg follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mr. Luka Erceg, President and CEO, Simbol
Materials
Chairman Harris, Ranking Member Miller, and Members of the
Subcommittee, my name is Luka Erceg, and I am the President and CEO of
Simbol Materials. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today about
research needs and priorities related to critical materials.
Simbol is commercializing innovative, sustainable processes for the
domestic production of lithium (Li), manganese (Mn) and zinc (Zn). We
currently operate a demonstration plant in the Salton Sea region of
California, where we co-produce minerals from geothermal brines at an
existing geothermal power plant. Following power production, we
``borrow'' the brine for about 90 minutes to selectively extract the
targeted minerals. The brine is then re-injected into the ground. This
process has a smaller environmental footprint and cost profile than any
other method for producing these materials.
We anticipate groundbreaking of our initial commercial lithium
plant in the spring of 2012. Each full-scale lithium facility will
produce approximately 16,000 tons per year of lithium carbonate
equivalent, and 19,000 tons per year of manganese metal. Each of
Simbol's lithium plants will increase global supply by approximately
10-15% over today's production volumes. There is sufficient capacity in
the Salton Sea region to construct several facilities.

A domestic supply chain for critical materials will spur domestic
manufacturing and innovation

While the development of a domestic supply chain for critical
materials will reduce the risk of supply disruption and mitigate
exposure to price spikes, the greatest benefit of developing a domestic
supply chain is bolstering our nation's competitive position in
innovative industrial sectors.
At every point in a supply chain, manufacturing drives innovation.
As a supply chain lengthens, each step is strengthened through industry
collaboration--which creates a more competitive overall domestic
industry. In the case of electric vehicles and grid storage
applications, critical materials are the cornerstone of the supply
chain. It is important to realize that production processes to convert
raw materials to usable products for downstream markets are highly
technology-intensive. At Simbol, we have approximately 9 PhDs and 4 MS
degrees on staff (representing about 25% of our current workforce)--all
with backgrounds in chemical engineering, electrochemistry and
chemistry. Our growth to date and future hiring is almost exclusively
in the areas of skilled trades and technical functions. Our scientists
and engineers are consistently finding innovative ways to improve the
quality of materials and to develop the next generation of products.
We believe that further domestic innovation in critical materials
will drive workforce growth throughout our entire industry. Because
domestic production of these materials largely ended in the 1970s,
today it is inordinately difficult to hire individuals with experience
in Mn and Li processing. In fact, it is taking us up to nine months to
find qualified candidates for key positions at Simbol. This is a direct
result of the absence of university programs: no U.S. universities
offer geothermal energy degrees. While DOE has been making targeted
investments in university coursework, in order to jump-start
significant growth in this sector, strong university programs are an
imperative. We believe that market growth in the production and
processing of critical materials will lead to increased training of
students in these fields, and subsequent technology advancements
through our university system.

Federal research and development funding drives private sector
investment in critical materials

We strongly support legislative initiatives to develop research,
development and deployment activities for critical materials. These
programs will jump-start the development of a domestic supply chain for
clean energy, defense and other strategic sectors in the face of
aggressive policy and financial support for entrenched foreign
producers.
The establishment of a new industry is inherently risky, and
requires a concerted effort by both the public and private sectors. We
believe that federal support for basic research remains essential to
advancing America's position in the clean energy economy. The Advanced
Research Project Agency - Energy (ARPA-E) plays a critical role in
driving cutting-edge, game-changing technologies. The Department of
Energy (DOE) and other federal agencies play an important function in
supporting R&D efforts to develop and demonstrate technologies that
lower operating costs, allow access to new resources, and improve
quality and environmental performance.
Federal R&D support that assists the private sector--including
small businesses like Simbol Materials--in de-risking innovative
technologies, when coupled with commercial sector investments, send
loud signals to the market that encourage follow-on investment. In the
critical materials space, these federal R&D commitments are power
drivers of private investment, and directly support the development of
a competitive domestic supply chain for next generation energy and
defense technologies.
For example, in 2009, DOE's Geothermal Technologies Program (GTP)
announced its intent to award Simbol a $3 million grant to demonstrate
its processes for the competitive production of lithium, manganese and
zinc chemicals for energy storage applications. Since being awarded the
grant, we have grown our workforce from 16 to 62, and will reach
approximately 80 by the end of next year. We also have leveraged those
federal funds to raise approximately $43 million in further capital.
The majority of these funds were committed prior to the actual delivery
of the first grant dollar, demonstrating the investment signal provided
by the government's technology validation.

Financing risk remains the greatest barrier to commercialization of
critical materials production and processing facilities

While basic R&D support is essential to restoring U.S. leadership
in mineral production technology, the federal government also has a
critical role in helping overcome commercialization risk. While Simbol
has been highly successful in raising private capital, the investment
required for a full-scale plant is significant. Private investors
require a demonstrated market for our product, but the reality is
that--at least here in the U.S.--we are selling into a nascent
industry. While growth projections for advanced batteries (and
associated Li and Mn consumption) are high, investors continue to hold
back, awaiting the emergence of downstream industry consumption for
electric vehicles and grid storage. Furthermore, the absence of a
federal strategy for the development of supply chains to support
priority policy areas causes confusion in the marketplace regarding the
importance of critical materials.
Federal support for commercialization will help us bridge this so-
called ``valley of death.'' In the same way that our GTP grant
attracted an initial round of private capital, we anticipate that
federal commercialization assistance would stimulate private investment
for the full-scale production facility. It is important to note that
mineral production facilities do not qualify for assistance under
existing commercialization programs. For example, neither the Section
1703 loan guarantee program nor the Section 48(c) advanced energy
manufacturing tax credit reaches sufficiently far back in the supply
chain to support mineral production or processing activities. Current
legislative proposals would be strengthened by adding provisions to
expand eligibility.

Absence of policy clarity stunts private investment in critical
materials.

The United States does not have a national policy on critical
materials. Even the R&D investments we are discussing today are not
explicitly focused on critical materials. Instead, nascent critical
materials policies and investments are packaged in disparate programs
and agencies based on end use technology. Let me give you two examples.
First, Simbol received our DOE grant--not because we are helping build
a domestic critical materials supply chain--but because we offer
benefits to geothermal power production. On the other hand, we were
excluded from consideration for a loan under the DOE Advanced
Technology Vehicle Manufacturing Program because we could not prove
that our lithium would be used only for electric vehicle batteries.
This stove-piped focus on end use technology conceals the important
critical materials policy efforts being undertaken in different parts
of the DOE.
This issue magnifies itself across the federal agencies. Different
agencies approach critical materials from different end use
perspectives, often resulting in divergent perspectives on criticality.
Let me give you an example from Simbol's vantage point. By any
objective measure, both Li and Mn should be considered ``critical.'' As
is the case with rare earth metals, this designation is not due to
scarcity in global supply, but rather due to the lack of U.S.
production. Li is an essential component of advanced batteries for
electric vehicle and grid storage applications. The U.S. is
approximately 76% import dependent on Li, with most global production
from salt flat evaporation in South America and growing supply in
China. While some government studies--including the Department of
Energy's 2010 critical materials strategy--have labeled lithium as
``critical,'' other assessments have not included it.
Electrolytic manganese metal (EMM) is a fundamental input for
specialty steels for defense and commercial applications, and Mn
dioxide increasingly is emerging as one of the leading metal components
for electric vehicle battery cathode powders. The U.S. is 100% import
dependent on foreign sources of manganese ore, as well as electrolytic
manganese metal--95% of which is produced in China. Signaling U.S.
concern with foreign production and trade patterns, the U.S. issued
anti-dumping orders penalizing Chinese and Australian Mn producers.
Despite this, Mn was not included in DOE's 2010 strategy, although in
April of this year the Defense Logistics Agency identified it as one of
the Department of Defense's top ten shortfall materials.
These examples are not intended to serve as a criticism, but rather
as a demonstration of the need for clarity across the U.S. government
in defining what makes a material ``critical.''
This lack of consistency and policy clarity has stunted private
sector investment. In the absence of a clear, consistent signal that
the U.S. government is committed to developing domestic critical
materials resources, private investors place their money elsewhere. On
November 21, Reuters reported that Beijing plans to dedicate $1.7
trillion to ``strategic sectors'' over the next five years. This builds
on the $500 billion in Chinese public and private investment in lithium
production since 2000. Similarly, South Korea announced approximately
$300 million in public dollars for lithium production, and the Japanese
government has been providing substantial public dollars through
various loan guarantee and grant programs for lithium and other
critical materials. In every instance, government involvement has led
to substantial investment by private industry in the critical materials
sector.

A coordinated critical materials effort is needed across the Executive
Branch.

We recognize and applaud the Obama Administration for taking a
focused approach to critical materials issues. The interagency working
group led by the Office of Science and Technology Policy has been
effective in bringing diverse agencies together to consider these
issues. Efforts like the ``Materials Genome Initiative'' have placed
high-level attention on materials science. Important activities are
taking place at individual agencies, including DOE, where Mr.
Sandalow's team is doing excellent work in developing and updating a
critical materials strategy for energy production. But these efforts
should be coordinated through federal policies and programs that are
responsive to market conditions and support domestic critical materials
production regardless of end use.

Critical materials policy recommendations

We applaud Representative Hultgren and other members of this
Committee for introducing legislation focused on the development of
critical materials. Given the urgent need for clear policy signals, and
the commitment to this issue on both sides of the aisle and the
Capitol, it is our hope that critical materials legislation can be
advanced this Congress. As the various proposals continue to move
through the legislative process, I urge you to consider the following
policy recommendations:

Establish whole-of-government critical materials policy:
Current initiatives are scattered at various agencies and masked within
programs focused on end-use technologies. It is essential to formalize
and improve coordination efforts to create a whole-of-government
critical materials policy agenda.

Utilize self-classifying definitions: Rather than
stipulating a list of qualifying materials or delegating broadly to
federal agencies, we recommend a self-classifying definition, which
could be based on 1) use of specific materials in industries that
support strategic or policy priorities and 2) the level of U.S.
production and processing. Such a definition should apply across the
entire federal government. This will ensure that the government is not
picking winners and losers at a given moment in time, but rather
structuring programs based on the realities of the rapidly changing
global marketplace. A straightforward, clear definition will
immediately communicate to the market that designated materials are
critical to U.S. policy goals. This will rapidly drive private
investment to strategic federal priorities.

Invest in materials science going back to the beginning
of the supply chain. At every point in the supply chain, manufacturing
drives innovation. Developing a domestic supply chain for critical
materials will bolster our nation's competitive position in innovative
and industrial sectors. This also will serve as a force for rebuilding
our university programs in materials science and engineering, which
have languished since the 1970s, following the downturn in U.S.
critical materials production.

Streamline methods for licensing technology from national
laboratories. We recognize that there have been a broad set of efforts
to create a more consistent licensing process for technology
commercialization from our national laboratories. However, there
remains substantial variance within the laboratory system. We need to
advance a more effective process that gets technology out of the labs
and into the commercial sector, in order to drive technology growth and
create opportunities for further innovative research.

Small-dollar government investments in research yield
significant returns. Small businesses employ approximately 50% of the
private sector workforce in the U.S., and they are able to move
technology along the S-curve of innovation faster than other entities.
In this time of downward pressure on federal budgets, it is essential
to continue to support the small companies and innovative technologies
that drive growth throughout our economy. We believe that the federal
government will be best served by diversifying its investments and
providing small research grants to a wide variety of promising
technologies in strategic sectors. This limits the government's
exposure and enables it to serve as a catalyst for growth industries.
In Simbol's case, a $3 million federal investment leveraged
approximately $43 million in private sector financing.

Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look forward to your
questions.

Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, Mr. Erceg. I want to
thank the panel for their testimony, reminding members
Committee rules limit questioning to five minutes, and the
Chair at this point will open the round of questions. I
recognize myself for five minutes.
Mr. Sandalow, your testimony notes that, and I think you
mentioned that DOE is updating its critical materials strategy,
I think you said next month, due to ``the rapidly changing
market,'' and that is kind of the issue. Given how quickly the
market has reacted to current supply constraints, how would the
government be best positioned, because, you know, the
government isn't usually very flexible on how it works, and how
would it be best positioned to position itself with regards to
rare earths? Shouldn't its efforts be focused as has been
suggested on, you know, gathering information, doing only basic
research, not necessarily applied technology solutions and
recycling? And is that the direction you think this report is
going to go or is it going to be more expansive than has been
suggested, and I think as the bill suggests, that we focus on
information, basic research and recycling?
Hon. Sandalow. Well, thank you for your question, Mr.
Chairman. It is a very important one. And DOE's 2011 Critical
Materials Strategy will be released this month, and in that
report, we have analyzed about 16 critical materials. We have
looked at their role in the clean energy economy and we have
looked at supply over the years ahead, and we have criticality
assessments. We are updating the announcement that we did last
year, and we hope it will be informative to the community that
is working on these issues.
With respect to your question about the role of government,
I think you identified, and others have as well, some central
roles. Certainly, collecting information is central, and
government plays an extremely important role in that.
Government also plays an important role in supporting research.
I would be careful about artificial distinctions between basic
and applied research in this area. I think research across what
are sometimes called technology readiness levels of different
numbers are important, and I would just highlight one example
in a different area along these lines.
In the 1980s, the Department of Energy supported work in
what was then not widely known technology called hydraulic
fracturing and horizontal drilling. It is a technology used to
extract shale gas. And it was by any definition applied
research that the Department of Energy was doing, partnering
with companies in order to further develop this technology.
Well, that work was picked up by companies and today we have a
shale gas revolution here in the United States, which is
revolutionizing our power markets and is spreading around the
world. So I don't think we would have wanted to be limited at
that time by any artificial distinction. I think we should be
careful of it now. So I think government's role there is
important.
There is one other principle I want to highlight in terms
of government's work on this, since you asked about it, Mr.
Chairman, is interagency coordination. I am keenly aware
sitting at the Department of Energy that we only work on a part
of this issue, the critical materials issue. So it is very
important that we coordinate across the Federal Government. We
are doing that now within the Administration led by OSTP.
Chairman Harris. No, I appreciate that, you know, since you
mentioned hydraulic fracturing, which is kind of a favorite
topic for the Committee at some times. You know, the problem is
that, you know, when you go again to applied technology, then
you do pick winners and losers, and right now the Department of
Energy and the Environmental Protection Agency are picking
hydraulic fracturing as a loser. They are not doing innovative
research in it, even though it is one of the most promising,
and I guess that is my problem with that.
But Mr. Erceg, you know, you bring up an important point.
Obviously, there is the imprimatur of somebody having like the
Federal Government agency having reviewed a proposal and said
yeah, this has merit, is obviously important. But your point
that, you know, you even made the point that the government
grant was for $3 million for your company but it leveraged into
$42 million of private capital, venture capital, I take it.
Obviously, that means that the venture capitalists weren't
looking at the government's investment per se, the $3 million,
because that is a drop in the bucket compared to what it is
going to cost to develop your technology, but merely the fact
it had been reviewed and it was felt to be a useful,
potentially useful process, and I think your process was more
along the lines of applied technology and the basic research
similar to Solyndra was applied technology, not basic research.
Is in fact the importance of what the government can do as
reviewing these proposals and the amount of dollars to it is
maybe not as important, that it has gone through a third-party
outside, you know, substantive review?
Mr. Erceg. Thank you, Chairman Harris. I certainly would
agree with that. If you look at the history of Simbol, when we
were seeking our first round of funding, there were in fact
next to no private industry experts in this field, and that
actually led us to senior scientists at the Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory, and so what you actually had was a
confluence of activities. What we saw was government was
deciding that electric vehicles was one of the key policy
initiatives for the Department of Energy to pursue that. In
addition to that, Department of Energy has been a long-term
supporter of geothermal technologies programs. You know, we
have had a decline in the availability of technical talent in
this country in these areas. In fact, you know, all the
investment that has gone on through the last couple of years
has been to build a U.S. industry around electric vehicles. We
have had a decline in addition to that in technical talent for
geothermal. So when it came time to validate the approach the
technologies that we were doing, the DOE had a very, very
important role. The geothermal side of the DOE was able to
essentially say yes, this has a lot of benefit to geothermal
producers, not every one of them but certainly it has a benefit
to promote geothermal investment and development, and then
secondarily coupled with the policy initiative that producing
these materials from a brine could satisfy other important
policy areas as well, that $3 million became an enormous signal
to the market that this was an area that government and the
United States was committed to.
Chairman Harris. And again, because you seem to suggest at
the beginning of your answer, it is not as much the value of
the dollars but that a collection of experts had looked at it
and said this is valuable?
Mr. Erceg. That is correct.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. Thank you. I think Dr. Scissors and I agree
that government should not rush to solve problems that the
market will solve on its own. I think we differ on how long we
are willing to wait for that to happen. A source that I know is
not revered at Heritage said that in the long run, we are all
dead, and in this case, I think waiting for the market to solve
its own problem will be a very long wait when there are massive
barriers to entry, massive investment required to compete with
the Chinese, who we know will use predatory pricing, have in
the past, will again, and have very deep pockets to wait out
any potential competitors.
Dr. Jaffe, I was struck by your using the term
``fundamental research.'' It appeared to me that you were
trying to skate over that distinction between basic and
applied, wanting to avoid that argument. It appears that we
do--there is some picking of winners and losers about what
research is done, what research is funded by the majority. The
losers are called applied, the winners are called basic. There
is not a clear distinction. There is no bell that goes off when
basic research crosses over into applied, and it appears that
most of what we are talking here would meet the usual
definitions of applied and yet it seems that most of us think
we need to do it.
Is there a useful distinction there? What should the
distinction be between what kind of research in this area we
support and what isn't? If you say let us not do basic--let us
not do applied but let us do basic, what is your definition?
How are you defining that? Let us start with you, Dr. Jaffe.
Which is fundamental research is applied, which of your
fundamental research is basic?
Dr. Jaffe. Thank you for the question. I think we did
choose that word ``fundamental'' quite carefully. There are
picking of winners and losers when any research task is
presented, whether it is at the very basic level or at the
applied level. The distinction that seems most meaningful to me
is time scale. It seems that private enterprise shies away from
making investments in research that have very long payoff time
scales, and that--those kinds of efforts usually fall to
government or foundation-sponsored research, whether it is in
the area of very abstract research like I do or whether it is
in the more practical areas of research like recycling or
lifecycle analysis.
When I listed those areas of research ranging from
characterization of resources all the way through to recycling
and resource analysis, it seems to me that that spans a
spectrum more identified by the time scale than it was by the
character of the individual investigation.
Mr. Miller. Anyone want to answer this question in 15
seconds?
Dr. Scissors. I will take a shot. It is the market view, it
is not the science view, which is when there is a single firm
or single technology, it is very difficult to see how you are
not moving--a firm, not a research center--how you are not
moving into applied research.
Mr. Miller. Anyone else, a very quick answer? Okay.
One of the differences between the bill that I have
introduced and Mr. Hultgren's bill, and I think a weakness of
the Hultgren bill, is that it gives significant responsibility,
coordinating responsibility, to an agency that exists only by
Executive Order. So we could get statutory authority to an
agency that might not be there if this President or another
President changes that Executive Order. But everyone seems to
agree that there should be coordination between agencies. The
Department of Defense has national security needs. Department
of Energy obviously has energy needs. The Interior Department
historically has kept records in this area, has a role as well.
Who do you think should be in the position of--Dr. Holdren, I
think, I said in June that OSTP was taking the lead in
coordinating across agencies. What--Mr. Sandalow, perhaps you
could start. What agency do you think should have that
coordinated role going forward?
Hon. Sandalow. Well, thank you for the question,
Congressman. I am not in a position to comment on the specifics
of legislation and the different proposals that are out there,
but just two thoughts in response to your question. First,
today, the Office of Science and Technology Policy is
coordinating our work within the Executive Branch, and that is
working very well. They are convening regular meetings on this,
making sure that the different experts are talking to each
other and that policy is coordinated. And I guess I would just
add, you know, more broadly, from looking--I have had the
opportunity in the past week or so to look at the different
bills that are out there, and I think, as someone said, we have
about 10 or 12 bills, and I see in those bills a lot more
similarities than I see differences. And so this may be an
opportunity where different sides can come together and really
enact something that would be good for the American people,
good for American business and move us forward in this--on this
topic.
Mr. Miller. Dr. Gschneidner, you testified before the I&O
Subcommittee in 2010, just last year, and you emphasized the
need to attract young people to research in this area and to
build a workforce in this area. What provisions should we make
for educating a workforce in legislation or otherwise?
Dr. Gschneidner. Well, as I noted in my testimony at that
time and also in the testimony today, I think a national center
for rare earth research and energy would be a very good step in
the right direction where the center would be located, as far
as rare earths are concerned, at a university which has a long
background of history, and that would be the major thing, but
there would be other satellites at other universities which
contribute their expertise which is not found in the main
thing--and I think the other thing is scholarships in addition
to stipends to attract students into this area.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I recognize the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms. Biggert.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing.
This question is for Dr. Sandalow and others if they care
to respond. Recognizing that critical materials are the
foundation for batteries and much of the focus of battery
improvement, how would you characterize critical materials from
a supply perspective as it relates to acquiring these materials
for battery production?
Hon. Sandalow. Well, thank you, Congresswoman, and let me
recognize in answer to your question the really superb cutting-
edge work done by Argonne National Laboratory in the topic you
were asking about. Argonne has really been a leader in battery
research for many years.
Last year in the Department of Energy's Critical Materials
Strategy, we identified a number of materials that are
important for batteries and assess their criticality, as we
said. We looked at lithium and concluded that lithium--there
are issues with respect to lithium supply, particularly with
lithium ion batteries. We didn't classify them as the most
critical, as one of the most critical elements in terms of
overall supply. We found that there are likely to be adequate
supplies of lithium going forward. Other batteries, nickel-
metal-hydride batteries, have other elements that are
important, and actually sitting to my left are some of the
world's experts in the chemistries of nickel-metal-hydride
batteries and so with them sitting at the table, with your
permission, we will pass the microphone to them.
Mrs. Biggert. Well, first, let me just continue with this
question and then we will do that, because, you know, obviously
Argonne is doing a lot of research on the work on batteries,
and I am always focused on taking that technology from the lab
to the marketplace. Would you consider the supply issue
critical at that point, taking it out of the labs to the
marketplace, or is it something to monitor for the time being?
Hon. Sandalow. Just maybe two pieces of that question.
First, in terms of our progress overall on batteries and
battery research, this is an extremely important area for the
U.S. transportation sector. Right now, we have electric
vehicles that are on the roads for the first time. They are
starting to make a difference and they will make a big
difference, particularly if the cost of these lithium-ion
batteries can be reduced, and research in this area is so
important for reducing our oil dependence, for reducing our
dependence on foreign oil, and it is important that we move
those batteries to the marketplace.
In doing that, we need to pay attention to the material
inputs for those batteries. Obviously, that includes lithium.
Our analysis and the analysis of others concludes that lithium
is not among those materials that is most critical in terms of
supply, that there are adequate supplies of lithium out there.
There are other materials that are important as well.
Mrs. Biggert. All right. Would somebody else like to
address that? Yes.
Mr. Erceg. Congresswoman Biggert, I would like to just
address this question of lithium supply and even the supply of
critical materials. First off, as has been noted on this panel,
we are not running out of any of these raw materials in the
earth. What we are lacking here in this country is the ability
to produce these materials and process them. That requires a
highly skilled and trained workforce. It requires research and
development. But it also requires paying attention to the
entire supply chain from how that material works its way from a
company like ours where I can assure you the technology in
producing a high-end lithium carbonate or lithium hydroxide for
use in a battery is as complex as producing a cathode power,
okay? And when you move these materials through the supply
chain, if elements of that supply chain do not exist, there are
no bonds for innovation. You lose the ability to innovate
throughout the industry, and that is, I think, what is critical
to understand is that critical materials support innovation and
we need to foster that innovation.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you.
And then Mr. Sandalow again, as our country faces the
fiscal constraints and our economy is facing some pretty strong
headwinds, we are making progress but it isn't enough, and as
such, we in the Federal Government need to do our part to
cancel or at least rein in those programs that are not
delivering the value for the money to our taxpayers, and in
terms of program management, what research and development
milestones or goals will teams competing for the critical
materials energy innovation hub need to meet so that we can
better evaluate our return on the investment?
Hon. Sandalow. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
It is extremely important, and let me note that a couple of
years ago when I had the privilege of first coming into this
job, I looked around the Department of Energy and realized that
there was no coordination across the many parts of the
Department of Energy or very little coordination with respect
to our research in this area. That is one of the reasons that
we pulled together our team within the diverse parts of the
Department of Energy to coordinate to be sure that we weren't
duplicating efforts in this area, and that internal
coordination I think has paid a lot of dividends for the
department and I hope for the taxpayers.
The exact question that you are speaking about in terms of
our R&D plan is one that we are going to be addressing more
specifically in the Critical Materials Strategy that we are
releasing this month and so if you are interested, we would be
delighted to send that up to you.
Mrs. Biggert. That would be great. I appreciate that. Thank
you.
Yield back.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Erceg, as a business from my district, I would like
to--and I am really thrilled to welcome you here today and have
you share the story of your success with us. Can you expand a
little bit on the grant you received from the Department of
Energy and how that helped you and your company create jobs?
Mr. Erceg. Certainly. Thank you, Congressman McNerney. So
we in 2009 had received a $3 million grant from the Department
of Energy's Geothermal Technologies program, and the grant had
arisen to foster the commercialization or in testing of the
extraction of materials from geothermal binds and to validate
that technology. So at the time we had 16 employees, and we had
done a lot of applied research in our own laboratory efforts,
building on some of the work and understanding that had been
gained from working with Lawrence Livermore, and then the $3
million that was granted to us was actually--actually paid for
the salaries of many of the employees that helped us run these
processes in a commercial-like environment. So we raised
additional capital, continued to invest our own capital to put
in the hard assets and equipment and then the $3 million grant
was predominantly used for the salaries necessary to operate
this facility in a 24 by 7 basis so that we could replicate and
demonstrate that the technologies had matured to a point where
you could now build a commercial-scale facility.
In addition to that, the capital has also fostered
additional R&D opportunities with universities and with
national labs where we continue to work on programs for
extracting other materials. The interesting thing is, is that
this signal also led the State of California as itself to
provide us with substantial opportunities such as matching
grant dollars and then in addition to that sales tax exemptions
that were provided for acquiring commercial-scale equipment and
building our facilities.
Mr. McNerney. Would you say that regulations have stifled
business and growth in your case or in general?
Mr. Erceg. So regulation is always tough, and I don't opine
on whether we should have regulation or not. We respect the
fact that the regulations exist and that we have to adhere to
the laws of the country. In our instance, actually regulation
had an interesting effect, is that it actually fostered more
innovation. So it actually drove us into a more sustainable
process. The net result of that was that we could be more
sustainable in the form of production that we use to produce
lithium compounds than our competitors can while at the same
time being able to compete with the lowest-cost producers. So
in that respect, it had a very positive outcome.
Our concern with regulation is just simply timing. You
know, as long as we know that there is timing transparency and
consistency, I am confident that, you know, American innovation
can adhere and be competitive.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Scissors, it seemed to me that you were saying to trust
the market and hope for the best, and, you know, I don't think
the Chinese use that model, and I bet you they are hoping that
we continue to use that model but I just can't abide with that
approach. The market is not a free market. We need some
participation and guidance from other sources than just the
market itself.
Dr. Scissors. Would you like me to reply, sir?
Mr. McNerney. I threw the first stone. Throw it back if you
want.
Dr. Scissors. Okay. It is not just trust the market and
hope for the best. Rare earths exist because of the market. You
know, we are just not hoping for something, we have evidence
that the market works. We have evidence from the beginning of
private sector innovation. We have evidence in the last year
when the Chinese, as you are absolutely right, tried to play on
the market and they failed. They haven't failed forever. I
agree with both comments.
Mr. McNerney. You said they tried to----
Dr. Scissors. They tried to drive up prices and now they
are failing. That is the whole point of trying to take over a
market so you can drive up prices and control the process and
that----
Mr. McNerney. That drove up market prices pretty
significantly.
Dr. Scissors. Absolutely, and I don't mean to imply that
because----
Mr. McNerney. They made a lot of money in the process, and
our companies have paid the price for that.
Dr. Scissors. And now they are losing a lot of money, and
my point is not that they are not going to try again. They are
going to try again. The point about whether the market works is
whether other firms can enter, whether consumers can respond,
and they can and they have. I am not relying on the Chinese to
do anything nice. I have studied the Chinese economy for 20
years. They are going to be predatory. Is it possible--I will
stop in a second, I am sorry--for market participants to
respond, and we have seen evidence that it is.
Mr. McNerney. All right. I think I will yield back.
Chairman Harris. I recognize the gentleman from--I didn't
see you sitting over there--the gentleman from California, Mr.
Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, and I am sorry, I was
here a little bit late. This is December 7th, and there is a
group of Pearl Harbor survivors downstairs who I was meeting
with, which sort of fits in with what we are talking about
today, doesn't it? The fact is that American security can be
attacked whether through economy and economic means or through
military means, and certainly what we are talking about today,
Mr. Chairman, goes directly to the security of our country
because we realize that many of the materials that we are
talking about today and the elements that are necessary to have
a modern society are at risk, and we are vulnerable to what is
a government that is the world's worst human-rights abuser,
perhaps like Pearl Harbor where the Japanese militarists at
that time were actually the greatest expansionary power along
with their Nazi allies. Today, the Chinese communist regime has
leverage over the West that it should not have, and if we are
to make sure that it does not, we have to look at this from
many different directions, and I will read your testimony, and
I appreciate--I am sorry that I was not here. I was down with
the Pearl Harbor survivors.
But just a few thoughts, and that is--and maybe your
reaction. If I am saying something repetitive, please feel free
of not commenting. But if we are to have the security we need
in these materials, we of course need research and development
that will make sure we have alternatives, but we also need to
make sure that the regulatory policies of the government will
permit our people to do what is necessary to meet the
challenge, but also we need to make sure that we have a policy
at the Bureau of Land Management and the Department of Interior
that will permit us when we have these materials available
domestically that will permit us to actually let our people to
do their job in getting us those materials and processing them.
We should take this very seriously because China is taking it
seriously, not only in manipulating the market, as the
gentleman just said, but in going around the world making
alliances with other horrendous gangster regimes, whether it is
Burma or whether it is African countries and Sudan, et cetera,
in order to have this quest of having control of these very
necessary materials for modern-type equipment.
So with that said, I just thought I would put that into the
record. Maybe some of you have any comment on that. Please feel
free. I am sorry if it was repetitive. Yes, sir.
Dr. Scissors. I will just briefly comment on your land
management issues because I brought that up quickly in my
testimony. I agree. I suspect we don't agree on everything but
I agree with you there, and I said that there is a commercial
return available. We have, in my opinion, a properly
functioning market. When you expand the size of a market, you
get wealth from that. I am not arguing to the committee that
there are no other considerations and I am not arguing that I
know a lot about those considerations. There are lots of
considerations. I just want to put it on the record that in
addition to the national security aspect that you are referring
to, there is a commercial return to expanding the land
available for ECE exploration. There may be countervailing
factors but there is a positive one to think about.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, let us just note that something as
heralded as solar energy has been dramatically hampered by the
Bureau of Land Management. I mean, it wasn't until this year
that after prodding, after years and years of putting pressure
on the Bureau of Land Management that they were willing to give
any contracts or any approvals for solar energy sites in
America's deserts. I mean, there was, I think, over 200
applications and not one of them had received an approval from
the Bureau of Land Management, and it wasn't until
Congressional pressure--I wrote the legislation and submitted
it--was exerted that they ended up permitting, and that is
something as easy to understand as putting out solar panels,
and sometimes the people who work for government will get
distracted and in this case I think it was the habitat of the
little lizards and the insects that were more important than
the well being of the American people that prevented us from
making those kind of decisions.
Let us make sure that doesn't happen in something with
these vital materials because we are not going to have the
industrial and the modern society that makes our standard of
living unless we do take care of this challenge.
Thank you very much for holding this hearing, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Harris. Thank you.
I recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Tonko.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Assistant Secretary Sandalow, I am encouraged by your
reports that efforts are underway to increase our supply of
energy-critical materials. While that is good news, especially
for some companies in my district that are manufacturing
products that require these elements, but I would ask if DOE
has responded to this barrier to retaining and expanding
manufacturing by creating--by doing more if we want firms to
manufacture, like a question to you would be, is DOE's effort
linked with a broader strategy to put the manufacturing model
and link it to these efforts, and is OSTP or the Commerce
Department part of a broader strategy to encourage domestic
manufacturing, not just a reliable supply of energy-critical
materials?
Hon. Sandalow. We are, Congressman, and thank you very much
for that important question, because U.S. manufacturing is so
vital for economic growth, for job creation, and the President
has proposed extending the manufacturing tax credit known as
48(c) and a variety of other policies that are central and
really beyond the scope of the particular issue that we are
talking about in this hearing. I know in your district there is
a company called Tonko, I believe, which is doing terrific work
in this area, and within the Department of Energy, we are
looking at this issue as part of a holistic package within the
Administration, coordinating with the Office of Science and
Technology Policy and the critical-materials aspect and other
parts of the government on manufacturing policy.
Mr. Tonko. And Dr. Jaffe, in your testimony, you suggest
there may be a significant amount of energy-critical materials
contained in discarded cell phones and other electronic
devices, things we now refer to as e-waste. Do we have
processes for collecting and recovering these materials for
recycling?
Dr. Jaffe. For some of them, yes. For others, it is a
subject of future research.
Mr. Tonko. Well, with the number of manufacturers that have
moved their facilities to China to gain access to their supply
of ECEs, do we have enough demand here to make recycling an
economically viable option?
Dr. Jaffe. At the present time, recycling couldn't possibly
satisfy the need for new supplies of these critical elements
simply because the demand is growing so rapidly, the amount in
present use is not sufficient. There are other economic puzzles
and scientific puzzles, one of them being that cell phones seem
to migrate down the economic world and end up when they are
finally discarded in countries where obtaining a stream of
recycling is very difficult.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
And Dr. Gschneidner, you provide a list of research needs
in this area. Are any of these underway at DOE or are they
being funded by the department at this time?
Dr. Gschneidner. There is some work being done at various
DOE laboratories but I don't think they are coming out of
regular projects. I mean, they are sort of diverting funds, you
might say, into that direction.
One of the problems I want to comment on, on rare earths,
is that the amount of rare earths in a cell phone is
insignificant. It is .1 weight percent, which makes recycling
very difficult. Of course, if you recycle it for the gold, the
platinum and the copper and co-mine it, that makes it move in
the direction you want to go. But as Dr. Jaffe says, a lot of
this material is being shipped overseas. The recycling problem
for the rare earths is difficult because the amount of rare
earths in most applications is pretty small except the wind
turbines, but there are not very many of them that are ready to
be recycled anyway. So it is a difficult challenge on the rare
earth side.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I recognize the gentleman from Illinois, the sponsor of
H.R. 2090 and a member of the full Committee, Mr. Hultgren.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
for letting me join the Subcommittee today.
Thank you all very much. This is a very important
discussion and I am so grateful for the important work that all
of you are doing and getting ready for the next steps that we
need to take as Members of Congress here.
I want to start with Assistant Secretary, a quick question
for you, Assistant Secretary Sandalow. I know you can't give
your opinion on my bill but I wondered if you could share your
thoughts on Dr. Jaffe's recommendations in his report.
Hon. Sandalow. Well, broadly, we think the report is a
really important contribution to the discussion here. I don't
want to comment on every specific recommendation in there but
it really is a very important piece of work. We thank Dr. Jaffe
and the whole committee that worked so hard on it.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you.
Expanding my question to the rest of you and specifically
the strategy for critical materials, kind of a long question
here, but I wonder if you could comment on this. What are your
perspectives on the December 2010 DOE Critical Materials
Strategy? Specifically, what input can you offer on the three
key points that are outlined in the report including the need
for a diversified supply chain, the development of substitutes
and increases in recycling and overall efficiency? I wondered
also if we have time if you can mention your opinion, what is
the appropriate proportion of the amount of effort expended
towards each one of these items and how might a focus on
development of substitutes and on recycling and efficiency
improvements impact the overall industry? So starting with Dr.
Scissors, I wonder if you would have some comments.
Dr. Scissors. Okay. I am going to give again the market
view as opposed to the science view, and the market view is, we
already are diversifying supply and we already are
substituting, and that is best handled by the market because
the market responds to prices and prices are what cause supply
diversification and demand substitution. If the government
orchestrates that, they are going to get it wrong. They are
going to substitute the wrong things, they are going to
diversify into the wrong things because ultimately what we are
trying to satisfy is market demand, not government demand. So
the government steps in. We are going to get a mismatch between
demand and supply.
Where I would see a government role is recycling simply
because environmental protection is part of the government
mandate. That is a public good. It is an appropriate government
role. We have heard from my colleagues challenges in this area
and make it a disincentive for the private sector to recycle
because the commercial return is low due to content and because
we are relocating our waste overseas, which is also a proper
government role. So I would stress the recycling side for the
government, not because the other two points aren't important
but because they are properly handled by the private sector.
Dr. Jaffe. If I might respond, I think there are three
different timescales involved here. The diversified supply
chain recognizes the present reality that these elements are
found all over the world and in all kinds of different
circumstances and that in order to maintain the present supply
we have to cultivate supplies wherever they occur. The research
efforts adjust over a somewhat longer time scale looking for
substitutes, looking for new ways of identifying resources. And
finally, I think the recycling efforts are an investment in the
longest term. I think the public simply doesn't appreciate the
preciousness of these materials. Many of them are literally
less abundant than gold on the surface of the earth and they
should be regarded as the same way you would regard your
discarded diamond rings or fillings from your teeth.
Dr. Gschneidner. May I make a comment? I agree with Dr.
Scissors in part in that the market situation has developed so
that the Molycorp now is a U.S. producer. They are going to
produce about 5,000 to 6,000 tons this year, 12,000 next year
and 40,000 probably by the end of 2013, beginning of 2014. The
problem is--I think that part of the problem--I said there are
three parts to the rare earth crisis, and that is the first
one. The second one and the third one, which are the most
serious ones which we need to really consider is what happens
after Molycorp mines this stuff. They are going to make metals
and then they are going to make magnets. What are we going to
do with them? Are we going to ship them back to China to make
all these things? We have to build up our infrastructure at
that point, and I think maybe at that point guaranteed loans
and tax incentives for the manufacturers that make the products
out of the magnets, out of the phosphors and so forth, and I
think we need to support.
And then the final thing, as I mentioned earlier before, is
the education. We have got to train people, and it is a long
term. It is ten years down the road before these--maybe five
plus before a Ph.D. becomes really productive. It takes four
years to get if he is lucky, and maybe five years. And so by
the time he really becomes productive, it is a long-term
investment. So we--and the government has to do that. I think
there is just no doubt about that, that we have to do that. And
we see that. It is already occurring. As a matter of fact, next
year one of my colleagues is going to be teaching a rare earth
course, a three hour credit. It is going to be distance
learning for anybody available in the whole world. And Colorado
School of Mines is also working on some of these things.
So I think things are moving but we do need some help in
certain aspects of these things down the road from the Federal
Government. Thank you.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, can I see if Mr. Erceg has any quick
comments? Do we have time?
Chairman Harris. Sure you can, and we will have a round, a
three minute round of questions follow-up if you would like,
but you can----
Mr. Hultgren. Just quickly, Mr. Erceg.
Mr. Erceg. Thank you. I would just note that diversity of
supply, substitutes and recycling form a circle, and this
circle is linked through R&D and education, and if we focus on
diversity of supplies being more than just a shovel in the
ground and that it includes processes and downstream
production, as you build those processes up, R&D and research
will continue as substitutes, but when we do get to the
question of recycling, the existence of manufacturing here in
the United States will also enable recycling, and it is very
important to not lose sight of the coordination that occurs in
the market if all elements of the supply chain exist.
Mr. Hultgren. Again, thank you all.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yield back.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much, and as I said, I know
some members have additional questions. We are going to have
just limited three minute round of questions, and I will start.
Dr. Scissors, let me ask you a question. You are kind of a
policy person. As we go to authorize these things, one thing I
personally wouldn't want to see is an authorization of
something that would lead to another Solyndra where we
authorize a program that really isn't basic research, that
really does attempt to pick a winner and loser, and isn't--you
know, the function of basic research in my mind should be not
to necessarily project exactly where things are going to go in
the future but to set open the array of options that science
and scientific development could present. How do we do that
with regards to this? How do we do this in this legislation so
that--again, you know, we have seen this with, for instance,
coal energy research where the Administration has decided, you
know, it is just going to do carbon sequestration is the
answer. Now, I will tell you what is going to happen. It is not
going to be the answer and we will have lost valuable years
where we could have done basic research on, for instance,
developing the metallurgy to develop the high-efficiency
carbon, high-efficiency coal generation facility for instance.
How do you think we do this in the legislative structure?
Dr. Scissors. My incomplete but I think valuable as part of
the answer is, you can't--you know, Solyndra. You can't involve
particular companies. You can't identify a company or a
technology. The government has to be working, if it is going to
do this, with multiple companies and multiple technologies. If
you pick one, first of all, it is at odds with the whole idea
of a competitive market. I think everybody in this room wants a
competitive market in rare earth but the government picking out
a company is immediately at odds with that.
And second, partly going back to the ranking member's
comment, you are setting up a giant target for our deep-
pocketed competitor to destroy. It is much harder to respond to
basic research and progress on a wide variety of fronts than it
is to say this is the company that is getting U.S. money. So it
is not a good tactic, you know, as somebody who works in
markets, it is not a good tactic to pick out a single company
or single technology. It is also going to end up biasing the
technological development and causing inefficiency in the
industry. So I have an incomplete answer for you but the start
of the answer is, if you are looking at one technology and one
company the government is making a mistake.
Chairman Harris. Dr. Jaffe, let me ask you, because I think
the study that you are involved in made recommendations on
that. I mean, how do we--and you noted that big companies can
do it. GE can do this on their own but it is the small
innovative companies that maybe can't. how do we protect
ourselves from placing those wrong bets?
Dr. Jaffe. Well, I frankly, I think it is impossible to
prescribe the rules of basic research in detail in legislation.
I think that creating a constituency for basic research and
then trusting the imagination and creativity of the world of
higher education, national laboratories and industry to arrive
at research topics through peer review is the way to go. But I
would still warn you that 75 percent or more of the research
activities that are undertaken now come a cropper, and the
creative part that comes from the remaining 25 may end up being
something that you didn't imagine in the first place at all.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much. I know that is true
in medical research. That is for certain.
I recognize the gentleman from New York for three minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Assistant Secretary, when DOE does respond to a
need out there for the Nation, does it look to an array of
companies, an array of technologies, or do you determine a
single source and single solution?
Hon. Sandalow. Congressman Tonko, thank you for your
question. We look at an array of companies, and this is an
important question so I am glad this Committee is talking about
it, and, you know, I would say this. Governments around the
world are deeply involved in energy markets today, and they
have been for decades, and so the people of the United States
acting through their government are standing up for their
businesses or helping their businesses succeed in the global
marketplace. That is an extremely important role. Now, as we do
that, we absolutely, as you say, Congressman, are looking at a
broad range of businesses, and the one that is here is a great
success story about creating jobs and making a difference for
Americans today using funding from the American people and
through the Federal Government.
Mr. Tonko. And to the panel at large, compared to other
commodities, how transparent is the global market and how
sensitive is this market to uncertainties and volatility?
Dr. Scissors. That is something I know a lot about. At
present, it is very sensitive and not transparent, and that is
exactly as you would expect. We have a currently dominant
producer. Even though its market share is shrinking, it is
still dominant by any measure, and the only thing they are
transparent about is bragging about their predatory pricing,
that they are going to drive people out of the market and raise
the prices. So I guess in some sense, they are providing us a
service by being so transparent. It certainly makes the WTO
case easier. But, you know, reserve--we are just at the
beginning of figuring out what we should be looking for, what
are the critical elements here. They are changing. Where are
they? You know, we see this in the United States, which is far
more transparent than China is. We don't really know where the
deposits are yet. So this is the early stages of a market, and
I would argue the market is moving very rapidly but I agree
with your point that compared to other important commodities in
energy, we don't know as much as we do elsewhere.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Erceg?
Mr. Erceg. Thank you, Congressman Tonko. You know, being a
market participant, I can tell you that in the context of
critical materials, there is very, very little transparency,
and what ends up happening is, there seems to be a fair amount
of transparency in the earliest part of the supply chain, where
are deposits, what does it cost to bring a shovel of material
out of the ground. The moment you start separating these
materials and defining them as compounds and derivatives, you
lose complete visibility into the markets. It just becomes so
clouded because the number of players becomes more and more
fragmented and reduced as you move through the various
components.
We can throw the term ``lithium'' around very, very easily
but, you know, I not being scientifically trained could bore
you for an hour with a list of compounds and derivatives that
come out of lithium and I can point to the fact that there
might be only one producer or two producers in each instance.
So it is very important that the research that goes on
sponsored by the government in terms of understanding the
markets such as what Mr. Sandalow's office is doing and goes on
at the DOD and other places because that offers us visibility
into what are our key policy initiatives and then the market
can determine, all right, well, which compounds and derivatives
are critical to meeting those components and then you can have
a market response, which is what happened in Simbol's case. But
we really have to focus on the fact that to create a
competitive economy, and a competitive response in this area,
we need more players here in the United States as well and only
in that way can we ensure that our Nation has market signals as
well.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you.
Chairman Harris. Dr. Jaffe.
Dr. Jaffe. Thank you. I just wanted to add briefly, I
certainly agree that the absence of transparent and robust
markets is a serious issue, and that was the motivation behind
our recommendation for a higher level of information gathering
and dissemination. The Energy Information Administration does a
remarkable job of gathering and making available facts about
energy from production through consumption for countries all
over the world, and we don't have any similar way of gauging
the availability and life of these materials that are becoming
so critical.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
I recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, and again, I missed
the opening here. I was down with our Pearl Harbor survivors,
so I am sorry if this is repetitive but perhaps it again fits
in with this whole idea. This is December 7th. We were attacked
at Pearl Harbor and we lost 3,000, basically 3,000 lives of our
military personnel there in Pearl Harbor and the battleship
sunk our ability to defend ourselves was immediately changed
for the worse and put us in a very desperate situation for the
first year of that war. What type of danger are we in now in
terms of these critical materials? I mean, there is not going
to be a sneak attack where bombs will be dropped but what if--
and we already know the Chinese are willing to attack us
economically. They have already tried that to a limited degree
of success and maybe long-term failure, according to our
Heritage Foundation witness.
So what danger are we in? Are we in danger of the American
people's standard of living being impacted if we don't pay
attention to this rare earth issue and what we are talking
about today? Could our economy be severely damaged and American
people's standard of living actually go down unless we do
something dramatic about this? Maybe everyone could have a
little--whoever wants to do it.
Dr. Gschneidner. May I make a comment, please, on the China
situation? The China situation has changed considerably in the
past few years, as we know, but I think a lot of things that
people don't appreciate. The Chinese economy is growing so fast
that the Chinese philosophy now is, we are not going to send
our rare earth materials, which are very precious, to the rest
of the world, we are going to keep them ourselves, as a matter
of fact, they are going to compete with us for other supplies
from other countries and so forth.
The other thing is on the Chinese situation, the ore
supplies. They have found out--you know, they had found this
one rich deposit of the heavies, which is where most of the
critical elements come from, is going to run out in five or ten
years, and they realize that, and there are no other sources in
China for this that have this rich deposit, and so that is
changing a good part of their philosophy.
The second thing is that, I have talked to--there was a
conference in Hong Kong just a couple, few weeks ago, and I was
there, and there was about 300 companies from all over the
world that had, quote, rare earth deposits. Many of them are
not. And they are looking into this business. The market forces
are moving things in this direction.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And if we don't succeed, is that----
Dr. Gschneidner. No, I think----
Mr. Rohrabacher. If we don't----
Dr. Gschneidner. If we don't succeed---
Mr. Rohrabacher. What can we face as a people and what will
we see here as a people if we do not succeed on this issue?
Dr. Gschneidner. Well, the places where we won't succeed is
we have to have these companies that come in after the mining
and the manufacturing and Molycorp comes. I think the supply
situation is going to be basically more or less solved in a
couple more years. But it is after these materials are
available that we don't have the infrastructure and the
commercial companies to do it and so we are still going to have
to depend on the Chinese.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And what will the impact be on the average
American's life?
Dr. Gschneidner. Well, it is a little bit hard to say but
you will have to put up with some other difficulties.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Maybe one of your other panelists can tell
us.
Dr. Jaffe. At a meeting preparatory for our report, we had
a Korean representative who said that the past was the Stone
Age, the Bronze Age, the Iron Age, the age of metals, and the
future is the age of the rest of the periodic table. But
looking forward to the next century, the engagement of these
other elements which we haven't paid much attention to in the
past will become pervasive in the economy. It will be
everywhere. They may play minor roles in this element, in this
object or this manufacturing process, but they are with us for
the future and we need to take a long-term viewpoint. To ask
what the individual effect on an American would be like asking
in the 18th century what the effect on Americans would be of
the absence of molybdenum, which is now a crucial ingredient in
fabricating high-performance steels. We use it everywhere.
Dr. Scissors. Well, being a resident of Washington, I will,
you know, make up stuff. After my colleagues pointed out that
there is no way to do this, I will do it anyway, but not
because I think I am right, just because we are in Washington
and that is what we do.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Educated guesses.
Dr. Scissors. Right. Just one element of context. Total
amount of rare earths that we imported from China last year was
$1.4 billion worth. We imported $2 billion of fish. This is not
a cost issue. So when you are talking about pocketbook or
coming out of Americans' pocketbooks, it is not a threat. When
you are talking about future technologies, that is a different
story, but coming out of American pocketbooks is not a threat.
By that, I mean in terms of surprise on the defense side, you
have looked at the DOD reports, I am sure. They don't see a
short-term problem. So when you are talking about what we can
do concretely for the short term, I agree with my colleague.
This is not an issue. It is not something to worry about. There
is no sneak attack that is going to cost us a lot.
We don't know about the long term, and that is where
learning more, providing more information, addressing
transparency issues, we don't want to be surprised as we were
as you referred to on December 7th.
Chairman Harris. Thank you very much.
Let me recognize the gentlelady from California.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you very much. I think this is an
important hearing, and one of the reasons among many it is
important is to let the American people know that despite the
name rare earth, the elements aren't actually rare, and this is
something that we can get ahead of except we need to get
organized to get ahead of it.
I would like to just ask a--I was at a hearing in the
Judiciary Committee, which is why I am late, and we had the
head of the FTC and the Department of Justice antitrust
division, and one of the issues that we talked about was the
interplay of patent law, which is exclusive, a grant of a
monopoly, and antitrust, which is breaking up monopolies, and I
noticed that Hitachi has refused to license its patent for
high-grade permanent magnets, and there may be other instances
where we are out of luck because of a license issue. Have we,
Mr. Sandalow, as a department consulted with DOJ and with the
FTC on whether this does in fact meet the obligations of these
patent holders not to engage in monopolistic activities?
Hon. Sandalow. I am not aware that we have, Congresswoman,
and it is something that I will follow up on. Your question
highlights an extremely important broader point and one that we
were talking about before, which is the importance of
developing intellectual capital in this area. This is not just
about mines, it is also about minds. It is about making sure
that Americans have the expertise to develop intellectual
property in this area so we have the patents in the future.
Ms. Lofgren. Yes, but if the patent is being held now by a
monopoly that refuses unreasonably to license it to the
detriment of our country as well as our industry, something can
be done about that. So if you wouldn't mind getting back to me
on your response to that, I would very much appreciate it.
Mr. Erceg, you mentioned--your testimony, as I understand
it, was that in some cases regulations can actually spur
innovation, although there needs to be transparency and the
timing does matter. Can you expound on that for me so I fully
understand your point?
Mr. Erceg. Well, thank you Congresswoman, for the question.
You know, I think it is no secret in saying that California
ranks as one of the most stringent regulatory regimes for any
type of materials-based processing, and I would just use as an
example that, you know, we were limited. The fact of natural
resources is, we don't really choose where we find them, and in
this instance, the natural resource being the salt and sea
brine is located squarely in the State of California. So we
knew that going in as a business model and understood that
there was going to be a lot of regulation as to how you work
with and process materials. Knowing that in advance, we knew
that we had to develop our processes in such a way that, one,
we could meet the needs of the regulatory authorities, but
secondarily, before we could raise investment dollars, we had
to be able to demonstrate that even with meeting those
regulatory obligations, we could be competitive in the
marketplace.
So what ended up happening was, we had, you know, a
brilliant team of scientists and engineers who represent the
applied nature and then the actual tactical nature of our
business came together and said oh, well, if we do this, this
will allow you to do X, Y and Z, and that ended up, for
instance, allowing us to reduce the CO
2
emissions
out of a geothermal power plant and reincorporate them in the
carbonation step of our plants, and that is the example I would
give as spurring innovation.
I will say that, you know, regulation ultimately affects
timing, you know, and that is a substantial concern. You know,
when we look to competitors around the world, you know, their
regulations are oftentimes more lax than ours, and I don't
propose in any regard that we should reduce the regulatory
burdens that are out there but we have to be conscious of the
impact on time and what it does in allowing a company to reach
a commercial point and built that plant going through the
number of regulatory steps necessary. So, you know, I would
just, you know, hope that we can take a balanced approach in
society on this issue.
Ms. Lofgren. If I may, Mr. Chairman, you can't breathe the
air in Beijing today. You can in San Josen. So there is a
reason for this but I think if we--if I am hearing you
correctly, if the standards are set out in advance and you can
look to them, that that is very helpful. Would that be
accurate?
Mr. Erceg. That is certainly accurate, ensuring that
especially in areas of policy initiatives, if we can provide
companies the opportunity to move rapidly through these
processes, that too could be very beneficial, and that is not--
again, that is not a statement to say that we should lower the
standard, just allow us to move through it much quicker, and as
industry participants, we will rise to the challenge and
innovation will help us.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you very much.
Chairman Harris. Thank you.
And before we adjourn, Assistant Secretary Sandalow, I
think you wanted to answer the Congressman from California, who
subsequently left, but if you want, I will give you 30 seconds
or a minute to address the issue of what if we don't.
Hon. Sandalow. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I did. I
appreciate that very much. I just wanted to say, first, it is
an important question that the Congressman was asking, I think
and I agree with much of what was said here. I think if we
don't address this set of issues, we are going to face problems
in terms of the availability of certain products, potentially
problems in terms of the cost of certain products, and problems
in terms of job creation and technology development, and those
are all important, you know, very important issues. At DOE, we
haven't done the kind of overall economic analysis, so I don't
mean to be speaking to an overall economic analysis, but there
is no question that there are serious issues here. I mainly
wanted to make the point that these are issues that we can
solve. These are issues we can address. We have done that in
the past, by pulling together, by smart policy, by the right
types of investments, by following policies like finding new
sources of supply, developing substitutes and recycling. We
have overcome challenges like that, and I believe we can do
that again.
Chairman Harris. Thank you, and I share your optimism. I
think we will have a bipartisan product of the Committee that
will address that.
I want to thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony
and the members for their questions. The members of the
Subcommittee may have additional questions for the witnesses,
and we will ask you to respond to those in writing. The record
will remain open for two weeks for additional comments from
members.
The witnesses are excused and the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:43 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by The Honorable David Sandalow,
Assistant Secretary for Policy and International Affairs,
Department of Energy

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Derek Scissors,
Research Fellow, Heritage Foundation

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

Q1.  General Electric's research begun in 2005 is often cited as an
example of a company proactively responding to potential supply
shortages for critical materials. Is there reason to believe a similar
course would not be pursued by other affected industries, such as the
automobile or wind turbine industries?

A1. This course is already being pursued. Companies such as Umicore are
altering their research paths in response to changing prices. In wind
turbines, for example, Boulder Wind Power has developed a technology
using more readily available neodymium rather than dysprosium. In
autos, Toyota and General Motors are improving induction motors that
reduce the use of critical elements. And so on.
More broadly, recall that rare earths became commercially valuable
materials in the 1970's, when GM and Sumitomo responded to supply
disruptions of then-strategic minerals. What we now consider critical
materials are not timeless and irreplaceable. Their role is the result
of powerful and long-term private sector innovation. That innovation
will inevitably continue to change what is deemed critical, unless the
government gives in to short-term concerns and chills natural
technological progress.

Q2.  Unfortunately, one of the major impediments to market stability in
energy critical elements is the monopolistic tendencies of Chinese
trade policy and a demonstrated willingness to leverage their monopoly
position for geopolitical advantage and drive American companies out of
business. As such, what other policy actions (WTO, currency
legislation, stockpiling, etc.) should the Congress consider to
mitigate the impact of these actions?

A2. With regard to a stockpile, Chinese predatory behavior is one
factor in the decision. The US should absolutely consider supplies from
the PRC to be at risk. However, stockpiling is only effective if the
correct elements are available when needed. For ECE's, this assessment
must frequently be redone, as supply and demand rapidly shift. A
traditional stockpile, as in oil, would not be useful.
The most obvious recommendation is to pursue a WTO case concerning
restrictions on rare earth exports. Given blatant violations of WTO
principles by Chinese state firms, this case should be easy to win.
While full implementation of WTO decisions is a lengthy process, the
initial favorable decision would permit the US to retaliate, perhaps on
China-made goods using rare earths. This will discourage Chinese
predation to some extent. One hopeful note: Chinese measures often
backfire. The PRC did not even fill its export quota for rare earths in
2011 as demand for Chinese output weakened.
Beyond the WTO case, a complex but vital trade issue concerns
subsidies. Large Chinese rare earth miners are all state-owned and
receive heavy subsidies. The most relevant such subsidy is protection
from competition, with the central government explicitly driving non-
state producers out of the market. The first step in responding to
these subsidies is a comprehensive assessment of their size and any
harm inflicted on the U.S. To mitigate actions based on China's near-
monopoly position, the US must document and counter the tools through
which this position was established. Suppression of competition in the
Chinese domestic market tops the list.
The other way to fundamentally undermine the Chinese position is to
permit the American market to expand. This can be most quickly and
efficiently started by permitting more land to be surveyed for possible
ECE deposits. As with stockpiles, Chinese behavior is only one factor
in this decision.

Q3.  Energy Critical Elements are well-known to be of significant
importance to certain defense applications such as jet engines and
weapons systems. How is the Department of Defense working to address
potential national security-related challenges, and how should (or are)
these efforts coordinated with those supported by DOE?

A3. I am not the best person to assess DOD efforts or DOD-DOE
coordination. True national security requirements should take priority
over market imperatives while industrial policy should not, so it may
not be possible to effectively coordinate DOD and DOE initiatives. A
guiding objective for DOD should be to try to project military demand
for ECE's against supply projections, to avoid surprises. DOD should
not simply treat all ECE's as critical to future military equipment.

Q4.  Dr. Scissors, you note your support for targeted government
resource assessments and information gathering associated with Energy
Critical Elements. What specific information is most important for the
federal government to provide to energy critical element market
participants?

A4. The ECE market involves, both at home and overseas, information
concerning land and resources that can only be provided by national
governments. The market is also shifting rapidly. As a result, the most
valuable information at present is quite basic in nature. It is
important that this information be provided reliably and repeatedly.
The definition of ECE should be broad and flexible, anticipating
change. For all classified ECE's, the government should initially work
to provide the most recent information concerning:

1.  Total world output and output change
2.  Output and change in output by country
3.  Total world demand and demand change
4.  Demand and change in demand by country
5.  Demand and change in demand by industry
6.  Total world known deposits and change in known deposits
7.  Total world estimated deposits and change in estimated deposits
8.  Known deposits and change in known deposits by country
9.  Estimated deposits and change in estimated deposits by country
10.  Price trend using a standardized measure and benchmark
Responses by Dr. Robert Jaffe,
Jane and Otto Morningstar Professor of Physics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

Q1.  General Electrics research begun in 2005 is often cited as an
example of a company proactively responding to potential supply
shortages for critical materials. Is there reason to believe a similar
course would not be pursued by other affected industries, such as the
automobile or wind turbine industries?

A1. I believe that GE's situation was unusual, almost unique: it had
appreciated for many years the importance of rhenium to its turbine
business and made it a high priority to gather information on U.S. and
world production and reserves. Because of the proprietary value that
individual companies would place on this kind of information and on
their research, it seems quite unlikely that ``industries'' would
respond collaboratively as your question suggests. Instead a few big
players might have the long term perspective, the vision, and the
resources to commit to a similar strategy, while most would not.
Entrepreneurial startups and small businesses would be at a particular
disadvantage.
I should mention that the number of individual chemical elements
that might be important to a given emerging technology would likely be
quite large. Instead of tracking one element, rhenium, as described in
the GE case, a company might be confronted with the daunting task of
tracking many.
This is the kind of information gathering activity that has
typically been recognized as a legitimate function of the Federal
Government, as illustrated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics or the
Energy Information Administration.

Q2.  Unfortunately, one of the major impediments to market stability in
energy critical elements is the monopolistic tendencies of Chinese
trade policy and a demonstrated willingness to leverage their monopoly
position for geopolitical advantage and drive American companies out of
business. As such, what other policy actions (WTO, currency
legislation, stockpiling, etc.) should the Congress consider to
mitigate the impact of these actions?

A2. The APS/MRS study focused primarily on medium to long-term
approaches to ECE problems, so my perspective on these issues is
somewhat limited. Our committee did agree that the U.S. should take all
appropriate actions under bilateral and multilateral trade agreements
and through the WTO. We observed, however, that the time scale for
addressing issues in these forums is often too long to have an impact
on the crisis of the moment (one more reason for taking a longer term
perspective). We advocated for free international trade in general, but
did not discuss currency manipulation. Finally, we recommended against
federal stockpiling for economic reasons1 for several reasons. First it
often has unintended and unforeseeable economic consequences; second,
it interferes with free markets in a particularly crude way; and third,
individual companies have the capacity to stockpile according to their
own needs.
Our report recommended a triad of information, research, and
recycling to anticipate problems before they become critical.
Unfortunately, by the time an individual event has reached the
proportion of the ``rare earth crisis'', the government's arsenal is
rather limited.
Responses by Dr. Karl Gschneidner,
Senior Materials Scientist,
Ames National Laboratory

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

Q1.  Unfortunately, one of the major impediments to market stability in
energy critical elements is the monopolistic tendencies of Chinese
trade policy and a demonstrated willingness to leverage their monopoly
position for geopolitical advantage and drive American companies out of
business. As such, what other policy actions (WTO, currency
legislation, stockpiling, etc.) should the Congress consider to
mitigate the impact of these actions?

A1. Yes, there are some other actions Congress should carry out. But
before I present my suggestions we need to understand the Chinese
strategy regarding rare earths.
The supply of the basic rare earth materials in the Rest of the
World (ROW) is close to being ameliorated with Molycorp (in the USA),
Lynas (Australia) and other smaller mining operations in the USA,
Canada and South Africa in (or coming into) operation. The post-mining
manufacturers and related infrastructure is practically non-existent in
the ROW, Japan is probably ahead of the USA and Europe in this regard.
We need to re-establish this portion of the rare earth industry. It is
absolutely necessary to do so from both a military and energy security
posture. But if we can build up this manufacturing capability to supply
computers, magnetic devices, electric motors, cell phones, i-pods, etc.
for the general public the money will be spent in the USA and not sent
to China.
My first three recommendations are: (1) that we make government
guarantee loans available to these companies to become established; (2)
make favorable tax incentives at the federal, state and local levels;
and (3) place import restrictions (quotas, taxes, etc.) on rare earth
containing products coming from China.
In order to re-establish the USA's rare earth intellectual capital
and keep us competitive, it is imperative to educate and train the next
generation of scientists, engineers, technical business managers for
our rare earth industry, especially the post mining manufacturers. This
requires 60 to 110 Ph.D., M.S. and B.S. degree students per year for
the next 10 years. In order to carry this out: educational institutions
need to teach semester long courses and short courses on various
aspects of the rare earths both locally and via distance learning;
federal government research organizations, such as NSF, DOE, DoD, and
NIST, need to fund research projects involving rare earth science and
technology; and a National scholarship program needs to be established
to assist students to obtain and complete their education.
My fourth recommendation is: the establishment of national rare
earth scholarships to be administered by the Energy Innovation Hub on
Critical Materials authorized by Congress on December 2, 2011.
The Chinese are restricting the supply of the basic rare earth
materials (concentrates, metals, magnets, etc.) to the Rest of the
World (ROW), but not the commodities (i-phones, TVs, audio systems,
cell phones, components which go into automobiles, computers, lighting,
etc.) which utilize the rare earths. The Chinese want to sell the high
value products (i-phones, TVs, etc.) and therefore, will continue to
supply them to consumers in ROW and also internally in China itself.
However, I foresee real problems further down the road, five to ten
years from now, when we have rebuilt the post-mining manufacturing
infrastructure. Putting the manufactured electronic products, magnets,
electric motors, CFL and LED lamps, computers, etc. in the consumer
market will be in direct competition with the equivalent products from
China. China is not going to let these markets slip out of their
hands--they will do most anything to retain them and earn hard
currency, which could include cutting prices below their costs and thus
dumping these products in the marketplace. This will be the next
battlefield--it will be a very competitive period, and we cannot fail,
we cannot let them drive our companies out of business. From military
and energy security needs we need these US manufacturers in the time of
military conflict--who would produce the various devices that the
country needs in a reasonable time scale?
How can we compete with the Chinese with their low labor costs and
centrally controlled economy? Automate-Automate-Automate our
manufacturing processes; maintain our intellectual and patent rights,
and our trade and corporate secrets; and finally send our components to
South and Central American countries to be assembled into the final
products taking advantage of the lower labor costs in these nations.
Responses by Mr. Luka Erceg,
President and CEO, Simbol Materials

Questions Submitted by Chairman Andy Harris

Q1.  Unfortunately, one of the major impediments to market stability in
energy critical elements is the monopolistic tendencies of Chinese
trade policy and a demonstrated willingness to leverage their monopoly
position for geopolitical advantage and drive American companies out of
business. As such, what other policy actions (WTO, currency
legislation, stockpiling, etc.) should the Congress consider to
mitigate the impact of these actions?

A1-a. Free trade practices must be paired with support for strategic
domestic industries

The U.S. has long been the leader in fostering free-trade
throughout the world, and simultaneously, our companies have exported
many technologies. Our policies have now come full circle--we have
invested abroad in countries with a comparative advantage in many
resources (labor, natural resources, etc.). Those countries have now
rapidly increased their standards of living for their citizens and have
developed industries in areas where the U.S. previously exerted
leadership, taking jobs from U.S. Citizens. Employment in the chemical
and mining industries, for example, is down by more than 30% the past
20 years. Critical aspects of the U.S. industrial commons--the skills
shared by a large, interlocking group of supply-chains, universities,
and government that has been central to U.S. technological leadership--
has lost its vitality as materials suppliers and production factories
have moved abroad. The issue is significant as many of the advanced
technologies, such as electric vehicles, solar, wind, LED lighting,
rely on materials that are increasingly complex and produced overseas.
The answer, however, is not one of protectionism. Rather, it is to
demand respect of the WTO standards and to make far greater use of the
WTO Agreement to rebuild our domestic industries. The United States
along with its partners in Japan and the European Union should
vigorously pursue WTO dispute settlement. Congress should appropriate
all funds necessary for the Office of the United States Trade
Representative and the newly created Trade Enforcement Unit to litigate
against distortive export quotas and export duties that constitute an
implicit assistance to domestic producers and downstream processors,
providing them with an unfair competitive advantage. Unless we take
measures that permit U.S. industries to rebuild, we will continue to be
a nation of importers.
We must stop the altruism of sacrificing our industries and jobs
for the sake of free trade, rather, we must take up ``fair trade.''
American ingenuity stands toe-to-toe with the best in the world. All
that is needed is a level playing field.

A1-b. Monopolistic tendencies of Chinese trade policies

Unfortunately, monopolistic tendencies are not limited to just
China, although it does provide ample evidence. The issue really is
whether the monopolistic tendencies are actually a ``wrongful act.''
Unfortunately, due to our reliance on the WTO, it is far too easy to
argue pursuant to the WTO's conservation provisions, such as found in
Article XX of the WTO Agreement, which provide ample protection for
countries such as China. Even if their acts are wrongful, the time it
takes to bring a WTO case is such that American industries will suffer
inordinately.
Pursuant to Article XIX of the WTO Agreement, the U.S. government
could take emergency action to safeguard domestic industry. Let us take
manganese or rare earths as an example. The U.S, the European Union,
and Mexico in their formal request to the WTO for dispute settlement
noted that Chinese export restraints on raw materials significantly
distort the international market and provide preferential conditions
for Chinese industries that use these raw materials. The U.S.
Government could implement import duties pursuant to Article XIX to
protect U.S. Industries. However, who would that really help? The irony
is that many of the customers of these products are located abroad, and
in fact could be U.S. Customers. So the question next becomes to which
products do you apply duties --the raw materials or the finished goods?
Neither are produced in the U.S. today. In the case of manganese,
duties will work because there is a domestic industry for refined
chemical products. However, there is not for manganese ore or manganese
metal.
My recommendation would be to take a position of supporting
critical industries and making use of treaty safeguards and laws as
necessary. Should domestic production be revived, the United States
antidumping and countervailing duty laws could be used to combat a
repeat of underselling by Chinese producers. However, the underlying
problem is that we do not encourage enough manufacturing in the U.S.
This is consequently causing shortages of talented persons.

A1-c. Manufacturing (not stockpiling) will provide us with innovation
bonds and long-term competitiveness

It is my opinion that stockpiling of materials is akin to the early
failures of aid to under-developed nations. In the past, we provided
food aid which was a short-term stimulus to those in need, but once the
food was gone the situation reversed itself. Aid was most successful
when we taught under-developed nations to grow their own food -- it is
time to teach the U.S. how to manufacture and support those endeavors.
This century we saw U.S. leadership in the production of raw materials
fall and shift to other nations. This was driven by taxation and
permitting.
We next saw U.S. manufacturing leadership fall and shift overseas
-- notably following raw material production. This occurred because of
anticompetitive trade policies of nations such as China that required
that raw materials be processed into finished products in their
countries. In the U.S., such tied relationships are considered in
violation of our competition laws and are illegal. Why do we tolerate
them with trading partners? This was driven by high labor costs and
taxation. Once manufacturing left, so too did innovation.
Manufacturing and innovation are intimately related. The erosion of
our economy is abundantly clear -- loss of raw material production, led
to loss of specialty materials, led to loss of manufacturing. Without
jobs, students do not enroll in university programs as there is no
gainful employment for them in this country; hence they shift to other
studies. Only 15.6 percent of U.S. bachelor's degrees were awarded in
science technology and engineering (STEM) during 2010. Once the
education system stops offering courses, educators stop conducting
research and thus innovation begins to wane. China now leads the world
in materials science publications, overtaking Japan and the U.S., and
currently challenging the combined output of the EU-15 group of well-
established European research economies While the demand for innovation
has increased, government sponsored research has actually declined as a
share of GDP. In one generation, we lost tremendous headway in multiple
disciplines. It is perhaps not surprising that many emerging
industries, such as solar-panels, and LED-lighting industries that have
their roots in the U.S. semiconductor materials commons, are now mostly
based in Asia. The erosion must stop.
Approximately 20 years ago, lithium-ion battery technology was
invented in the United States. Today, the U.S. is not consequential to
the world market for lithium-ion technologies. Some of the battery
related investments made through ARRA funds were deployed for end-use
assembly of battery and their components. We missed the opportunity to
invest in materials capability that is at the head of the innovation
supply-chain and the foundation for a competitive industrial base. This
is not a criticism, rather an example of how much more we must do to
foster education, innovation, and manufacturing in the United States.
Today, the U.S. falls woefully short in its ability to produce raw
materials and to manufacture specialty / critical materials. U.S.
companies must be given an opportunity to be competitive. Today, we
face the highest labor costs, the most difficult permitting regimes,
strictest environmental standards, the highest taxes, and lack of
sufficient training in industries of strategic importance to the U.S.
economy. Any one of the impediments aforementioned is daunting to
overcome, let alone all. In no way do I suggest that environmental
standards be lessened, or an elimination of permits. Rather, our
governance slows the ability of U.S. Industry to act and respond,
rather than encouraging it. Permitting must be transparent and rapid
for manufacturing. Environmental standards must be predictable. Being
competitive is not about lowering the pay of U.S. workers, rather,
being competitive is about productivity. We need to encourage the
optimization of labor, capital, and natural resources--the basic
implements to the economy. That is manufacturing, and manufacturing of
critical materials.
We suffer from a tax regime that has encouraged off-shoring of
manufacturing and many other jobs. There is evidence that without such
tax benefits related to repatriation of income, there would be no
incentive to off-shore jobs. It is further worth noting that the
research tax subsidy in the United States is only about half of that
available in such technology strongholds as Japan. It is imperative to
support the development of manufacturing supply chains in the U.S. But,
merely providing acute stimuli will do little as we do not address the
underlying problems. History has shown that nations are strongest when
they manufacture. This has the advantage of reducing imports, or
alternatively increasing exports to balance trade. Strengthening in our
trade position improves the strength of the U.S. dollar. Only support
of manufacturing will provide the solution.
Critical materials play a special role in our economy. Critical and
specialty materials are the building blocks to advanced technologies,
even such as solar panels, EV batteries, magnets for wind turbines,
handheld consumer electronics, etc. Material innovation will lead to
substantial R&D, innovation, commercialization, and job creation.
I respectfully submit to the committee, that without reducing
taxes, providing incentives for manufacturing in general and more
specifically to specialty materials producers, and supporting
education, we cannot counter the monopolistic tendencies of other
nations. By providing the incentive to increase U.S. based
manufacturing, we will encourage companies to invest in training and
collaboration with educational and research institutions. This will
then foster more technical developments that will strengthen our
ability to compete and lead.


