- TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH PRIORITIES: MAXIMIZING RETURN ON INVESTMENT OF TAXPAYER DOLLARS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH PRIORITIES:
MAXIMIZING RETURN ON INVESTMENT OF TAXPAYER DOLLARS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, JUNE 14, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-23

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-923PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. RALPH M. HALL, Texas, Chair
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR.,         EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
Wisconsin                        JERRY F. COSTELLO, Illinois
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                LYNN C. WOOLSEY, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         ZOE LOFGREN, California
ROSCOE G. BARTLETT, Maryland         DAVID WU, Oregon
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD MILLER, North Carolina
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
W. TODD AKIN, Missouri               GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
PAUL C. BROUN, Georgia               BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 PAUL D. TONKO, New York
BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona             JERRY McNERNEY, California
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
Tennessee                        TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia            FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi       HANSEN CLARKE, Michigan
MO BROOKS, Alabama
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
LARRY BUCSHON, Indiana
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation

HON. BENJAMIN QUAYLE, Arizona, Chair
LAMAR S. SMITH, Texas                DAVID WU, Oregon
JUDY BIGGERT, Illinois               JOHN P. SARBANES, Maryland
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              FREDERICA S. WILSON, Florida
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CHARLES J. ``CHUCK'' FLEISCHMANN,    GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, Arizona
Tennessee                        BEN R. LUJAN, New Mexico
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
CHIP CRAVAACK, Minnesota
RALPH M. HALL, Texas                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas

C O N T E N T S

Hearing Date

Page
Witness List.....................................................     2

Hearing Charter..................................................     3

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Benjamin Quayle, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     8
Written Statement............................................     8

Statement by Representative David Wu, Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Witnesses:

The Honorable Peter Appel, Administrator, Research and Innovative
Technology Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation
Oral Statement...............................................    12
Written Statement............................................    14

Mr. John Halikowski, Director, Arizona Department of
Transportation; Chair, American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials Standing Committee on Research
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    18

Mr. David Gehr, Senior Vice President, Highway Market, Parsons
Brinckerhoff; Chairman, American Society of Civil Engineers
Transportation Policy Committee
Oral Statement...............................................    29
Written Statement............................................    31

Dr. Irwin Feller, Professor Emeritus of Economics, Pennsylvania
State University; Senior Visiting Fellow, American Association
for the Advancement of Science
Oral Statement...............................................    34
Written Statement............................................    36

Ms. Lynn Peterson, Transportation Policy Advisor, Office of
Governor John Kitzhaber (OR)
Oral Statement...............................................    42
Written Statement............................................    44

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

The Honorable Peter Appel, Administrator, Research and Innovative
Technology Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation...    66

Mr. John Halikowski, Director, Arizona Department of
Transportation; Chair, American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials Standing Committee on Research....    72

Mr. David Gehr, Senior Vice President, Highway Market, Parsons
Brinckerhoff; Chairman, American Society of Civil Engineers
Transportation Policy Committee................................    74

Dr. Irwin Feller, Professor Emeritus of Economics, Pennsylvania
State University; Senior Visiting Fellow, American Association
for the Advancement of Science.................................    75

Ms. Lynn Peterson, Transportation Policy Advisor, Office of
Governor John Kitzhaber (OR)...................................    76

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Material Submitted by Representative Randy Neugebauer,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    80

TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH PRIORITIES:
MAXIMIZING RETURN ON INVESTMENT OF TAXPAYER DOLLARS

----------

TUESDAY, JUNE 14, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 p.m., in
Room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Benjamin
Quayle [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

hearing charter

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Transportation Research Priorities:

Maximizing Return on Investment of

Taxpayer Dollars

tuesday, june 14, 2011
10:00 a.m.--12:00 p.m.
2318 rayburn house office building

I. Purpose

On Tuesday, June 14, 2011, the Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation will convene a hearing to review the research, development,
and technology (RD&T) activities of the Department of Transportation.
The hearing will focus on issues related to the funding and
prioritization of current research initiatives and how to maximize the
efficiency of these activities. With the expiration of SAFETEA-LU in
fiscal year 2009, this hearing will also examine research issues to
inform the current Federal surface transportation reauthorization
effort.

II. Witnesses

The Honorable Peter Appel, Administrator, Research and
Innovative Technology Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation

Mr. John Halikowski, Director, Arizona Department of
Transportation; Chair, American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials Standing Committee on Research

Mr. David Gehr, Senior Vice President, Highway Market,
Parsons Brinckerhoff; Chairman, American Society of Civil Engineers
Transportation Policy Committee

Dr. Irwin Feller, Professor Emeritus of Economics,
Pennsylvania State University; Senior Visiting Fellow, American
Association for the Advancement of Science

Ms. Lynn Peterson, Transportation Policy Advisor, Office
of Governor John Kitzhaber (OR)

III. Brief Overview

The Department of Transportation (DOT) annually supports more than
$600 million in research, development, and technology deployment (RD&T)
activities focused on surface modes of transportation (rail, transit,
motor carrier and highway). DOT characterizes research funding into
three main categories: applied, development, and technology. The first
two categories are pre-implementation stage work, while the technology,
or ``T'' classification, implies that funds are being used for
technology deployment or field demonstration.
Secretary Ray LaHood's DOT priorities are organized around five
strategic goals: safety, state of good repair, economic
competitiveness, livable communities, and environmental sustainability.
Several plans have provided strategic direction for the Department.
DOT's most recent strategic plan, ``New Ideas for a Nation on the
Move'' provided goals for fiscal years 2006-2011. In 2006, the Research
and Innovative Technologies Administration (RITA), the research
coordination body of DOT, produced ``The Transportation, Research,
Development, and Technology Strategic Plan for 2006 to 2010.'' The
plan, mandated by the surface highway reauthorization bill passed in
2005 (PL-109-59, ``SAFETEA-LU''), established a five-year pathway for
DOT research activities. The Transportation Research Board, a part of
the National Research Council, reviewed the plan and identified a
number of strengths and weaknesses. One area of concern was that the
plan did not ``explain how the varied missions of DOT and its operating
agencies influence the RD&T portfolio.'' DOT does not have a current
strategic plan for the Department or specific to RD&T activities, and
current research priorities are not easily quantified or characterized.
A draft strategic plan was made available for public comment in May
2010, but has not been finalized.
In November 2008, the Transportation Research Board produced a
report titled, ``The Federal Investment in Highway Research 2006-2009:
Strengths and Weaknesses.'' The Board made a number of recommendations
for change to highway research programs, including improved engagement
of the research community in the priority-setting process and
subjecting research programs to merit-review.
The hearing will explore whether the research activities of DOT are
well-executed and integrated across the Department, and how to
efficiently address the long-term research and technology needs of the
country. In particular, the relationship between states and the Federal
government will be explored. The pending surface transportation
reauthorization presents an opportunity to ensure transportation RD&T
activities are aligned with national transportation priorities and to
examine how the priorities will further the states' ability to
incorporate transformational research results into their transportation
systems.

IV. Background

The Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity
Act: A Legacy for Users (SAFETEA-LU), which became law in August 2005,
was the last comprehensive Federal surface transportation
reauthorization bill. Since that authorization expired in fiscal year
2009, a series of extensions have been enacted to continue funding for
programs. The most recent extension, the Surface Transportation
Extension Act of 2011 (Public Law 112-5) extended surface
transportation programs through September 30, 2011.
The DOT surface RD&T endeavor is conducted by a host of multi-modal
Administrations. Those Administrations include the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA), the Federal Transit Administration (FTA), the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), the Federal
Railroad Administration (FRA), and the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration (FMCSA). In addition, the Research and Innovative
Technology Administration (RITA) conducts a small amount of internal
research and primarily facilitates and supports coordination of
research efforts across the DOT.

Department of Transportation Research, Development and Technology
(RD&T) Activities*

Research and Innovative Technology Administration (RITA)

RITA is responsible for planning, coordination, facilitation, and
review of DOT's research programs. The request includes $17.6 million
for RITA to conduct a small amount of internal research and to
coordinate research programs across the agencies. RITA oversees the
following programs, which are funded out of other Administration's
accounts:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Research Area (and source of funding)                          FY 2012 Request (millions)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Intelligent Transportation Systems (FHWA)                              $110.0
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Univ. Transportation Center (UTC) Program (FHWA, FTA)                   $100.0
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Competitive UTC Consortia (FHWA, FTA)                                   $80.0
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bureau of Transportation Statistics (FHWA)                              $35.0
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UTC Multimodal Competitive Research Grants (FHWA)                       $20.0
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Multimodal Innovative Research Program (FHWA)                           $20.0
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Transportation Safety Institute (fee for service)                       --
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Volpe National Transportation Systems Center (fee for service)          --
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Research Area (and source of funding)                          FY 2012 Request (millions)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Structures (improving and maintaining infrastructure)                  $75.0
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Planning, Environment, and Realty (environmental research, project     $35.0
delivery improvement initiatives, asset management)
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Highway Operations (research to improve movement of people and goods)   $25.0
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Safety                                                                  $25.0
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Next Generation Research & Technology                                   $22.0
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Policy (analysis on emerging domestic and international issues)         $18.0
.........................................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

FHWA also funds the Future Strategic Highway Research Program (SHRP
II), administered by the Transportation Research Board, which is a
multi-year research effort focused on moving transportation research to
deployment in the field in order to reduce congestion, improve highway
safety, and rehabilitate aging infrastructure. While no funds were
requested to continue the program in FY 2012, the last enacted funding
was $50 million in FY 10.

Federal Transit Administration (FTA)

FTA's FY 12 National Research & Technology Deployment request is
$129.2 million. When funding for implementation and deployment is
removed, the total amount focused on research and development is about
$40 million. FTA's requested research and development activities in FY
12 include: Innovative safety research, industry analysis research,
rail programs and infrastructure research, transit standards
development, and transit planning and forecasting research under the
National Program ($14.5M); transit-focused University Transportation
Centers Program ($8.0M); Clean Fuels and Environmental Research
($14.8M); Greenhouse Gas and Energy Reduction Deployment and
Demonstration Programs. $10 million would be provided for two transit
agencies to serve as ``test beds,'' and $65 million for demonstration
activities ($75.0M).

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)

NHTSA's FY 12 request for Research and Analysis is $78.2 million
which includes: Crashworthiness Research ($21.4M), Crash Avoidance
Research ($12.7M), and Alternative Fuels Vehicle Safety ($1.5M).
Additionally, $13 million is requested for Highway Safety Research.

Federal Railroad Administration (FRA)

The FRA Core R&D request of $40 million includes funding for:
railroad systems, human factors, track and train interaction, HAZMAT
travel, and the National Cooperative Rail Research Program, among other
areas. Additionally, $50 million is requested for High-Speed Rail R&D.
These funds are to address safety risks and fund new technology.

Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA)

The FMCSA RD&T program request for FY 2012 is $11.6 million. The
request includes the following research and development activities:
Produce Safer Drivers ($2.4M), Improve Safety of Commercial Vehicles
($200,000), Produce Safer Carriers ($1.1M), and Enable and Motivate
Internal Excellence ($700,000).

V. Major Issues and Concerns

DOT Prioritization of Research and Performance Metrics

The current amount DOT spends on research to support surface
programs is approximately one percent of federal expenditures on
highways. Questions remain as to whether this is a sufficient amount,
and whether the long-term research needs of the nation are being
adequately addressed. In addition, the current strategic priorities for
the DOT, which impact all programs, may not be well-aligned with the
needs of stakeholders. Components such as livable communities,
environmental sustainability, and economic competitiveness remain ill-
defined, amorphous, and difficult to measure, especially as they relate
to research programs. There are no Federal performance standards to
guide states or standardized reporting metrics. Without a means for
states to prove the effectiveness of their programs, and without the
DOT requiring such justification coupled with clear strategic goals, it
is challenging to ensure that federal funds are being used as
efficiently and effectively as possible.

Competitive Funding and University Transportation Centers

The practice of earmarking funding in the surface transportation
bill has expanded in recent reauthorization measures. The 2005 SAFETEA-
LU legislation contained over 5,600 earmarks accounting for $21.7
billion in the highway title alone. Some transportation groups have
opposed the practice of earmarking, arguing it constrains DOT's ability
to invest strategically in RD&T. In fact, SAFETEA-LU's research title
earmarked more funding than was authorized by the title, so several
research programs and projects were unable to be funded until a
technical corrections Act was passed in 2008 to fix the research
funding shortfall.
SAFETEA-LU provided about $70 million annually to support
University Transportation Centers (UTCs) across the country. The act
authorized an expansion in the number of UTCs from 33 to 60 UTCs, 20 of
which were competitively selected. All UTCs require a portion of state
matching funds, conduct basic and applied university-based
transportation research, and are managed by RITA. Secretary LaHood
recently made the decision, based on authority provided to DOT under
the last extension bill (P.L. 112-5), to cease funding for all of the
existing 59 UTCs and reform the program into a competitive, consortium-
based system. Several other research programs funded through RITA, FTA,
and FHWA also will not receive funding in FY 11 as a result of the
Secretary's decision. For FY 2011, UTC applicants will be required to
apply in consortia of at least two institutions of higher education.
The UTC program has been cited as valuable to transportation research,
as well as underutilized by DOT and overly focused on highly applied
research instead of advanced research to support national
transportation needs.

Highway Trust Fund Solvency

The current highway research programs have been funded through a
series of extensions, which have transferred sums from the general
fund. Driving has declined significantly in the last decade and
vehicles have become more fuel efficient. Consequently, at the current
rate of 18.4 cents per gallon, set in 1993, the Highway Trust Fund is
no longer covering all of the surface transportation expenses. To
remain solvent, the highway account has already required three
transfers from the general fund totaling $29.7 billion. The most recent
transfer of $14.7 billion in 2010 is expected to keep the account
solvent through sometime in 2013. A means of adding more funds to the
trust fund must be found, or the size of programs supported by DOT must
decrease. In the current budget environment it is unclear whether the
most viable path forward is to restore the solvency of the fund or to
address financing needs in other ways.

Chairman Quayle. The Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation will come to order. Good morning, everybody. Welcome
to today's hearing entitled, ``Transportation Research
Priorities: Maximizing Return on Investment of Taxpayer
Dollars.'' In front of you are packets containing the written
testimony, biographies, and truth in testimony disclosures for
today's witness panel.
I will now recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement.
The research and development activities at the Department
of Transportation are vital to the Nation's prosperity. These
efforts support critical infrastructure and enhance both our
economic competitiveness and our way of life. The pathway
forward for these programs continues to present significant
challenges for Congress. We need to ask difficult questions to
determine how best to address the issues facing our aging
infrastructure within the limitations of our current budget
environment.
The DOT annually supports more than $600 million in
research, development, and technology deployment activities
focused on surface modes of transportation. These programs were
last authorized in 2005, and are primarily supported through
the Highway Trust Fund and Mass Transit Fund. However, since
2009, funding shortfalls have required us to transfer nearly
$30 billion from the general fund to maintain all of our
highway programs.
Advancements in materials and technology can help achieve
long-term cost savings by reducing congestion and improving the
durability and lifespan of our transportation projects. It is,
therefore, critical that we find a way to maintain a healthy,
substantive research base behind our state and local
transportation initiatives.
Concerns have been raised about how research priorities are
identified and the means used to quantify and measure
performance. Today's hearing provides an opportunity for us to
examine if our research activities are well-executed and
integrated across the Department and whether they are
efficiently addressing the long-term research and technology
needs of the country.
I would like to thank our witnesses for coming here today
and for sharing your thoughts on how to improve our
transportation networks and research activities. I look forward
to starting a dialogue with you today and hope you will
continue to work with us to maximize the effectiveness of these
programs as we attempt to reauthorize our federal surface
transportation programs.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Quayle follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Subcommittee on Technology and Innovation
Chairman Ben Quayle
The research and development activities at the Department of
Transportation (DOT) are vital to our nation's prosperity--these
efforts support critical infrastructure, and enhance both our economic
competitiveness, and way of life. The pathway forward for these
programs continues to present significant challenges for Congress. We
need to ask difficult questions to determine how best to address the
issues facing our aging infrastructure within the limitations of our
current budget environment.
The DOT annually supports more than $600 million in research,
development, and technology deployment (RD&T) activities focused on
surface modes of transportation. These programs were last authorized in
2005 and are primarily supported through the Highway Trust Fund and
Mass Transit Fund. However, since 2009, funding shortfalls have
required us to transfer nearly $30 billion from the general fund to
maintain all of our highway programs.
Advancements in materials and technology can help achieve long-term
cost savings by reducing congestion, and improving the durability and
lifespan of our transportation projects. It is therefore critical that
we find a way to maintain a healthy, substantive research base behind
our state and local transportation initiatives.
Concerns have been raised about how research priorities are
identified and the means used to quantify and measure performance.
Today's hearing provides an opportunity for us to examine if our
research activities are well executed and integrated across the
Department, and whether they are efficiently addressing the long-term
research and technology needs of the country.
I would like to thank our witnesses for coming today and sharing
your thoughts on how to improve our transportation networks and
research activities. I look forward to starting a dialogue today, and
hope you will continue to work with us to maximize the effectiveness of
these programs as we attempt to reauthorize our federal surface
transportation programs.

Chairman Quayle. I would now like to recognize the Ranking
Member of this Subcommittee, Mr. Wu, for an opening statement.
Mr. Wu. Thank you, Chairman Quayle, for calling this
hearing. I also want to thank our witnesses for appearing
before the Subcommittee and for their assistance today in
helping us assess what research and development needs should be
addressed in any surface transportation reauthorization bill
considered by this Congress.
Since the last reauthorization the Subcommittee has
examined a number of research and development challenges faced
by DOT. For example, in 2009, we looked at ways to improve the
planning and coordination of DOT's research agenda, strengthen
technology transfer, and ensure that federally-funded research
and development is meeting State and local transportation needs
and mitigating the impact of the surface transportation system
on the environment. It is important that we have some of these
discussions again today because the transportation sector has
an enormous impact on our lives and the economy.
The average household in America spends 16 percent of its
budget on transportation. In all, transportation-related goods
and services contribute about $1.2 trillion to the U.S.
economy.
If we are committed to making our transportation system
more reliable and more efficient and ensuring that
transportation planners are wisely investing taxpayer dollars,
we need to have a robust and effective transportation and
research program.
Therefore, I am pleased that this Subcommittee continues to
take seriously its critical role in guiding DOT's research and
development priorities while seeking input on the specific
investments needed to see those priorities through to fruition.
I also believe that we need to be talking more seriously
about improving the energy efficiency of our entire
transportation system. We should be asking questions like what
modeling tools would help communities develop an effective,
mixed-use transportation system of cars, buses, bicycles, light
rail, and trolleys such as we have in Portland, Oregon. If we
are serious about congestion mitigation and traffic management,
what are the next steps towards realizing those goals and
reducing the amount of time cars spend idling in traffic.
Sustainability and energy efficiency are no longer just
buzz words in transportation, in the transportation community.
They are crucial components of a working national
transportation infrastructure. Building more roads is not the
only answer. We must use our resources carefully and plan
strategically, and that requires a commitment to finding simple
and innovative ways to increase the productivity and longevity
of our transportation systems.
I am proud that my congressional district has been at the
forefront of this endeavor, implementing and operating a
transportation infrastructure that serves as a national model
of integrated energy efficiency and sustainability. The State
and local departments of transportation in Oregon have worked
effectively to implement truly innovative solutions to our
transportation challenges using a diverse set of technologies
including a transit signal priority project that greatly
reduces idling for buses by linking onboard computers to
traffic lights, sensory ramp meters that cut congestions on our
freeways, and real time digital dissemination of traffic
information to travelers so that they can avoid backups.
These efforts are coordinated regionally, not just city by
city, so that the energy savings benefit taxpayers throughout
the area.
Ms. Lynn Peterson, who is the Sustainable Communities and
Transportation Policy Advisor to the governor of the State of
Oregon, is here to tell us more about how the research and
policy communities collaborate to make these projects a
reality. The Committee on Science, Space, and Technology will
play an important role in defining our transportation research
priorities for the future. I am confident that today's
witnesses will give us some solid ideas for moving
transportation research forward, and I look forward to their
testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wu follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ranking Member David Wu
Thank you, Chairman Quayle, for calling this hearing. I also want
to thank our witnesses for appearing before the Subcommittee and for
their assistance today in helping us assess what research and
development needs should be addressed in any surface transportation
reauthorization bill considered by Congress.
Since the last reauthorization, this Subcommittee has examined a
number of research and development challenges faced by the Department
of Transportation.
For example, in 2009, we looked at ways to:

improve the planning and coordination of DOT's research
agenda;

strengthen technology transfer and ensure that federally
funded research and development is meeting state and local
transportation needs;

and mitigate the impact of the surface transportation
system on the environment.

It's important that we have some of these discussions again today,
because the transportation sector has an enormous impact on our lives
and the economy. In fact, the average household spends 16 percent of
its budget on transportation. In all, transportation-related goods and
services contribute about $1.2 trillion to the U.S. economy.
If we are committed to making our transportation system more
reliable and more efficient, and ensuring that transportation planners
are wisely investing taxpayer dollars, we need to have a robust and
effective transportation research program. Therefore, I am pleased that
this Subcommittee continues to take seriously its critical role in
guiding DOT's research and development priorities, while seeking input
on the specific investments needed to see those priorities through to
fruition.
I also believe that we need to be talking more seriously about
improving the energy efficiency of our entire transportation system. We
should be asking questions like:

What modeling tools would help communities develop an
effective mixed-use transportation system of cars, buses, bikes, light
rail, and trolleys like we have in Portland, Oregon?

If we are serious about congestion mitigation and traffic
management, what are the next steps toward realizing those goals and
reducing the amount of time cars spend idling in traffic?

Sustainability and energy efficiency are no longer just buzzwords
in the transportation community. They are crucial components of a
working national transportation infrastructure. Building more roads is
not the only answer. We must use our resources carefully and plan
strategically--and that requires a commitment to finding simple and
innovative ways to increase the productivity and longevity of our
transportation systems.
I'm proud that the 1st District of Oregon has been at the forefront
of this endeavor, implementing and operating a transportation
infrastructure that serves national model of integrated energy
efficiency and sustainability.
The state and local departments of transportation in Oregon have
worked effectively to implement truly innovative solutions to our
transportation challenges using a diverse set of technologies
including:

a transit signal priority project that greatly reduces
idling for buses by linking on-board computers to traffic lights;

sensory ramp meters that cut congestion on our freeways;

and real-time digital dissemination of traffic
information to travelers so they can avoid backups.

These efforts are coordinated regionally, not just city by city, so
that the energy savings benefit taxpayers throughout the area.
Ms. Lynn Peterson, who is the Sustainable Communities and
Transportation Policy Advisor to the Governor of the State of Oregon,
is here to tell us more about how the research and policy communities
collaborate to make these projects a reality.
The Committee on Science, Space, and Technology will play an
important role in defining our transportation research priorities for
the future. I'm confident that today's witnesses will give us some
solid ideas for moving transportation research forward and I look
forward to their testimony. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance of my time.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Wu. If there are Members
who wish to submit additional opening statements, your
statements will be added to the record at this point.
At this time I would like to introduce our witness panel.
Our first witness is Mr. Peter Appel, Administrator of the
Research and Innovative Technology Administration at the
Department of Transportation. Next we will hear from Mr. John
Halikowski from the great State of Arizona, where he is the
Director of the Arizona Department of Transportation and Chair
of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials Standing Committee on Research.
Our third witness is David Gehr, a Senior Vice President at
Parsons Brinckerhoff and Chairman of the Transportation Policy
Committee at the American Society of Civil Engineers. Our next
witness is Dr. Irwin Feller, Professor Emeritus of Economics at
Penn State and the Senior Visiting Fellow for the American
Association for the Advancement of Science.
I now yield 2 minutes to the Ranking Member, Mr. Wu, to
introduce our final witness, Ms. Peterson.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I am happy
to introduce a fellow Oregonian, someone I have worked with in
the past and have enjoyed working with, Ms. Lynn Peterson.
Ms. Peterson currently serves as Governor Kitzhaber's
Sustainable Communities and Transportation Policy Advisor. She
is the former Chair of the Clackamas County Commission and a
nationally-recognized transportation and land use integration
expert. In her role with the governor's administration, Ms.
Peterson leads the governor's policy efforts on transportation
initiatives, including high-speed rail, freight, highway
planning and improvement, the solar highway, and linking
transportation to housing and sustainability.
Prior to serving on the Clackamas County Commission, Ms.
Peterson worked as a Transportation Consultant and as a
Strategic Planning Manager for TriMet. She also was a
Transportation Advocate for 1,000 Friends of Oregon and a
Transportation Planner for Metro.
I would like to thank Ms. Peterson for coming all the way
across the country, a trip with which I am more familiar than I
want to be, and for dedicating her career for building safe and
healthy communities.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Wu. As our witnesses should
know, your spoken testimony is limited to five minutes each,
after which the Members of the Committee will have five minutes
each to ask questions.
We are going to start it off. I will now recognize our
first witness, Mr. Peter Appel.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. PETER H. APPEL,

ADMINISTRATOR, RESEARCH AND INNOVATIVE

TECHNOLOGY ADMINISTRATION,

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

Mr. Appel. Thank you, Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Wu,
and Members of the Subcommittee. On behalf of Secretary Ray
LaHood, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to appear
here today to discuss the research, development, and technology
priorities of the U.S. Department of Transportation.
It will come as no surprise to this Subcommittee that the
research, development, and technology priorities of the
Department are the same as the strategic objectives for
American transportation that Secretary LaHood has set forth.
Our first priority is safety, and our additional priorities are
the state of good repair, economic competitiveness, livable
communities, and environmental sustainability.
I am privileged to lead the Research and Innovative
Technology Administration or RITA, which guides the development
of research and technology priorities and their coordination
across the Department. At RITA we seek to implement the
research and development programs in the most effective means
possible, conducting research that advances national
transportation goals and is deployable, while ensuring that the
various operating administrations across the Department do not
duplicate research efforts but rather find synergies across
them.
RITA works to identify synergies and opportunities for
collaboration in support of the Department's priorities. An
example of this is RITA has pulled together all of the human
factors experts across the Department to address crucial safety
issues involving operator fatigue, no matter what mode of
transportation.
Setting research priorities starts with the Research,
Development, and Technology Planning Council, which I chair.
The Council consists of my fellow heads of the Operating
Administrations across the DOT and the Office of the Secretary.
The Council sets forth guidance, oversees implementation, and
identifies at a policy level the coordination that needs to
occur to meet new challenges in research and technology.
Our guidance is implemented through the RD&T Planning Team,
which includes the Associate Administrators for research and
the heads of research for each Operating Administration. The
team discusses ongoing research activities, convenes clusters
of researchers and program managers, facilitates research
alignment with DOT priorities, and ensures that research we
undertake has clear value and a path to deployment. We
routinely interact with stakeholders to ensure that we have a
coherent RD&T direction and that research has a champion
willing to test, demonstrate, and deploy the results of our
research.
One of our closest partners is the American Association of
State Highway and Transportation Officials represented here
today by John Halikowski seated to my left. AASHTO routinely
takes research results and incorporates them into AASHTO
standards, guiding State and local transportation agencies in
improving planning, design, operations and maintenance.
A key tool that RITA has deployed over this past year to
accelerate collaboration are 14 scientific Research Clusters.
Each cluster has a dedicated online collaboration portal which
includes shared research, activities, searches through the
National Transportation Library, and links to research stored
in the Transportation Research Board's Transportation Research
International Documentation and Research in Progress databases.
RITA is the Department's lead on cross-cutting technology
transfer activities as well. RITA's Technology Transfer Program
seeks to move the Department's investment in research and
technology into application and to facilitate
commercialization. RITA hosts events to showcase research
technologies developed by Departmentally-funded programs. Most
recently on April 6 we hosted a University Research Technology
Transfer Day at DOT Headquarters where about 25 universities
from across the country demonstrated research they were doing
that had a clear pathway to technology transfer and
implementation and deployment.
We have seen many DOT-funded research and technology
results come to commercialization. Among these are several of
which you may have heard such as the Solar Roadways Program,
the unique concept to make roads out of recyclable solar
panels. This program won the first GE Ecomagination Challenge
and we are funding a phase II of this effort.
Another example, innovative analytical methods to determine
the best locations in the Chicago area for electric vehicle
charging stations. These innovations are already being applied
to other regions to support electric vehicle deployment. This
research was conducted by the University Transportation Center
at Northwestern University.
The Engineered Material Arresting System that safely stops
aircraft that overshoot the runway end. This is deployed at
over 50 runway ends at over 35 major airports and has prevented
seven significant accidents. Research was conducted at the FAA
Hughes Technical Center.
The Department is focused on working with our state and
local partners to accelerate the deployment and acceptance of
such technologies. With that I look forward to answering any
questions you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Appel follows:]

Prepared Statement of The Honorable Peter Appel, Administrator,
Research and Innovative Technology Administration,
U.S. Department of Transportation
Transportation Research Priorities: Maximizing Return on Investment of
Taxpayer Dollars
Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Wu, and Members of the
Subcommittee:
On behalf of Secretary Ray LaHood, I'd like to thank you for the
opportunity to appear here today to discuss the research, development
and technology priorities of the U.S. Department of Transportation.
It will come as no surprise to this Subcommittee that the research,
development and technology priorities of the Department are the same as
the strategic objectives for American transportation that Secretary
LaHood has set forth:

Safety--our number one priority;

State of Good Repair--optimal condition and performance
of our infrastructure;

Economic Competitiveness--targeted investments to better
serve the traveling public and facilitate freight movement, while
supporting American jobs and exports;

Livable Communities--increasing travel choice and
providing access to affordable transportation; and

Environmental Sustainability--addressing transportation's
impacts on air, water and natural ecosystems.

As always, the Department seeks to implement our research and
technology programs in the most effective means possible, conducting
research that advances national transportation goals while ensuring
that the various Operating Administrations of the Department do not
duplicate research efforts. The organization I am privileged to lead,
the Research and Innovative Technology Administration, or RITA, guides
the development of research and technology priorities, and research
coordination across the Department.
RITA works to identify synergies and opportunities for
collaboration in support of the Department's priorities. For example,
RITA has pulled together all of the human factors experts across the
Department to address the crucial safety issue of operator fatigue, no
matter the mode.
Setting research priorities starts with the Research, Development
and Technology (RD&T) Planning Council, which I chair. The Council
consists of my fellow heads of the Operating Administrations and key
members of the Office of the Secretary. The Council sets forth
guidance, oversees implementation, and identifies at a policy level the
coordination that needs to occur to meet new challenges in research and
technology. A recent example of this guidance is the creation of the
DOT Safety Council, to share best practices and results in safety
systems.
Our guidance is implemented through the RD&T Planning Team, which
includes the Associate Administrators for research in each Operating
Administration. The Team meets monthly to discuss ongoing research
activities, to convene clusters of researchers and program managers in
specific disciplines, to facilitate research alignment with DOT
priorities, and to ensure that research we undertake has clear value
and has a path to deployment. The Team coordinates DOT research with
non-DOT-funded research being conducted in the states, at universities,
in the private and non-profit sectors, and through the Transportation
Research Board (TRB). We routinely interact with these and other
stakeholders to ensure that research has champions willing to test,
demonstrate, and deploy the results of our research.
A key tool that RITA has deployed over this past year to accelerate
this collaboration are fourteen scientific ``Research Clusters.'' These
Clusters were identified by the Team as the priority topics on which
DOT researchers should collaborate with each other and with our
external stakeholders. Each Cluster has a dedicated on-line
collaboration portal which includes shared research, activities,
searches through the National Transportation Library, and links to
research stored on TRB's Transportation Research International
Documentation and Research in Progress databases.

The fourteen Research Clusters currently include:

Data Driven Decision-Making,

Economics,

Energy Sustainability,

Human Factors,

Infrastructure and Materials,

Livability,

Risk-Based Analysis to Address Safety Issues,

Modeling and Simulation,

Multimodal Intelligent Transportation Systems,

Policy Analysis,

Positioning, Navigation and Timing (PNT),

System Resilience and Global Logistics,

Transportation Implications For an Aging Population and
Those With Special Needs, and

Travel Behavior.

RITA reaches out to other Federal agencies to address
Administration research and technology priorities, and to make sure
that our work on similar topics is complementary. For example, we serve
on the interagency Biomass R&D Board, and recently hosted the
Interagency Biofuels Infrastructure Workshop. We have significant
interest in the Department of Energy's SmartGrid work, especially as it
relates to electric vehicle deployment. Through our involvement at the
National Science and Technology Council, we work on Administration
priorities relating to technical standards policy and development,
nanotechnology in materials, and wireless broadband deployment.
RITA is the Department's lead on cross-cutting technology transfer
activities. RITA's Technology Transfer program seeks to move the
Department's investment in research and technology into application,
and to facilitate commercialization. RITA hosts events to showcase
research technologies developed by Departmentally-funded programs, most
recently the April 6, 2011, University Research Technology Transfer Day
at DOT Headquarters.
We have seen many DOT-funded research and technology results come
to commercialization--among these are several of which you may have
heard:

1.  A Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project resulted in
``Solar Roadways,'' the unique concept to make roads out of recyclable
solar panels. Solar Roadways won the first GE Ecomagination Challenge,
and we are funding a Phase II SBIR project.

2.  The Northwestern University Transportation Center is using
innovative analytical methods to determine the best locations in the
Chicago area for electric vehicle charging stations. These innovations
are already being applied in other regions to support electric vehicle
deployment.

3.  The Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA) Hughes Technical
Center tested the engineered material arresting systems that safely
stop aircraft that overshoot the runway end. It is deployed at over 50
runway ends at over 35 major airports, and has prevented seven major
accidents.

4.  Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) research has brought
many improvements to daily transportation operations--traffic
management centers, improved work zone safety, transit customer
information services (like NextBus), electronic payment systems (like
EZPass), and traveler information systems.

Deployment is thoughtfully and continuously coordinated from the
start of the innovation cycle with our stakeholders in state and local
governments, port and airport authorities, transit agencies, and all of
the industries that build and operate America's transportation systems.
Each Operating Administration conducts a research planning process to
identify their top priorities for future operational and safety
improvements. These planning efforts are consistently coordinated with
stakeholders, both to ensure that we are meeting the needs of the
people actually operating the system, and to ensure deployment
champions in the field. Because DOT research results range from new
data analyses, to new designs and materials, to more effective
operational methods, to technologies like Intelligent Transportation
Systems and the Next Generation Air Transportation System, methods for
coordination and deployment are scaled to suit.
Much of our research is undertaken in response to Congressional
mandate or National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) recommendations
and to other pressing safety issues, often to support new or refined
safety regulations and guidance. We involve all parties from the
beginning to the end of the innovation cycle to ensure that we are
researching the best possible opportunities to resolve the safety
issues, and that our results are deployable and economically effective
in daily operations.
The Department works closely with almost 100 Standards Developing
Organizations (SDOs) to ensure that the results of our research and
technology demonstrations are incorporated into the codes and standards
that transportation operators use every day to work safely and
efficiently. One of our closest partners in this effort is the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO),
represented here today by John Halikowski. AASHTO routinely takes
research results and incorporates them into AASHTO standards, guiding
state and local transportation agencies in improving planning, design,
operations and maintenance.
The Department is focused on working with our state and local
partners to accelerate the deployment and acceptance of new
technologies. For example, the FHWA Every Day Counts Initiative is
designed to identify and deploy innovation aimed at shortening project
delivery time, enhancing roadway safety, and protecting the
environment. A major pillar of Every Day Counts is to move effective,
proven and market-ready technologies into widespread use. In support of
our local partners, the FHWA's Local Technical Assistance Program and
Tribal Technical Assistance Program enables counties, parishes,
townships, cities, towns and tribal governments to improve their
operations by supplying them with a variety of training programs, an
information clearinghouse, technology updates, and customized technical
assistance.
Continued success in research and technology innovation and
deployment requires us to keep what has worked, while continuing to
find creative ways to break down barriers. The Administration supports
the following goals:

simplifying the existing surface transportation research
program;

maximizing research funding flexibility so that available
resources are applied to Departmental and stakeholder priorities;

using full and open competition, and peer review, to get
the best possible researchers and technologists working on top
priorities; and

emphasizing performance-based management of programs.

I would like to call your attention to specific innovation reforms
which the Obama Administration supports:

authorizing FHWA a technology and innovation deployment
program, specifically to test, evaluate, and accelerate the delivery
and deployment of technologies;

allowing FHWA to increase research efficiency by
expanding the authority to conduct research in collaboration with
international partners;

reorganizing RITA's University Transportation Centers
program on a fully-competitive consortia model, to better leverage the
intellectual capital created through the Federal investment in the
important work of the universities;

authorizing a Multimodal Innovative Research Program to
competitively award advanced multimodal transportation research
projects, facilitating practical innovative approaches to address
systemic transportation problems; and

enabling RITA's National Transportation Library to
establish agreements with other transportation libraries and
information centers, to improve the accessibility and exchange of high
quality transportation information and data that support operations,
policy development, and decision-making.

Thank you for this opportunity to provide an overview of the
Department's transportation research priorities. I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you very much.
Mr. Halikowski, you are now recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. JOHN HALIKOWSKI,

DIRECTOR, ARIZONA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION;

CHAIR, AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF STATE

HIGHWAY AND TRANSPORTATION OFFICIALS

STANDING COMMITTEE ON RESEARCH

Mr. Halikowski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman and Ranking Committee Member Wu, Members of the
Committee, my name is John Halikowski. I am Director of the
Arizona Department of Transportation and Chair of the Standing
Committee of Research of the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials.
On behalf of AASHTO, I want to express my appreciation for
your focus on transportation research needs in the United
States. In today's fiscally-challenging circumstances,
particularly for state governments across the country, state
departments of transportation rely heavily on research that
leads to practical solutions to their most challenging
problems.
The return on today's dollar investment in research pays
off many times into the future. Today I want to cover three
points about transportation research and the need for strong,
continued commitment and investment.
First, it is critical that we retain the current, multi-
tiered research structure that has worked very well for us.
Second, AASHTO has identified a number of high-priority policy
areas where we believe that national research focus is needed,
and last, it is critical to ensure that the discoveries made
through research are communicated and transferred into
practice.
First, on our current research structure. There are
numerous layers to the current research structure, funded by
federal, state, and local dollars. This multi-layered and
integrated structure has worked well in delivering strategic
research that responds to the needs of the transportation
industry.
About one percent of the Federal Highway Program is spent
on highway research by the Federal Highway Administration and
the 50 States through their federally-funded State Planning and
Research Program. This relatively small amount that we spend on
research helps us to leverage the rest of the transportation
program by providing us with solutions that improve the quality
and efficiency of the system. Thus, in any consideration of
future federal transportation research programs, this multi-
layered approach should be continued and supplemented.
Through the existing multi-layered research structure,
including the Transportation Research Board (TRB), and the
states, we can support and complement strategic national
transportation research with our own research efforts.
Second, regarding the areas of research focus, the State
DOTs through AASHTO have identified a number of research areas
where coordinated, collaborative strategic policy research is
needed. These areas are safety, performance management,
interstate preservation, freight and economic competitiveness,
accelerating project delivery and environmental streamlining,
transportation funding, and finance.
It is an appropriate role for the U.S. DOT to take a
leadership role in undertaking strategic policy research in
support of these national policy focus areas. Specific examples
are contained in my written testimony.
For you, however, I would like to highlight a few examples
of high payoff, practical research in my home State of Arizona.
ADOT has partnered with the University of Arizona to take our
freeway management system real time, taking smart ramp metering
to the next level. The use of this system will enable us to
squeeze more capacity out of our system by increasing the
throughput while improving safety, air quality, and reducing
resource consumption.
In another example, Arizona State Route 260 runs through
one of the largest contiguous stands of Ponderosa pine in the
world and is home to a large population of elk. ADOT partnered
with the Arizona Game and Fish Department to record over 4,000
animal crossings and over 100,000 location fixes using GPS-
colored elk to determine their preferred crossing locations.
This has let us know exactly where we need to use fencing to
channel the elk crossing to underpasses and thereby not only
reducing wildlife vehicle collisions but also preserving the
wildlife population and minimizing the State outlays needed.
Lastly, it is the importance in transferring the findings
of our research to transportation planners, engineers,
designers, and contractors. U.S. DOT should embrace the latest
methods to assist in technology transfer and implementation and
be provided with the funding needed to share this information.
For example, the use of web-based technologies, including
webinars and interactive pages, web pages and online training
and the Strategic Highways Research Program implementation
funding needs to be provided for.
We already know that research, properly transferred into
practice, can make a difference in the way Americans move about
the country. State DOTs stand ready to collaborate with you on
this crucial effort.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you,
Mr. Chairman, Members, today. I will be happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Halikowski follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. John Halikowski, Director, Arizona Department
of Transportation; Chair, American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials Standing Committee on Research
Chairman Quayle and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on Transportation Research Priorities for the
next surface transportation authorization bill. My name is John S.
Halikowski, Director of the Arizona Department of Transportation, and
today I am speaking on behalf of the American Association of Highway
and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) which represents the state
departments of transportation (DOTs) in all 50 states, Washington, DC.
and Puerto Rico. I serve as Chairman of AASHTO's Standing Committee on
Research.
On behalf of AASHTO, I want to express our appreciation to you,
Chairman Quayle for your recognition of the value of a strong federal-
state partnership in conducting and deploying the results of
transportation research.
Mr. Chairman, in your invitation to me, you posed a number of
questions. In response, today I want to focus my remarks around the
following general points:

The current national framework, structure and process for
identifying transportation research needs, conducting and disseminating
research, and partnering for transferring technology works well and
should be sustained.

In the context of this framework, there are ample
opportunities for all stakeholders to identify research needs,
participate in overseeing research studies and have access to research
results

In 2008, AASHTO's Board of Directors adopted policy
priorities for reauthorization of the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, and
Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users--SAFETEA LU
(Public Law 109-59). While those policies remain priorities for AASHTO,
we have updated and refined our policy recommendations for the national
research program to reflect a fiscal environment that is much more
constrained than we anticipated or planned for nearly three years ago.

Through AASHTO's various standing committees, current
detailed research needs and gaps have been identified along with
opportunities for addressing those needs.

The Current National Framework for Research: An Overview

To build, maintain and expand its vast, multimodal transportation
system the United States has long relied on the fruits of research--
innovations in planning, materials, construction methods, system
operation, organizational effectiveness and many other areas.
Innovation through research allows state agencies-even with today's
fiscally challenging circumstances--to efficiently deliver a safe,
reliable and sustainable transportation system while continuously
improving facilities and services.
The federal government's support and funding for transportation
research has been steady over many decades dating back at least to the
1893 formation of the Office of Road Inquiry in the U.S. Department of
Agriculture. \1\ However, by any measure--across industries or
countries--the U.S. transportation community invests very modest
resources in research and innovation. A substantial return on
investment from smarter, better, and longer-lasting transportation can
easily be documented in terms of such factors as more durable
infrastructure and improved operations. But the benefits extend far
beyond the easily quantified to lives saved, a greener transportation
system and improved quality of life.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Transportation Research: Value to the Nation--Value to the
States, 2008.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Transportation research in the U.S. is a complex and decentralized
array of interrelated programs. This reflects the decentralized nature
of the transportation system itself, which includes local, regional,
state and federal operators and agencies, and involves many
stakeholders--the U.S. Congress and Department of Transportation (U.S.
DOT), state departments of transportation, local and regional
governments and planning agencies, universities, private firms,
associations and users of the systems.
The multiple and interrelated components of our national
transportation research effort that are supported with federal surface
transportation funds include the following:

1.  Federal research and technology transfer carried out directly
by U.S. DOT, including research directed by the Secretary's Policy
Office, as well as by the modal agencies--the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA), Federal Transit Administration (FTA), National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration (FMCSA), Federal Railroad Administration (FRA),
and the Research and Innovative Technology Administration (RITA).
Through the federal program, U.S. DOT tackles high-priority national
research needs and shares new technologies and practices with the
states. The U.S. DOT research program is described further detail later
in this testimony.

2.  Research conducted by each State department of transportation,
managed by the individual state DOT members of AASHTO's Research
Advisory Committee, coordinated with national research programs and
funded using either federal funds or directly by the states themselves.
The majority of the funding for this research comes from the federal
State Planning and Research (SPR) Program, which is the nation's
cornerstone state research program. State research programs are
described in further detail later in this testimony.

3.  Various cooperative research programs managed by the
Transportation Research Board (TRB), including the National Highway
Cooperative Research Program (NCHRP), Transit Cooperative Research
Program (TCRP), the National Cooperative Freight Research Program
(NCFRP), the Airport Cooperative Research Program (ACRP), and the
Hazardous Materials Cooperative Research Program. Most of these
programs determine their research agenda on an annual basis. The
largest of these programs--NCHRP--is funded through an annual voluntary
contribution of state SPR funds and has been carried out since the
early 1960s. NCHRP pools the voluntary research dollars to find
solutions to transportation challenges identified as critical by the
states.

4.  Policy research undertaken and managed directly by TRB. TRB
conducts policy studies at the request of the U.S. Congress, executive
branch agencies, states, and other sponsors examining complex and
controversial transportation issues. Studies cover all modes of
transportation and a variety of safety, economic, environmental, and
research policy issues.

5.  Special research authorized by Congress, such as the second-
generation, Strategic Highway Research Program (SHRP2), which is
focusing on four critical issues in transportation--safety,
infrastructure renewal, travel-time reliability, and capacity needs.

6.  The University Transportation Centers (UTC) Program carried out
by 60 University Transportation Research Centers typically housed
within individual universities, or in consortia of universities, across
the country.

Each of these components plays a vital role in the overall research
effort and, while the efforts are independent, there is considerable
collaboration and communication that exists between these research
programs to ensure the development of cohesive, complementary, and
significant research.

Federal Research and Technology Programs

Throughout its history, a core element of U.S. DOT's mission has
been to promote innovation and improvement in America's transportation
system. Over the course of the last few decades, this critical mission
element has developed into a broad array of research and technology
activities covering the spectrum of advanced research, applied
research, technology transfer, and implementation. Research conducted
through the U.S. DOT allows the federal government to address the more
strategic, national research needs which are typically more expensive
and broader in scope than can be accomplished by the states on their
own.
In addition, in order to maximize the effectiveness of these
research and technology activities, U.S. DOT supports and funds a host
of complementary activities including research administration,
deployment and training, communication, coordination, conferences, and
partnerships with other national and international research
organizations.
Transportation research authorized under past federal-aid highway,
highway safety, motor carrier and transit authorization bills included
funding for national surface transportation research, technology
innovation and deployment, and training and education. Funding for
FHWA's Research and Technology Program (R&T) was authorized under
Titles I and V of SAFETEA LU for conducting research, technology and
training activities. The largest research component is the Surface
Transportation Research, Development, and Deployment program (STRDD)
which had an annual authorization of $196.4 including $14 million for
an Exploratory Advanced Research (EAR) program, which focuses on long-
term, high-risk research with the potential for dramatic breakthroughs
in surface transportation.
This FHWA R&T program enables U.S. DOT with FHWA and the other
modal administrations to carry out policy research to achieve their
mission and address their four priority areas of safety, livability,
sustainability and economic competitiveness. For example, given the 50-
100 year design life for highways and bridges, research should now be
underway to consider and develop new specifications for highway and
bridge construction, maintenance and materials to adapt to weather
impacts associated with climate change. U.S. DOT and FHWA have assumed
a leadership role in that critical research undertaking. The states and
others can complement U.S. DOT's research program through the research
we are conducting in our ongoing programs.
AASHTO believes that even in a constrained fiscal environment,
funding for FHWA's R&T program should be maintained at levels
sufficient to continue a strong and effective research program. We have
recommended funding at no less than $175 million per year.

State Transportation Research

For decades, federal-aid funding has been a key resource for
research, with the states and federal government jointly investing in
innovation.
Each state receives federal-aid funding through the State Planning
and Research (SPR) Program first authorized in the Federal-Aid Highway
Act of 1944. Currently SPR funding to each state equals 2% of its
federal funds in the six core highway programs, with at least 25% of
the total required to be spend on research, development and technology
transfer activities, including training. This research component of SPR
can include highways, public transportation, and intermodal
transportation systems; infrastructure renewal (including pavement,
structures and asset management); activities relating to safety,
operations and maintenance; environmental and real estate planning; and
management, policy analysis, and systems monitoring.
The states use these funds to address the transportation needs that
they deem the most critical, including, among others: engineering and
economic surveys; planning and financing of future highway programs;
studies on the economy, safety, and convenience of surface
transportation systems; and research, development, and technology
transfer activities. The variety of activities carried out and products
produced by this program is crucial to the advancement of the
transportation system in our country.
The states' transportation needs and critical issues are unique and
constantly changing, and the SPR program affords states the opportunity
and flexibility to address those research and technology needs that are
most vital to maintaining and improving their transportation systems,
including emerging transportation research needs. States give high
priority to applied research to address state and regional challenges,
the transfer of technology from researcher to user, and research that
supports the development of standards and specifications.
The return on the states' investment in research is substantial. In
just one example, a formal cost analysis in 2003 prepared for the
Indiana Department of Transportation's research program, jointly
administered with Purdue University, showed benefit-cost ratios ranging
from as high as 220 to as low as 3 to 1. The average benefit-cost ratio
for nine projects, collectively, was an amazing 59:1. In 2009 a similar
analyses was performed with an average benefit-cost ratio of 32:1. But
it is more than just good economics. Research, for example, is
producing safer highways and construction zones for its customers and
workforce, saving future maintenance expenses, developing longer
lasting materials, introducing new technology and processes, developing
environmentally friendly solutions, to Indiana's waste problems,
promoting economic growth, bringing on-line faster and more economical
facilities. \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Indiana Department of Transportation-Joint Transportation
Research Program (Purdue University), 2011
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The State DOTs also collaborate on research projects with other
federal, state, regional, and local transportation agencies, academic
institutions, foundations, and private firms through the Transportation
Pooled Fund program. The Federal Highway Administration administers
this program and approves the projects that are selected. The program
allows groups to combine resources to support the project, which may
consist of research, planning, and/or technology transfer activities.
Since this program is dependent upon the organization of the core
programs for its funding, any changes to the current structure could
have a tremendous effect on the states' research programs and,
subsequently, what can be accomplished.
We urge that the SPR Program which is funded by a 2% set aside of
funds from the core highway programs be continued in its current
formula-based configuration.

Cooperative Research Programs

The states also voluntarily co-fund the National Cooperative
Highway Research Program through the Transportation Research Board of
the National Academy of Sciences. Funds are drawn voluntarily from the
states' SPR funds. Projects are selected annually by the AASHTO
Standing Committee on Research, and the funds can be spent only for
research projects approved by at least two-thirds of the states. Each
state's allocation amounts to 5 percent of its SPR apportionment.
As noted above, the States' research efforts are decentralized,
with priorities determined by experts in their fields, i.e., the
stakeholder and user groups who deal directly with transportation
issues day-in and day-out. Its flexibility allows the states to deal
with new and emerging needs that bubble up from those on the front
lines of the transportation industry. Research can be conducted by a
single state, pooled among several states with a common need or
concern, or conducted through a national program such as NCHRP.
Frequently, key research efforts start in one or more states--
through the SPR program--and other states and/or U.S. DOT expand upon
that research and it becomes more national in perspective. Advanced
searchable databases such as the Transportation Research Information
Service (TRIS) and the Research in Progress (RIP) database help to
ensure that overlap and redundancy do not occur by allowing researchers
to determine what has been accomplished thus far and what may be
underway related to their topic of interest. This decentralized
organization of research programs has been working well for many years
and should be continued in its present form to ensure that ongoing
research continues and that the flexibility exists to meet new demands.

Technology Transfer and Implementation

The final, and possibly most important, steps in the research
process consist of technology transfer and implementation. Technology
transfer and implementation can be explained best by a fishing analogy:
technology transfer provides the information on what pole to buy and
where to find the lures; implementation involves showing someone how to
fish.
Research is useless if it sits on a shelf. Thus, the need for
effective and continual technology transfer and implementation cannot
be overemphasized. For most people, and by extension most agencies,
change is difficult. New ideas may get nods of approval but may not get
implemented without assistance, such as champions to get the ball
rolling, presentations and webinars to get the message out, and pilot
projects to show practitioners how the new ideas can be incorporated
into the current business model.
Programs such as the Local Technical Assistance Program, which
provides information and training to local governments and agencies
across the country; the National Highway Institute and National Transit
Institute, which provide training, education, and information
clearinghouse services; and the National Transportation Library, which
maintains a robust transportation knowledge base for researchers and
practitioners; provide critical assistance in ensuring that research
becomes reality.

AASHTO's Research Policy Priorities for Surface Transportation

Reauthorization

AASHTO believes that research and technology transfer are critical
for federal, state, and local governments to provide world-class
transportation services to the American people. A strong transportation
research and technology transfer program should be sustained at the
levels provided in the last authorization, or at the same proportionate
level achieved for research in that bill, depending on the overall
funding provided in this authorization. This paper assumes that the
reauthorization will not meet the levels of the last reauthorization in
total dollar levels authorized per year.

Maintain the State Planning and Research Program. We urge
Congress to maintain the State Planning and Research program in its
current, formula-based configuration with a 25% minimum set aside for
research, development, and technology transfer activities, including
the National Cooperative Highway Research Program. The percentage
drawdown for the SP&R program may have to be increased to maintain the
dollar levels of the last authorization.

Fund FHWA's Core Research and Technology Programs. AASHTO
supports funding FHWA's core Research and Technology program at a small
increased level of $175 million per year, without earmarking and with
sufficient flexibility in order for FHWA to carry out its mission in
national research and innovation.

Continue Research Programs for FTA, NHTSA, FMCSA, and
RITA. AASHTO supports continuing to fund the research program for FTA,
NHTSA, FMCSA, and RITA (including funding for the Bureau of
Transportation Statistics) at the levels provided in SAFETEA-LU. If
funding falls below that provided in SAFETEA LU, proportionate shares
for these programs should be maintained.

Fund Implementation of the Strategic Highway Research
Program (SHRP 2). Provide funding for SHRP 2 Implementation through a
statutory takedown of funds from the federal-aid highway programs. The
percentage should be at least one quarter of one percent of the core
program funding levels in order to assure a stable, predictable source
of funds estimated at approximately $50 million per year.

SHRP 2 Implementation should be authorized following the
recommendations of the TRB report called for by SAFETEA-LU, TRB Special
Report 296, ``Implementing the Results of the Second Strategic Highway
Way Research Program.''

``Recommendation 1: A SHRP 2 implementation program should be
established.''

``Recommendation 2: The Federal Highway Administration should
serve as the principal implementation agent for SHRP 2, in partnership
with the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA),
and the Transportation Research Board. NHTSA should exercise a
leadership role in the long-term stewardship of the safety database.''

``Recommendation 3: Stable and predictable funding should be
provided over several years to support SHRP 2 implementation
activities.''

``Recommendation 4: A formal stakeholder advisory structure
should be established to provide strategic guidance on program goals,
priorities, and budget allocations, as well as technical advice. At a
minimum, this advisory structure should include an executive-level
oversight committee for the entire SHRP 2 implementation program and a
second oversight committee focused exclusively on administration of the
safety database.''

Fund the Cooperative Research Programs. Fund the
cooperative research programs administered by TRB at the annual levels
established in the previous authorization.
Transit Cooperative Research Program--$ 10.5 million
Cooperative Freight Research Program--$ 3.75 million Hazardous
Materials Cooperative Research Program--$ 1.25 million

Fund Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) Research
and Development. Continue funding support for ITS Research at its
current level of $110 million per year. Continue support for on-going
initiatives such as IntelliDrive, a partnership between state and
federal DOTs, the automotive industry and its suppliers, to improve
safety and mobility.

Fund the University Transportation Centers Program. Fund
the University Transportation Centers Program at the levels established
in the previous authorization--$69.7 million. Ensure an 80/20 federal/
non-federal matching requirement.

Fund the FHWA Training and Education Programs. Continue
support for FHWA training and education programs at current funding
levels, including the National Highway Institute, the Garrret Morgan
Transportation and Technology Futures Program, Eisenhower Fellowships
and other capacity building programs. Continue funding for the Local
and Tribal Technical Assistance Programs (LTAP/TTAP) at a small
increase over the current levels to $15 million per year. These
programs are significant to the sharing of knowledge and peer-to-peer
exchange practices among the counties and the district offices of the
state DOTs.

Fund ongoing data and knowledge-related activities.
Continue funding for ongoing data and knowledge-related activities,
including the National Pavement Performance Database and the National
Transportation Library.

Critical National Research Needs and Gaps

AASHTO has identified a number of focus areas of critical research
needs and gaps. Funding to undertake this research should come from all
of the interrelated research support components: U.S.DOT; FHWA's R&T
Program: the Cooperative Research Programs largely funded by volunteer
contributions from the state DOTs and housed at TRB; federal-state-
private sector partnerships and funding support; and Congressionally
authorized research support. It will take leadership, commitment and
funding support across all components to undertake the research and
innovation needed to ensure continuous improvement for maintaining a
world-class transportation systemSafety
For safety, we know what the goal is--reducing deaths and injuries
on our nation's transportation system--but we do not necessarily know
how effective we have been in achieving that goal because we don't have
the much-needed data to tell us what works and what doesn't. Data is an
extremely important part of the research effort that is often
overlooked, but research is only as good as the data it is based upon.
Some individual states, such as Iowa, have extensive safety databases,
but to address key national challenges, we need more national-level
data beyond what is currently available.
Key safety research needs are focused on developing a better
understanding of the factors contributing to crashes, developing new
strategies for addressing highway safety, and evaluating the
effectiveness of strategies currently in use. Examples include the
following:

Understanding Crash Causation. Human factors play a part
in the occurrence of crashes and need to be better understood in order
to develop appropriate countermeasures. Two specific contributing
factors for which additional research is needed are distracted driving
and drugged driving. While distracted driving has received significant
attention recently and is a growing highway safety concern, some of the
details are not clear. In the instance of cell phone use, for example,
it has not been shown that there is less risk associated with hands-
free use than with hands-on use. Also, drunk driving has been studied
extensively, but additional information is needed on driving under the
influence of drugs. A recent NHTSA report showed that 16 percent of
nighttime drivers in a roadside survey tested positive for one of a
variety of legal or illegal drugs. Since drugs are absorbed by and act
on the body differently from alcohol, additional research is needed to
determine which drugs impair driving, and the dosage levels that are
associated with impaired driving and a higher crash risk.

Countermeasure Development. New and promising strategies
are needed to address highway safety from the engineering, enforcement,
education, and emergency medical response perspectives. Reducing
roadway departure and vehicle collisions, improving the effectiveness
of enforcement activities, strengthening public information campaigns,
and reducing emergency response times will contribute to the reduction
of highway fatalities. New countermeasures could include infrastructure
improvements related to better signing and marking, work zone safety
improvements, and median barrier improvements; vehicle technologies
such as crash avoidance, rollover avoidance, and occupant protection;
and communication technologies that allow vehicle-to-vehicle and
vehicle-to-infrastructure communication as well automated communication
of crashes to emergency responders.

Evaluation. State, local, and federal agencies with
responsibilities for addressing highway safety are continuously
implementing strategies and programs, but additional information on the
effectiveness of these countermeasures is needed to enable highway
agencies to better direct their limited funds. The National Cooperative
Highway Research Program (NCHRP) has published a series of over 20
guides that provide detailed information on a wide range of highway
safety strategies, but the effectiveness of many of these
infrastructure and driver behavioral strategies is unknown. The
effectiveness of behavioral programs, such as public information and
education campaigns, is especially difficult to evaluate, and
methodologies for performing these evaluations need to be developed.
Legislation, such as hand-held cell phone bans and ignition interlock
requirements for first time drunk/drugged driving offenders, need to be
evaluated for effectiveness in changing the behaviors--in the short and
long term--that are contributing to serious crashes.

Data and Data Collection Technologies. Without
comprehensive and high quality data, it is difficult to determine the
nature of our highway safety problems, where the problems are, how to
best to treat the problems, and how successful treatments have been.
Extensive roadway networks, interaction of and communication between
the various highway agencies with jurisdiction in the states, and
limited resources for collecting data are the main challenges related
to obtaining data for highway safety analyses. With the increased focus
on new highway safety analysis tools and on the need for measuring
performance, data are constantly becoming more of a limitation and data
improvements are becoming more of a crucial need. Technologies are
needed that automate data collection on all public roads, including
lesser traveled and rural roads, and to significantly reduce the time
needed to transfer data to a database and make it available to users.

AASHTO urges Congress to fund state data improvements at
significantly higher levels than current ones, and AASHTO supports
increased funding for federal highway safety research.

Interstate Preservation

We believe that it is essential to focus attention on preserving
the trillion-dollar investment that has been made over the past 50
years on the roads and bridges that make up the Interstate Highway
System. Many of the 55,000 bridges on the system and the 210,000 lane
miles of pavement in the system are reaching 40-50 years of age. They
may be at a stage where total replacement or more than routine
reconstruction is required. These costs are not adequately taken into
effect in today's bi-annual U.S. DOT conditions and performance
reports.
We recommend that funding be authorized for U.S. DOT and State DOTs
to jointly undertake a comprehensive study of the assessed (not
modeled) needs and investment requirements of the Interstate system
bridges and structures.

Performance

Performance management is a policy-directed, data-driven,
performance-based business practice that links organizational goals and
objectives to resources and results. The outcomes of performance-based
management include more efficient distribution of limited resources and
a focus on accountability of decision-making. Over the last 15 years,
there has been a dramatic increase among state departments of
transportation (DOT) in the use of performance management principles to
plan, prioritize, track, and improve the effectiveness of nearly all
DOT functions to achieve the agencies' fundamental goals. Performance
information helps to guide decisions about priorities and resource
allocation for capital project delivery and internal agency management
and operations. The trend towards states adopting performance
management has been the result of several factors, including the demand
for more accountability from government programs and agencies (both
state and Federal), the pressure of scarce financial resources, and the
recognition of best business practice.
Currently, all state DOTs use some type of performance management
process. The most common is to track asset condition and safety data
and the majority of states provide comprehensive performance data to
decision makers to both increase accountability to customers, and
achieve the best possible transportation system performance with
current investment programs. The primary challenge for many agencies is
the lack of funding to maintain and expand the current transportation
system. However, by using a performance-based management approach, DOTs
can maximize existing resources and justify recommendations for
additional funding.
In order to continue the work that state DOTs are doing with regard
to performance management more research needs to be conducted. The
following are several research priorities which AASHTO believes are
necessary in order for states to fully embrace and implement
transportation performance management:

Transportation Data Program- A fundamental component
necessary to the development of performance measures and in performance
management is data. Research is needed on how best to develop a data
program that can be used to support a robust performance management
process.

Development of Performance Measures- AASHTO, with its
metropolitan planning organization partners, and FHWA has identified a
select number of performance measures for safety, pavement and bridge
assets that could be used by all states. However, additional work is
needed to standardize data collection and reporting for those measures.
Beyond the initial highway asset and safety fatality measures,
additional research is needed to identify appropriate measures. For
example, how do we measure freight mobility--by measures of delay,
reliability or access?

Comparative Analysis of Performance Measures- The
usefulness of performance management may be enhanced when the
performance measures used by one state DOT are comparable to those of
other state DOTs. AASHTO's members, through NCHRP, support a robust
research program that voluntarily compares performance for certain
variables, such as fatalities, across all the states. Many state DOTs
would like to continue this type of research extending comparison of
performance to additional performance indicators which all states agree
to measure.

Development of Performance-based Planning and
Programming- The current focus on performance measures is transforming
the transportation planning process to one that is performance-based
and focused. The planning process is where performance management can
drive transportation investment decisions--linking performance and
return on investment. Support for research, including the development
of innovative tools and techniques along with training and peer-to-peer
exchange of best practices, is need to accelerate the adoption of
performance-based planning and programming.

AASHTO supports sufficient funding for federal highway research to
enable the agency to continue its research and technical assistance on
performance measures and management.

Environment: The AASHTO Center for Environmental Excellence

In 1992, AASHTO established the Center for Environmental Excellence
(Center) in partnership with Federal Highway Administration as a
continuation of its efforts to find innovative ways to assist state
transportation agencies and their partners in improving public trust,
environmental performance and program delivery. The mission of the
Center is to promote environmental excellence in the delivery of
transportation services by encouraging environmental stewardship and
disseminating innovative ways to advance the state of the practice in
environmental management and mitigation. The vision for the AASHTO
Center is to broaden and enhance the environmental tools and resources
available to state transportation agencies and their partners.
The Center provides State DOTs, our local partners and the
transportation community in general with technical assistance,
training, information exchange, partnership-building opportunities, and
access to innovative environmental tools. One example of technical
assistance and information exchange is the development of Environmental
Practitioners' Handbooks which help advance the state of the practice
by describing the latest practices and procedures for addressing
environmental considerations in transportation project development,
design, construction, maintenance and operations.
Another key function of the Center is to serve a convener for
problem solving to bring together the states, resource agencies and
stakeholder to address pressing environmental concerns with the
objective of identifying and reaching consensus on potential solutions.
For example, the Center organized a meeting with the state DOTs, State
Departments of Natural Resources, the Fish and Wildlife Services, FHWA
and the Indiana State University Center for North American Bat Research
and Conservation to discuss and identify the problems states were
confronting with the Endangered Species Act process related to the
Indiana bat and discuss programmatic approaches to solve this problem.
The programmatic approach that resulted from this process provides for
enhanced recovery and protection of the species and eliminates most of
the project-by-project review related to the Indiana bat, therefore
allowing needed transportation improvements to proceed. This effort was
awarded the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services 2007 Transportation
Environmental Stewardship Excellence Award.
In 2006, the Center developed the Transportation and Environmental
Research Ideas (TERI) Database. TERI provides an organized structure to
capture and catalogue research ideas by environmental topic. The State
DOTs use the data base to evaluate and prioritize the environmental
research needs from among a constant flow of new research ideas that
come from federal, state, metropolitan and local transportation
agencies, TRB, federal and state resource agencies, non-governmental
organizations and other stakeholders.
AASHTO urges continued funding to support the AASHTO Center of
Environmental Excellence in its commitment to technical assistance,
training, and information sharing to help transportation professionals
to advance environmental sustainability and stewardship and to deliver
transportation improvements more efficiently and expeditiously.

Funding and Finance

Established in the 2005 SAFETEA-LU transportation authorization
act, the mission of the AASHTO Center for Excellence in Project Finance
(the Center) is to provide support to State DOTs in the development of
finance plans and project oversight tools, and to develop and offer
training and state-of-the-art finance methods to advance transportation
projects and leverage funding.
The Center provides four primary services:

Professional Education

Research Services

Information Dissemination

In education the center has implemented the Wharton Transportation
Executive Program which is designed to provide executive education in
finance to senior state DOT officials. The program is conducted by
AASHTO and the Wharton School of Business at the University of PA. The
Center also offers forums in Public Private Partnership's education.
This past September the center offered a one day Congressional forum
for Members and staff on revenue and financing options.
The Center conducts research on cutting-edge project finance
techniques and topics. The Center's Research Services aim to undertake
objective research into specific financial management and policy
issues, many of which are actually suggested by State DOTs. These
findings are summarized in a series of Occasional Papers, as a resource
for project sponsors and policy makers. Most recently the Center joined
with the National Conference of State Legislatures in a research
project to compile the first comprehensive set of material on how State
DOTs are organized for making investment decisions including
programming, and project funding and finance.
Other examples of research and information exchange include the
development of case study instructional materials for use by the Center
and other educational organizations, and interdisciplinary academic
assessments of project finance techniques. The Center also collaborates
with other entities, such as TRB to help organize such symposiums as
the National Conference on Transportation Finance to aid in the
development of state-of-the-art project finance tools and methods.
Using the center's website as its primary dissemination tool, the
Center is a comprehensive source of information on transportation
finance, financial management, and policy for the transportation
community in the United States. The Center's website provides access to
all activities and products under one umbrella functioning as a central
clearinghouse for all issues relevant to transportation finance,
providing extensive information on transportation funding and financing
including tools and programs, information on legislation, a
comprehensive calendar of domestic and international events and
seminars on project finance, a glossary of terms, and links to
extensive resources germane to transportation finance.
AASHTO urges continued funding to support the AASHTO Center for
Excellence in Project Finance in its commitment to technical
assistance, training, and information sharing to help transportation
professionals to advance environmental sustainability and stewardship
and to deliver transportation improvements more efficiently and
expeditiously.

Freight and Economic Competitiveness

AASHTO has developed recommendations for the next surface
transportation authorization that support continuation and increased
funding for the NCFRP. These AASHTO proposals also include freight
policy and program recommendations that need additional research as a
foundation for effective implementation. AASHTO's proposals are
consistent with those made by the Freight Stakeholders Coalition, which
is comprised of the national associations representing the major
elements of the freight transportation industry, including both
carriers and shippers.
The following are several research priorities related to AASHTO's
authorization recommendations that are important for transportation's
contribution to economic competitiveness:

Defining the National Freight Transportation System.
There is consensus, but not unanimity, on the importance of investing
in the national freight transportation system in support of economic
competitiveness. Unfortunately, there is not consensus on a definition
or description of that system as a guide for productive investment. We
must have a firm foundation of research and analysis to guide a freight
investment program that is intended to generate economic
competitiveness benefits for the nation.

Freight Chokepoints. We know the freight chokepoints on
the interstate system that are the most costly. However, we do not know
how to translate that into a program of improvements that results in
improved system performance that is feasible and cost effective.

Calculating Public Benefits in Public/Private Freight
Projects. It is important to justify all public investments made in
transportation in terms of public benefits. It is especially important
for freight transportation investments where there may be private
profit on the same balance sheet and where we want to document regional
and national benefits, as well as local. Currently there is no
standard, widely-accepted approach for doing this.

Measuring Performance. Knowing where to invest and
whether or not the investment has been productive requires performance
measurement. What you can't measure, you can't manage. AASHTO has
invested considerable effort to advance this objective, but more
analysis is required to know not only what the appropriate measures
are, but most importantly how to apply them for policy, program, and
project purposes.

Financing. At present we do not have the funding
necessary to simply maintain our core freight transportation systems.
We will not get that funding from the traditional sources. We need to
figure out how to generate new revenues for this purpose--directly or
indirectly--from the beneficiaries of freight improvements that do not
have adverse consequences for specific industries, modes, or regions.

Multi-State Planning and Investment. Freight moves across
state lines, but for the most part our processes for planning and
financing do not. There are projects important for economic
competitiveness for which benefits are widespread but costs are
concentrated. These projects cannot be realized, without immense
effort, because our institutions or planning and financing are not
organized for this purpose. We need to know how to build on the
strength of our existing institutions to develop mechanisms for doing
these projects.

Without research in these areas, we cannot hope to have a
transportation program that meets the nation's economic competitiveness
needs.
There is another important category of research that often gets
lost in the high-level policy, sometimes abstract, discussions related
economic competitiveness. This research is related to simply making
sure that the condition, performance, and capacity of the basic
transportation systems are adequate to meet the need. Virtually all
freight moves on systems that are shared with passengers--road, rail,
and water. Continuing research that addresses basic elements of these
systems is essential
Furthermore, there are many operational objectives for State DOTs
that are important for economic competitiveness for which we do not
currently have well-grounded standard practices. Research can support
the advancing the state of the practices in a number of areas including
areas identified above as research priorities and also including:

Incorporating freight factors into the project selection
process

Assessing the adequacy of secondary freight routes for
large truck traffic

Experience with highway improvements to support
intermodal terminals

Guidelines for adequacy of connector roads to seaports

Translating highway engineering and construction
experience into the rail arena

Engineering issues related to truck-only lanes

Procedures for managing a rail-crossing program to
maximize efficiency on rail and road

Standardizing bridge analysis among the states relative
to vehicle weight

AASHTO supports sufficient funding for federal highway research to
enable the agency to continue its research, technology and innovation
deployment, and technical assistance to advance all aspects related to
freight.

Conclusion

Ultimately, AASHTO cannot stress enough the importance of research
implementation, transfer of research into practice, and technology
transfer. Multiple and varied efforts are underway to move research
into practice, and the variety of methods to do this are dependent on
the actual results and specific solutions.
To use a potentially overused phrase, ``it takes a village'' to
accomplish all of the research objectives within transportation,
including developing the data, establishing the needs, conducting the
research, sharing the results, and implementing the best ideas. And
through coordination and collaboration, leveraging time and money,
utilizing the combined knowledge and expertise, our village is making
significant contributions to the advancement of our nation's
transportation system.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you very much.
Mr. Gehr, you are now recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID GEHR,

SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, HIGHWAY MARKET,

PARSONS BRINCKERHOFF;

CHAIRMAN, AMERICAN SOCIETY OF CIVIL

ENGINEERS TRANSPORTATION POLICY COMMITTEE

Mr. Gehr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the
Subcommittee. I am David Gehr. I am Chairman of the
Transportation Policy Committee for the American Society of
Civil Engineers. ASCE is pleased to offer our views on how to
maximize funding for transportation research priorities.
The Highway Trust Fund has been an essential source of
funding for surface transportation research and technology for
decades and has led to critical benefits for the development of
a 21st century surface transportation system.
While research has provided benefit, in ASCE's 2009,
``Report Card for America's Infrastructure,'' roads received a
D-, bridges a C, and transit a D. To bring these three
categories into a state of good repair would require a five-
year investment of about $1.2 trillion. While an investment of
this magnitude is very unlikely, a number of targeted research
programs could extend the life span and effectiveness of our
transportation infrastructure. As passed, the 2005 Surface
Transportation Research Development and Deployment and the
University Transportation Research sections in SAFETEA-LU were
completely programmed or earmarked and over-authorized, thus
creating a difficult environment to allocate funds.
Additionally, the Federal Highway Administration had no
discretionary funds to maintain certain core research programs,
meaning critical efforts like the biannual conditions and
performance reports struggled for funding. This speaks to the
need for minimal earmarking and free and open competition among
non-federal entities performing research utilizing federal
funding.
Currently the entire transportation research community
focuses on short-term, applied problem-solving research instead
of the advanced, higher-risk, multi-year projects which would
lead to the development of a more efficient system. The longer
we delay the necessary research, the longer the Nation delays
implementation of a 21st century transportation system.
The University Transportation Centers Program should be
continued, but the program can be improved. Universities work
well in high-risk, long-term research, so new legislation
should emphasize their role and ensure that the best
universities are selected through a competitive process. The
existing program levels should be simplified, and authorized
funds should be subject to open competition.
Given the large number of entities in the UTC Program,
coordination of research activities is a challenge, and we run
the risk of duplicative research. Efforts have been made to
improve coordination but more needs to be done. The program
needs to reduce the number of UTCs in order to increase
competition, and all centers should receive the same level of
funding.
Awarding each center 2 million annually would provide
enough critical funding for each center to develop significant
research projects. To help facilitate a more competitive
selection process the current match should also be adjusted.
Changing the match to 80 percent federal UTC program funding
and 20 percent match from the centers would allow a break from
using State DOT funding as the matching source. Centers would
then not be obligated to focus on short-term solutions for
State DOTs and could focus on long-term research endeavors.
Technology transfer activities are critical to the
successful completion or implementation of research results.
The transfer of technology from the research stage to the
application stage must be emphasized in surface transportation
research. The application of improved or new technology is the
ultimate goal and must be supported by funding.
While there are some research and publication successes,
many university programs do not have proper channels for
assuming ownership of the technology transfer process. A
research project should need to have an implementation plan
worked out with the funding agency during the proposal process.
Adding this step will increase the actual implementation of
research.
Furthermore, the Long-Term Bridge Performance Program
should be continued in the authorization bill. There is a need
to study long-term bridge life to develop a better
understanding of how bridges age and deteriorate. This allows
engineers to better predict bridge behavior and should lead to
improved maintenance and management practices. The Long-Term
Bridge Performance Program can lead the way in this effort.
Finally, the Intelligent Transportation Systems section
must be more long-term in nature. ITS is a cost-effective means
of addressing rising demand by increasing the efficient
utilization of our transportation systems. The technology
revolution in transportation will require a wide range of
independent yet coordinated actions by public and private
sector interests.
Improvements resulting from research and technology remain
critical to achieving national transportation goals. Therefore,
funding for research should be increased to levels that will
provide high returns on investment.
ASCE looks forward to working with Congress as it develops
a robust surface transportation system for the future. Thank
you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gehr follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mr. David Gehr, Senior Vice President,
Market, Parsons Brinckerhoff; Chairman, American Society of
Civil Engineers Transportation Policy Committee
The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) \1\ would like to
thank the Technology and Innovation Subcommittee for holding a hearing
today on how to maximize funding for transportation research
priorities. The Society is pleased to present to the Subcommittee our
views on investing in surface transportation research.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ASCE was founded in 1852 and is the country's oldest national
civil engineering organization. It represents more than 140,000 civil
engineers individually in private practice, government, industry, and
academia who are dedicated to the advancement of the science and
profession of civil engineering. ASCE is a non-profit educational and
professional society organized under Part 1.501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Highway Trust Fund has been an essential source of funding for
surface transportation research and technology (R&T) for decades.
Research results have lead to many benefits including: materials that
improve the performance and durability of pavements and structures;
design methods that reduce scour (and consequent threat of collapse) of
bridges; intelligent transportation systems technologies that improve
safety and reduce travel delay; methods and materials that radically
improve our ability to keep roads safely open in severe winter weather;
innovative management approaches that save time and money; analytical
and design approaches that reduce environmental impacts that support
sustainable development and improve the aesthetic and cultural aspects
of transportation facilities. These benefits are provided through
several major transportation research programs and have proven critical
in developing a 21st century surface transportation system.
However, while research has provided many benefits for the nation's
surface transportation systems, in ASCE's 2009 Report Card for
America's Infrastructure roads received a D-, bridges a C, and transit
a D. Furthermore, to bring just these three categories of
infrastructure into a state of good repair would require a five year
investment of $1.2 trillion from all levels of government. While an
investment of this magnitude seems unlikely at a time of economic
uncertainty, a number of targeted research programs could extend the
life span and effectiveness of our built environment. In the long term,
investment in research and development technologies and processes can
help reduce the gap between the current transportation funds available
and the $1.2 trillion necessary for road, bridge, and transit repairs.
Research funding will prove critical to achieving national
transportation goals in safety, quality of life, economic health,
environment impacts, sustainability, and security in the next surface
transportation authorization bill.
ASCE supports several general principles in the reauthorization of
research and technology programs in the nation's surface transportation
legislation. Improvements resulting from research and technology are
critical to achieve national transportation goals, therefore funding
for these activities should be increased to levels that will continue
to provide high returns on investment. Research programs should be
conducted according to the highest scientific and engineering
standards, from priority setting to the awarding of contracts and
grants, to review and evaluation of research results for
implementation.
ASCE supports the following actions regarding specific surface
transportation R&T programs:

The research and technology portion of the State Planning
and Research (SPR) program should be maintained to help support state-
specific activities while continuing to encourage the states to pool
these resources to address matters of mutual interest.

University research should continue to be supported
through the University Transportation Centers (UTC) program using a
competitive selection process that guarantees quality participants and
fairness in the allocation of funds.

The Federal Highway Administration's (FHWA) program
should be strengthened by giving it sufficient funding and flexibility
to implement the recommendations of Transportation Research Board (TRB)
Special Report 261 ``The Federal Role In Highway Research and
Technology'' to focus on fundamental, long-term research; to perform
research on emerging national issues and on areas not addressed by
others; to engage stakeholders more consistently in their program; and
to employ open competition, merit review, and systematic evaluation of
outcomes.

The recommendations of TRB Special Report 295 ``The
Federal Investment in Highway Research 2006-2009, Strengths and
Weaknesses'' should be implemented.

The Strategic Highway Research Program (SHRP II) should
be continued beyond the life of SAFETEA-LU, ensuring that critical
research will be continued in key areas of surface transportation.

Total Research and Technology funding for activities
corresponding to Title V in SAFETEA-LU should be at least $750 million
per year.

The Federal Transit Administration's (FTA) research
program should be free of earmarks and allocations and given
flexibility to work with its stakeholders to develop and pursue
national transit research priorities. The Transit Cooperative Research
Program should be funded at a minimum of $20 million per year.

The Research and Innovative Technology Administration
(RITA) should have a well-defined scope and responsibility and
appropriate funding, in addition to currently authorized research
funding, so that it may supplement and support the R&T programs of the
modal administrations.

University Transportation Centers

University research should continue to be supported through the
University Transportation Centers (UTC) program. However, the program
could be improved in several ways. The existing multiple levels of the
program should be simplified and funds authorized for this program
should be entirely subject to free and open competition. At this time
there are approximately 80 to 100 different universities participating
in the UTC program. Given this large number of entities, coordination
of research activities, so that each institution's research efforts are
complementary and not duplicative, is a significant challenge. Efforts
have been made to improve coordination, but more still needs to be
done.
The program needs to be competitive in order to award approximately
forty UTCs through the research title and five to ten through the
transit title. Additionally, the different types of UTCs should be
eliminated, in order to allow all UTCs in the research title to fall
into the same ``tier'' and therefore receive the same level of funding.
The funding should amount to approximately $2 million per center
annually. This would provide enough critical funding for each center to
develop significant, long-term research projects, rather than projects
that only last one year. Transit title centers should be selected on a
competitive basis as well and receive the same level of funding as
those in the research title.
Currently the entire transportation research community focuses on
short term, applied, problem solving research. By shifting primary
research toward advanced, higher risk, longer term, multi-year
projects, the surface transportation system that this nation will need
in 40 years can begin to be developed. At this time very little high
risk, long term research is occurring and the longer we delay the
necessary research, the longer the nation delays implementation of a
true 21st century surface transportation system.
Much of the technology necessary for a future surface
transportation system already exists, however UTCs can properly apply
that technology for the greatest benefit of the nation. Universities
work well in high risk, long term research, which is why new
legislation should emphasize their role and ensure that the best
universities are selected through a competitive process.
To help facilitate a more competitive selection process adjusting
the current match would be beneficial. The current match required for
centers funded through the research title is dollar for dollar, however
the match should be changed to 80% federal UTC program funding and 20%
match from the centers. The revised match system would allow for
centers to break away from using state department of transportation
dollars as the primary matching source, therefore allowing UTCs to
delve into advanced research, instead of focusing on state departments
of transportation (DOT) problems. In general, state DOT's are more
focused on short-term solutions rather than long-term, high risk
research endeavors. With UTCs relying on state DOT funding, this
limited focus is carried over into the research programs at the
centers. ASCE believes that the revised match would not inhibit centers
that are already very aggressive from securing more than a 20% match,
but there will be some centers that can only raise the minimum revenue
necessary.

Technology Transfer

Technology transfer activities are critical to the successful
implementation of research results. The transfer of technology from the
research stage to the application stage must be emphasized among all
participants in surface transportation research. The application of
improved or new technologies is the ultimate goal, and must be
emphasized to the point of being supported by research funding.
However, while the Federal Highway Administration research program, the
National Cooperative Highway Research Program, the Strategic Highway
Research Program, and state DOT research funded by State Planning and
Research funding each has a mechanism in place for technology transfer,
many research programs do not have a similar system in place.
While there are some research and publication successes like the
Accelerated Bridge Construction program being undertaken at the Utah
Department of Transportation, many other programs do not have proper
channels for assuming ownership of the technology transfer process.
Many times research reports from universities are sent to a funding
agency, such as a state DOT, but the application of the research
outcomes are not implemented. Instead, as part of a research project
there needs to be an implementation plan worked out with the funding
agency during the proposal and contract process. After the research a
follow up report on the implementation successes or failures should
then be prepared. Adding this step to the process will increase the
actual implementation of research and will provide the primary federal
research administration with evidence of research implementation, which
is currently lacking.
It should be understood that high risk, advanced research does not
always have an implementable outcome. Since UTCs are currently unable
to push state DOTs to implement applied research, this provides another
example as to why UTCs should instead focus on higher risk projects
that do not necessarily require an implementation process.

Improving Transportation Research Programs in a Reauthorization

As originally passed, the Surface Transportation Research,
Deployment and Development and the University Transportation Research
sections in SAFETEA-LU were both completely programmed or earmarked and
over-authorized, creating a difficult environment within which the
Federal Highway Administration and the Research and Innovative
Technology Administration (RITA) had to allocate funds. An additional
effect was that the Federal Highway Administration had no discretionary
funds to maintain certain core research programs, which meant that such
critical efforts as the biannual Conditions and Performance Report
struggled for funding. These problems were partially relieved by the
SAFETEA-LU Technical Corrections Bill in 2008. However, the research
programs continue to be adversely impacted by the level of programming
and earmarking. This speaks to the need for minimal earmarking and free
and open competition among non-federal entities performing research
utilizing federal funding.
Specifically ASCE would better define a UTC program with
approximately 40 centers funded at $2 million annually, which focus on
long term, advanced research. Additionally, there needs to be a larger
Exploratory Advanced Research Program, funded with at least $20 million
annually. The exploratory advanced research program should then fund
only large, multi-year, high risk projects.
Furthermore, the Long Term Bridge Performance Program, a planned 20
year research program, should be continued in the authorization bill.
There is a need to study long term bridge life to develop a better
understanding of how bridges age and deteriorate. This allows engineers
to better predict and model bridge behavior and could lead to improved
maintenance practices and better bridge management. The FHWA's Long-
Term Bridge Performance Program should lead the way in this effort.
Bridge maintenance is based on the funding available and which
bridge is most in need of repair. That usually means deck repair, not
the structure of the bridge. When the public notices problems, such as
potholes, these get attention. The public rarely notices severe
structural problems unless concrete is falling from the bottom of an
overpass bridge. Obviously, to properly maintain bridges, more funds
are needed, and more of those funds need to go into the maintenance of
the structure, not just the deck. It is ASCE's hope that the Long-Term
Bridge Performance Program will help to provide answers as to how to
properly channel our nation's bridge maintenance funds.
Finally, the Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) section must
be more long term in nature, rather than looking at five year horizons.
A transportation system for the 21st Century will be developed in part
by ITS research and therefore must have a long term outlook.
Intelligent Transportation Systems are a cost-effective means of
addressing rising demand by increasing the efficient utilization of our
transportation systems. The technology revolution in transportation
will require a wide range of independent yet coordinated actions by
public and private sector interests, which must be sustained by a major
federal commitment. The federal government should provide the
leadership and commitment to direct the complete deployment of ITS for
consumers of passenger and freight transportation across the nation.
At a minimum Congress should maintain the funding that is currently
in place for surface transportation research in the new authorization.
By investing in smarter, more efficient transportation systems now,
operations and maintenance costs in the future could be significantly
reduced. In order, to acquire these efficient systems in the nation
must invest in research programs today.

Conclusion

Surface transportation infrastructure is a critical engine of the
nation's economy. It is the thread which knits our nation together. To
compete in the global economy, improve our quality of life and raise
our standard of living, we must successfully rebuild America's public
infrastructure. Faced with that task, the nation must begin with a
significantly improved and expanded surface transportation system. A
surface transportation authorization must be founded on a new paradigm;
instead of focusing on the movement of cars and trucks from place to
place, it must be based on moving people, goods, and services across
the economy. Beyond simply building new roads or transit systems, an
intermodal approach must be taken to create a new vision for the
future.
The nation's economic competitiveness will be tied to the ability
to reduce congestion, reduce use of fossil fuels, and reduce the
production of greenhouse gases. This work can only be done through high
risk, advanced, long-term research. The transportation research title
in the new surface transportation authorization bill, must emphasize
this need and therefore should focus on the UTC program, the ITS
section, the surface transportation research section that supports the
Federal Highway Administration, and the Exploratory Advanced Research
Program. ASCE looks forward to working with the Congress as it develops
robust surface transportation authorization legislation which is
founded on a strong national vision, adequate funding and new
technology and research, and creates an integrated, multi-modal
national transportation system.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes Dr. Feller for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. IRWIN FELLER,

PROFESSOR EMERITUS OF ECONOMICS,

PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY;

SENIOR VISITING FELLOW, AMERICAN

ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE

Dr. Feller. Good morning, Mr. Chair, Ranking Member Wu. It
is an honor to testify------
Chairman Quayle. Dr. Feller, could you put your microphone
up?
Dr. Feller. It is an honor to testify before this
Subcommittee.
Over several decades and under the leadership of several
distinguished chair and subcommittee chairs, this Committee has
played a distinctive and essential role ensuring that federal
investments in research and development are allocated to those
ends and performed in ways that maximize the taxpayer returns,
be these in the form of increased standards of living, safer,
healthier lives, and other forms of monetary and non-monetary
benefits.
The questions I have been asked to answer relate to the
vitality, productivity, and efficiency of those taxpayer
returns of surface transportation of specific applications of
these overarching Subcommittee concerns. My answers derive from
a career studying and evaluating federal and State government
science and technology programs and the organization and
performance of university research centers. These studies have
been enlivened and enriched by service and chairing of several
federal advisory panels, National Research Council panels, as
well as service on the Transportation Research Board, Research
and Technology Coordinating Committee.
Let me start with an overarching answer to the questions
that the Committee posed to me, and recommendations about
changes in the highway bills' reauthorization of its research
titles. They are as follows.
Deregulate the surface transportation R&D system by
removing earmarks. Earmarks constitute a deadweight tax on the
performance of federal investments and surface transportation
R&D. Steer funding to longer-term, more fundamental research
questions prioritized through consultation among Congress, the
Executive Branch, major stakeholders, and the research
community.
Allocate these funds by opening all competition and merit
review processes. Reshape the UT system into a smaller number
of centers as now being proposed by the Department of
Transportation's Research and Innovative Technology
Administration with provision for placing at least one center
in each of ten regions to ensure geographic dispersion.
Modify and expand DOT's Technology Transfer Programs to
mesh with changes that occur in the underlying research and
development system, and here I would simply extend a previous
speaker's statement about understanding a broader
conceptualization of technology transfer and working with
universities on related measures to form closer cooperation.
Provide funding for systematic, independent, state-of-the-
art assessments of the public's return to federal investments
in surface transportation. One of the clear limitations
addressed in the question to me was how to measure public
returns to transportation R&D. There are very few studies that
I am aware of and to a large extent they fall behind the state-
of-the-art now being developed by other agencies.
Let me just expand upon these comments. The existing
surface transportation R&D system obviously produces a steady
stream of new knowledge, products, and techniques that yield
benefits, and the UTC System is an important source for
replenishing and upgrading the transportation sectors' need for
technically-trained labor force.
With all these benefits, both the design and performance,
the current system operates under constraints that
significantly impair its performance, producing a return to the
taxpayer well below obtainable levels. Earmarking is not
innovative. Earmarking reduces the incentives that the faculty
have to seek ambitious, challenging, larger, more complex, but
competitively awarded projects. Earmarking reduces the basic
quality controls both at the input stage in terms of the
selection of products and projects and performance, and at the
output stage in terms of systematic, rigorous, independent
evaluation of taxpayer returns.
Earmarking, and here I speak from reviewing the research
programs of many other federal agencies, transportation
research is isolated from the larger stream of research being
conducted across many fields and many agencies and many
university activities. Earmarking essentially provides no
incentive for faculty to collaborate with faculty in other
fields. It provides no opportunity for researchers in other
fields to collaborate or to enter into research with
transportation research. Transportation research, in effect,
has become a backwater, which is inconsistent with the changes
in science and opportunities for collaborative,
interdisciplinary work.
And lastly, I would emphasize that these are not my views
alone. I am privileged to say that I believe I am reflecting
the views of many of the leaders of the transportation research
system.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Ranking Member Wu.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Feller follows:]

Prepared Statement of Dr. Irwin Feller, Professor Emeritus of
Economics,
Pennsylvania State University; Senior Visiting Fellow,
American Association for the Advancement of Science
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee,
It is an honor to be invited to testify before the House Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Technology and
Innovation.
Over several decades and under the leadership of several
distinguished committee and subcommittee chairs, the House Science,
Space and Technology Committee and its Subcommittees have played a
distinctive and essential role in ensuring that the Federal
Government's investments in research and development are allocated to
those ends and performed in ways that maximize the taxpayer's benefits,
be these in the form of increased standards of living, safer, healthier
lives, or comparable monetary and non-monetary returns. Spanning the
R&D, technology transfer and related educational activities of
individual Federal agencies and departments, it has assumed
responsibility for monitoring the performance of major components of
the larger Federal R&D enterprise. It thus has contributed and
continues to significantly contribute to the vitality, productivity,
and efficiency-and thus taxpayer returns-of this enterprise.
CONTEXT
The questions that I have been asked to respond to in today's
testimony on Transportation Research Priorities are specific
applications of the Committee's larger purview. Correspondingly, my
answers are specific applications to the field of surface
transportation research of overarching principles and findings about
how best to allocate Federal R&D funds to achieve maximum benefits and
how to assess the performance of those receiving these funds.
These answers distill findings from a career as a researcher into
technology transfer, evaluation of Federal and state government science
and technology programs, performance measurement, and the organization
of university research centers. This research has been enriched, and
enlivened, by service as a member and chair of numerous Federal agency
advisory and evaluation panels, related experiences on several National
Research Council committees charged with studying the effectiveness of
the Federal R&D programs, and similar international experiences,
including advisory and consulting work for the European Commission, the
Organization for Economic Development and Cooperation and several
countries.
My work on technology transfer was the basis for an invitation to
become a member of the Transportation Research Board's (TRB) Research
and Technology Coordinating Committee (RTCC), on which I served between
September 1, 1997, and August 31, 2003. Likewise, my work on
comparative national science and innovation policies has led to my
current membership on the National Research Council`s Committee on
National Research Frameworks: Application to Transportation.
My answers to Questions (2)-(5) in the Committee's invitation thus
blend facts and findings that span most of the Federal Government's
domestic R&D activities, with working knowledge of specific Federal
surface transportation R&D program and policy issues. My expertise
regarding the technical contents of specific R&D programs and projects
though is limited. My answer to Question (1), which requests a brief
overview of the Transportation Board's roles and responsibilities is
taken from the TRB's website and communications with TRB staff.
In key respects, my answers restate long recognized, well
documented, and articulately expressed concerns about the shortcomings
of the current system of Federal funding of surface transportation
research that can be found in numerous independent, expert reports and
in previous testimony before this Committee and other Congressional
committees. These shortcomings include the excessive earmarking of
transportation funds that limits the ability of Department of
Transportation agencies to shape a coherent, sustainable national
transportation R&D program and the dilution of the impact of Federal
R&D research dollars associated with having to disburse them through an
unduly large number of University Transportation Centers (UTCs). Each
condition drives the transportation research system to short-term,
incremental research undertakings at the expense of the higher
priority, longer term, more fundamental, more collaborative and thereby
more impactful research topics that could be funded with the same
research dollars. Simply put, current arrangements constitute systemic
obstacles to garnering the maximum benefits from Federal surface
transportation R&D outlays.
If there is a value-added to be found and generated by my
testimony, it rests perhaps in two things. First, as evidenced by
enactment of the Government Performance Results Act and recent salutary
reforms already taken to reduce earmarking across the swathe of Federal
government expenditures, Congress has demonstrated an increasingly
unwillingness to accept inefficient budget practices and ineffective
programs. Thus, on this Committee, as well as hopefully on related
authorization and Appropriations Committee, old words may be heard by
new ears.
Second, viewing transportation R&D from the enlarged cross-agency
perspective that weaves through my answers offers additional, new
insights into why current arrangements for funding and organizing
transportation R&D are inconsistent with basic principles for
justifying Federal government investments in domestic R&D. Equally
importantly, as my answers detail, current arrangements are
inconsistent with the internal dynamics of scientific discovery and
technological innovation. It is not that some beneficial results do not
emerge from current surface transportation research programs. Of
course, they do. Rather, it is that the benefits are small relative to
what is needed and what is possible.

QUESTIONS

(1) TRB in the National Academies
TRB is one of six major divisions of the National Research
Council--a private, nonprofit institution that is the principal
operating agency of the National Academies in providing services to the
government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.
The National Research Council is jointly administered by the National
Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the
Institute of Medicine.
TRB was created in the 1920s to be an intermediary between newly
formed state highway departments and research programs and the federal
government, then the Bureau of Public Roads. Since the 1980s TRB has
also convened committees under the auspices of the National Research
Council, which advise Congress and federal agencies on transportation
policy issues and evaluate and advise agency research programs.
TRB is supported by state transportation departments, federal
agencies including the component administrations of the U.S. Department
of Transportation, and other organizations and individuals interested
in the development of transportation. Since its inception, TRB has
provided opportunities for dialogue, information exchange, and sharing
of research activities (to avoid duplication of effort) and research
results. For more than 40 years TRB has been a multimodal research
organization with activities in all modes. TRB provides an extensive
portfolio of services, including:

Information exchange on current transportation research
and practice,

Management of cooperative research and other research
programs,

Analyses of national transportation policy issues and
guidance on federal and other research programs, and

Publications and access to research information from
around the world.

These activities annually engage more than 7,000 engineers,
scientists, and other transportation researchers and practitioners from
the public and private sectors and academia, all of whom contribute
their expertise in the public interest by participating on TRB
committees, panels, and task forces.
(2) Earmarking
Earmarks are a tax on the rate of return to the national investment
in transportation R&D. Earmarks constrain the publicly funded
transportation research system's ability to produce other than
incremental solutions to incremental problems. Legitimate objectives to
insure that the national transportation R&D portfolio take into account
geographical, climatic, and demographic differences while
simultaneously providing geographically dispersed opportunities for the
education and training of technically trained transportation personnel
do not require earmarks. These objectives can be met by far simpler,
more cost-effective policies and programs.
Indeed, to someone who has only recently migrated into the domain
of transportation R&D, its most striking landscape feature, as
documented in several TRB reports and the overview article,
``Earmarking in the U.S. Department of Transportation Research
Programs,'' by Ann Brach and Martin Wachs (Transportation Research Part
A 39 (2005), 501-522), is the pervasiveness of earmarking in the
allocation of transportation R&D programs. Both in terms of total DOT
transportation research and the allocation of UTC funds, earmarking has
gone viral. Its causes have moved from the opportunistic actions of
influential members of Congress to designate funds for selected
purposes and/or performers within their jurisdictions to what I have
termed a race to the bottom among academic administrators and faculty
who increasingly ``view earmarks . . . as an acceptable way to get
financial support for projects and facilities that might not survive
review procedures based on merit'' (``Research Subverted by Academic
Greed,'' Chronicle of Higher Education, January 16, 2004; B6ff).
Only in my earlier work on the U.S. agricultural research and
technology transfer system have I encountered such pervasive
earmarking. This comparison, I believe, is an especially telling one in
considering the future. Earmarking contributed to ``same old/ same
old'' research agendas--some of it highly productive, some of it
mundane-of agricultural researchers in the USDA's Agricultural Research
Service and university faculty receiving funds via State Agricultural
Experiment Stations. It thus was a factor in the limited role of these
research communities in the genetics-biotechnology scientific and
technological revolution that has since transformed plant and animal
research. The major scientific and technological advances that spawned
this revolution came from researchers in the life sciences whose work
was funded by other Federal agencies and other sources. Indeed, the
backwater nature of mainstream agricultural research even gave rise to
proposals, some of them originating in this Committee, for moving
funding for agricultural research from USDA to other Federal agencies.
Even today, the mix of formula funding and competitive awards in the
funding of agricultural research remains at issue, but at least it is
one openly debated, leading to some acceptance, albeit at times
grudgingly, that some provision for all-comer, competitively awarded
grants is needed to insure the continuing vitality and thus
productivity of the underlying research.
Earmarking, by definition, is a method for circumventing the
quality control contained within competitive, merit review processes.
The result is not necessarily that earmarked projects do not produce
useful findings. Research by definition involves uncertainty; not
inconceivably, as in selecting single entries from two sample
distributions, one may find some earmarked awards producing results
that are at least as good or better by some standard than those
allocated by competitive merit review processes. But one has every
reason to expect that a comparison of overall statistics--mean, mode,
lower and upper tails--will document the greater return on the public's
investment to those allocated via competitive, merit review processes.
Beyond the quality control issue, there are increasingly compelling
reasons to expect this difference. These differences derive from the
dynamics of faculty and institutional behavior and the dynamics of
scientific and technological discovery.
Earmarking of academic R&D funds is enervating. It provides
researchers and their institutions with assured funding that need not
necessarily require their best efforts. It reduces the incentives
faculties have to respond to new scientific or technological advances
or new sources of funding. As a dean of engineering once lamented
during an interview I conducted during a study of the determinants of
university research competitiveness, he had little ability to motivate
his faculty to seek larger, more technically challenging but
competitively awarded grants because they were ``comfortable'' with the
support for summer salaries and graduate research assistants they
received from a congressional earmark.
Insulation from competitive, merit review processes also removes
opportunities for constructive learning. Painful and idiosyncratic at
times that it can be, and here I speak from considerable experience,
running the gauntlet of competitive merit reviews can contribute
significantly to the improvement of one's work. The judgment and advice
of peers about ways to reconceptualize a problem or to attend to
otherwise overlooked analytical techniques or data sources are low cost
ways of increasing the yield from specific projects. These
opportunities are missed or diluted when earmarking occurs.
My current research into the dynamics of scientific and
technological advances across many fields of endeavor highlights yet
another debilitating effect of earmarking on the returns to Federal
investments in transportation research. As cross-disciplinary, cross-
sector/collaborative research becomes an increasingly essential element
in generating significant/transformative/impactful discoveries, other
Federal R&D agencies have responded by increasing their support for
multi-year, multi-institutional R&D awards. A key requirement in this
new mode of funding academic science is the requirement that the
research program involve participation by faculties in multiple
disciplines, departments, and colleges.
Cross-fertilization of ideas, techniques and discoveries are
increasingly the seedbed of significant advances, not only in ``basic''
science but also in mission-oriented/problem-focused research. To cite
but one of numerous contemporary examples, the University of
California-Santa Cruz's Center for Adaptive Optics research efforts to
improve the precision of telescopes used in astronomical research also
have yielded important advances in vision science that ultimately will
enter into practical applications in optometry.
Existing earmarking arrangements limit these possibilities in
transportation R&D. In particular, earmarking serves to isolate the
transportation research community from researchers in cognate
disciplines. Isolation occurs because the recipients of earmarks have
little incentive to seek out or engage colleagues in disciplines whose
work may enhance their own. Further contributing to this isolation is
that faculties outside of the transportation field have little
opportunity to extend their techniques or findings to transportation
related problems. Isolation in turn contributes to making
transportation R&D an academic research backwater.
Indeed, writing now clearly as a lay person and not a technical
expert, I continue to be struck by the opportunities for collaboration
and cross fertilization of ideas and techniques--all pointing to higher
returns on the nation's investments in R&D--in the thematic areas I
have encountered during my participation in a recent assessment by the
American Association for the Advancement of Science of the National
Science Foundation's Science and Technology Center's program and those
identified in several TRB reports about opportunities and needs in
transportation R&D. New materials, nanotechnology, remote sensing,
optics, computer software, and more, are but a few such examples of the
research being conducted by these centers that appear to connect
directly to the larger transportation R&D agenda. A more open, flexible
and competitive transportation system that fosters such connections
would contribute both to more impactful findings and by narrowing the
gap between discovery-oriented and mission-oriented work also serve to
accelerate the incorporation of new scientific and technological
discoveries into socially beneficial practices.
The essential point to my answer about earmarking is that it is
mainly a restatement of views already expressed by key performers and
users of transportation R&D. One of the most striking, and indeed
gratifying experiences, I had as a member of the RTCC that prepared the
2001 report, The Federal Role in Highway Research and Technology
(Transportation Research Board, Special Report 261) was to observe its
members-representatives from industry, state government, universities,
not-for-profit organizations, and professional association-advance as a
core recommendation that:
``University transportation research funded under the UTC program
should be subject to the same guidelines as FHWA's R&T program-open
competition, merit review, stakeholder involvement, and continuing
assessment of outcomes-to ensure maximum return of the funds invested
(p.9).'' Similarly, the 2008 RTCC report, The Federal Investment in
Highway Research 2006-2009, offers as a recommendation:
``To the maximum extent practical, research funding should be
awarded through competition and merit review'' (TRB 295, p.4).
Far more important than may be my views, it is the stakeholder
community that is asking for relief from current earmarking
arrangements. It is they who are asking to be allowed to be all that
they can be.
(3)
This is a multi-part question, with my answers limited to the two
areas--measuring returns to Federal investments in research and
technology transfer-on which I have conducted research and professional
activities. My answer to the question, ``How is the value of Federal
transportation measured,'' is based on a general impression, augmented
by a review of FHWA's Office of Research Development and Technology's
2007 ``Synthesis of R&D Benefits Case Studies,'' which reports on
findings from 3 contractor studies.
At present, assessment of the value of transportation R&D appears
to be based heavily on expert review panels, augmented, as above, with
infrequent contractor studies. Expert review is a mainstream technique,
widely used by and for Federal agencies to assess R&D programs. But it
is not state-of-the art. Increasingly, both Congress and the Executive
Branch are demanding or requiring that expert judgment be augmented
and/or supported by ``evidence,'' typically of a quantitative nature.
As the author of several recent review articles on measuring the
returns to Federal government R&D and as an active participant in
recent workshops and forums relating to the ``science of science policy
research,'' I recall no participation of anyone whose work bore upon
transportation R&D. Noting that I have not had time to conduct a full
review of the above cited contractor studies or the larger published
literature, I am not presently aware of any studies related to
transportation research that have employed the concepts--e.g.,
knowledge spillovers; social savings--or employed the methodological
techniques--e.g., network analyses, patent analysis, bibliometric
analysis--that are becoming standard components of efforts to measure
the value of Federal R&D in other domestic domains.
The cause and consequences of this lag are circular. Without the
type of evidence now being demanded of research programs in budget
reviews, advocates for Federal support of transportation research are
at a competitive disadvantage relative to those in other fields who
have advanced beyond review panels and are tackling the admittedly
formidable challenges of deriving valid and credible estimates of
outcomes and impacts from what is inherently a long-term, circuitous
and probabilistic process. Lacking funds, and especially discretionary
funds to support policy oriented research, which is not cheap, DOT and
its subunits cannot gather the type of evidence needed to make a
``convincing'' case about the value its research activities have
generated.
My answer to the question, ``Is technology transfer from federally-
funded research and development effective,'' and ``How could it be
strengthened'' is an indirect one, in part again because of what I
perceive to be the limited availability of quantitative evidence that
would permit program level assessments along cost-effectiveness or
benefit-cost lines, and in part because the processes of technology
transfer are so variable and context dependent that it is difficult to
generalize from one or a few cases--successes or not--to a program
level assessment.
Certainly, one can point to notable successes in technology
transfer. Moving beyond the justifiably oft-cited example of SuperPave,
my favorite example based on personal experience as a taxpaying
consumer is the increased adoption of roundabouts. According to TRB
295, the diffusion of roundabouts was spurred by an FHWA 2000 report,
Roundabouts: An Informational Guide, which is described as having lent
``legitimacy and credibility to an alternative intersection design.''
(p. 78) that has considerable safety benefits. I now encounter
roundabouts on Route 15 crossing over between Virginia and Pennsylvania
and most especially, and thankfully, on Route 179 between Oak Creek and
Sedona, when my wife and I spend time there in the winter. I also
believe that I am about to get a roundabout in my local neighborhood as
construction continues on a new intersection between Old Gatesburg Road
and Pine Hall Road in Ferguson Township, Pennsylvania.
DOT's existing technology transfer programs consists of information
dissemination, technical assistance, and demonstration projects. These
are the tried and true technology transfer techniques of most Federal
agencies. Thus FHWA's Priority, Market-Ready Technologies and
Innovations List which offers clear, concise, and informative
information about ``vetted'' new technologies is one means of reducing
the technical and regulatory uncertainties associated with trying new
things, thereby making them more attractive to potential adopters.
What needs to be considered here is less the present than the
future. The design and operation of a technology transfer system must
be based on the design, operation and outputs of its parent R&D system.
Whatever may be the current level of effectiveness of DOT's technology
transfer activities, a new, expanded Federal role and set of techniques
will be required if the recommendations relating to the restructuring
of the direction and conduct of transportation research contained in
the other answers are adopted.
In particular, a shift to a system directed at longer-term, more
exploratory research, especially one predicated heavily on the
participation of universities, requires a broader conceptualization of
meaning and implementation of technology transfer. Only sketching here
the elements of such a system, added emphasis would need to be given on
how the Federal government could assist in the development of
university-industry-state and local government cooperative agreements
or research centers that provide for closer, upfront connections
between research agendas and user needs. Also, under a similar
revamping of the research agendas of UTCs, additional attention would
need to be given to policies and terms relating to patent and licensing
arrangements between Federal labs and universities and private sector
firms. Again, focusing on technology transfer from the UTCs, added
attention would need to be given to the role that the placement and
mobility of graduates of university research centers or of other
university degree programs plays in disseminating new practices into
the agencies and firms in which they work.
(4) University Transportation Centers
I am aware that in the interval between the Subcommittee's
invitation to me to address this topic and submission of my written
testimony, important administrative actions have been taken by DOT to
modify the program. Specifically, it is my understanding that the
Research and Innovative Technology Administration (RITA) has decided to
end funding for all 59 UTCs (including those selected through
competition) and hold a new competition that will select a total of 20
UTCs.
Recognizing then that I address a situation much in flux, my
answers relate to the previous setting, while in the process being
consistent with the general thrust of RITA's recent actions.
My recommendations for improving the University Transportation
Center program essentially extend the above answers about the need to
curtail the earmarking of transportation research funds to specific
projects and performers, with the added observation that specific
provisions of the UTC program further sap its potential to be a
significant contributor to a vibrant national transportation R&D
program. In particular, the requirement that UTCs match their federal
funding with nonfederal funding on a dollar-for-dollar basis and the
peanut butter spreading of program funds among such a large number of
recipients cannot but serve to drive research agendas to short-term,
applied projects. Basing my answer on my experience as a social science
researcher accustomed to the modest size awards offered by NSF but also
as the director for 25 years of a social science research institute in
which single investigators received competitive multi-year awards for
several hundred thousand dollars, the $500,000 annually awarded to the
earmarked Tier II schools is below the threshold needed on average to
engage in a substantial, sustained research program.
The program's 4 tier categorization serves little purpose but to
ensure that each state has 1 center, each doing what it states it can
do best, with little regard for an integrated, priority-driven national
transportation R&D agenda. Moreover, quality control checks on the
program's performance are reported as weak or lacking. According to the
2008 TRB, The Federal Investment in Highway Research, only 38 percent
of the Title V UTCs are awarded their funds competitively (p. 77). More
strikingly, in contrast to the increasingly rigorous evaluations
already undertaken or being planned for the R&D programs of agencies
such as NIH, NSF, NIST, DOE, and USDA, ``There is little program
oversight for the earmarked universities'' (TRB, 2008; p. 73).
Overall, whatever its initial merits as both a research and
educational program, at present the UTC program is poorly designed to
produce substantial returns. The program requires fundamental re-
engineering based on the design principles of providing adequate funds
for some smaller number of competitively selected universities so that
they can engage in longer term, more fundamental research. The original
design principal of one UTC in each of 10 districts should be retained,
with the collective university research agenda closely linked to a
clearly articulated set of national transportation R&D priorities.
Rather than relying on earmarking to insure participation of other
universities (and political jurisdictions), one of the selection
criteria used to competitively select host institutions should be the
extent to which the proposed host institution can demonstrate
partnership relationships with other universities and stakeholders
within the region.
(5) Recommendation
The above answers not surprisingly lead to this final answer about
recommended changes in the highway bill's reauthorization of its
research titles. My overarching recommendation is to deregulate
transportation R&D. Existing provisions are overly restrictive,
prescriptive, and inflexible. New titles should be based on setting
forth broad national transportation objectives--economic productivity/
competitiveness/efficiency; safety and the like, as have been
identified in earlier national reports; funding for these objectives
should reflect mutually arrived at agreement among Congress, the
Executive, and stakeholders about the relative priorities to be
assigned among these objectives along with the assessments of existing
and newly consulted relevant research communities about the feasibility
and the opportunities predicted for research and development; funding
should be provided for a modest number of multi-year research centers
in order to foster longer-term, interdisciplinary research, with awards
made on the basis of competitive merit review; funding also should be
provided for all-comer, unsolicited proposals directed at stated
research priorities, with awards again based on competitive, merit
review; and procedures should be put in place for systematic,
independent, expert assessment of the quality of research and of
subsequent impacts.
In one sense, these are very modest recommendations. They integrate
best R&D organizational design, management practices, and evaluation
procedures from across Federal agencies. They are clearly grounded in
the oft expressed views of transportation R&D leaders and users across
levels of government as well as the private, public and not-for-profit
sectors. In another sense though they clearly are stretch goals for the
Congress and for the relevant stakeholder and performer communities for
they represent far reaching changes in the status quo.
They are presented here today in the view that this Subcommittee is
in a unique position to substantially increase the national return on
Federal investments in transportation R&D by catalyzing long recognized
and much needed changes.
There are more specific recommendations to the transportation
research title made in the 2008 report of the Research and Technology
Coordinating Committee referenced earlier. Although I was no longer a
member of the committee when this report was developed, it is relevant
to your work and I recommend that the Subcommittee request a briefing
on it from the Transportation Research Board.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman

Chairman Quayle. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes Ms. Peterson for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF MS. LYNN PETERSON,

TRANSPORTATION POLICY ADVISORPR,

OFFICE OF GOVERNOR JOHN KITZHABER (OR)

Ms. Peterson. Good morning, Chairman Wu and Ranking
Member--I am sorry. Chairman Quayle and Ranking Member Wu and
Members of the Committee. I am Lynn Peterson. On behalf of the
governor's office of the great State of Oregon, thank you for
the invitation.
You know, I have spent my career as a transportation
engineer, and you know, really trying to find ways to reduce
costs within the entire transportation system and as a whole in
designing construction. As an entry-level engineer in
Wisconsin, I was told that because I was designing for the
public infrastructure my number one priority was public safety,
and while I completely and utterly agree with that, what we
were taught was basically take everything from the 13 three-
ring binders that I was told to memorize my first couple months
and basically look at adding 20 percent plus 20 percent in
order to make sure that we were accommodating for public
safety.
But over the 20 years that I have been out of school that
over-design because we didn't know, and there were a lot of
myths out there, that over-design is slowly going away, and we
are getting to a much more cost-effective delivery system.
So let me just give you an example. If it said a 12 foot
lane, add 20 percent, 14 feet wide must be better. We now know
that depending on the context of how you are building, what the
land uses are or what the users of the system are, you may or
may not need that width or the width may be needed for
something else.
So we are really looking to reduce costs. In these tough
times we can't afford to continue not having the research,
especially in safety and all of the other things that these
fine gentlemen have pointed out in order to reduce costs. And
we also cannot allow ourselves to kind of dip into the point of
getting back into the myth creation by not having a workforce
that is either being trained or retrained in what actually the
experiments have shown, what the testing has shown, whether it
is concrete or the turn radius for a roundabout.
So we have to continue these robust engineering research
programs, and I want to just call your attention to page 2 of
my testimony where we talk about the types of things that--
savings that we have been able to achieve both in the Oregon
Department of Transportation and OTREC, our Transportation
University Research Center. The first example that I would
point to is our cracked bridge program, where we spent $1.3
billion in replacing bridges, but we were able to save $500
million by looking at the research over a series of years and
demonstrate that given allowable revisions to load rating
procedures, many of these bridges did not need repair or just
needed small repairs.
We also did an applied research with Transportation
Research Board that saved about $73 million on expediting
project delivery while improving environmental outcomes by
moving to an outcomes-based environmental approach.
And then just let me bring up the example of Missouri DOT,
who has moved into what they call practical design. Based on
safety research they have been able to figure out how to reduce
costs for delivery of projects and do more projects, and has
seen significant reductions in the number of fatalities over
the last five to six years.
This applied research such as ODOT examples must be paired
with the Transportation Research Board and local advanced
research development such as the university transportation
centers. OTREC or Oregon Transportation Research and Education
Consortium is doing that by integrating and looking ahead of
the research development arm of the State by working with all
of our universities to coordinate research and expertise. Each
one of our universities in the State has a specific expertise
which I think while we talk about needing to reduce the number
of university transportation centers, we also need to recognize
geographic diversity and uniqueness of where that expertise is
housed from past years of how--where is that research coming
from.
Which is important because we need to be able to implement
lease cost planning within our infrastructure. One of the
largest gaps in advanced research is the integration of freight
and bicycling into regional travel demand models. It is
something we really need to pay attention to.
And as I sum this up, probably the most important thing to
remember is that we need to support workforce development. Let
me just emphasize that we have a lack of engineers in this
country. Just like Intel which is in Congressman Wu's district,
they only look for the best and the brightest, and they are not
looking in the United States as much as they looking abroad.
We need to actually develop the workforce here in this
country, and we can't do that without being able to provide
research-type opportunities for them in order to be able to
have commonsense judgment on the ground when they are
implementing. They need to be able to test and experiment. Our
University Transportation Research Centers allow that to
happen, and without that we are not teaching strategic
thinking.
Let me just finish by saying that the Federal Government
should continue to play an integral role in financing and
setting performance measures in transportation because from a
local street to the interstate, from a local airport to the
international airport, between the actual local bus stop to
busses and other forms of public transit options between
cities, the transportation system is a connected system, and
the user doesn't care who owns what. This is a shared system
that only works if all the pieces are working together, and
since research is learning and learning is necessary to compete
and create a skilled workforce, competition for economic
prosperity is tight worldwide and in order to keep the U.S.
moving, we need to keep our research strong to keep our
economic advantage.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Peterson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ms. Lynn Peterson, Transportation Policy Advisor,
Office of Governor John Kitzhaber (OR)
Good morning Chairman Quayle, Ranking Member Wu and Members of the
Subcommittee. My name is Lynn Peterson and I am the Sustainable
Communities and Transportation Policy Advisor to the Governor of the
State of Oregon.
I would like to begin by thanking you for this opportunity to share
our views and perspectives on our ongoing research and development
activities. On behalf of my colleagues in academia, government and
industry, I appreciate this chance to address the technical,
regulatory, social and financial challenges to implementing new
measures and integrating new technologies into existing transportation
networks.
The State of Oregon has a long history of research and development,
and we learn from the cutting edge application of policies and
technology we have put in the field. This has encouraged an environment
of learning within the state. I have benefitted as a professional of
having this environment by receiving two masters degrees from Portland
State University (transportation planning and engineering), and the
citizens have benefitted with increased efficiencies, choice of modes,
environmental quality and safety.
Oregon has focused on applied research, which has allowed us to do
more with less. In order to maximize this approach, we need all federal
programs to be as flexible as possible so that Oregon and other states
are allowed to make the most effective use of limited funding, leverage
resources and maximize their economic competitive advantages.
There are four things I hope you will take to heart from this
testimony. The first is that you will appreciate the key role that
research plays in continuing to meet the mobility needs of Americans
and building stronger communities.
The second is that virtually every aspect of our transportation
system needs to be transformed in the short and medium term future, and
this challenge can only be met through innovations developed through
research. Congestion threatens our economic viability and our quality
of life. Fuel taxes, which currently provide the core of transportation
funding in America, are not able to keep pace with the cost of
preserving, maintaining and operating our transportation system, much
less improving it. Energy consumption by the transportation sector
frustrates efforts to achieve energy independence. The future
transportation system needs to be safer, cleaner, more efficient, more
equitable, more reliable and more cost-effective. Research will play an
indispensable role in achieving those objectives. We value research in
spite of limited resources because research spurs innovation and helps
to tackle difficult transportation issues.
The third is that in Oregon our research needs exceed our research
resources. The scope of our research activities are largely limited to
applied research which has applicability primarily to local conditions
in Oregon. Oregon and other states rely on other programs to carry out
applied research that has regional and national applicability. We also
rely on other programs, such as research conducted by University
Transportation Centers (UTCs) and sponsored by USDOT and the
Transportation Research Board, to pursue more advanced research.
Advanced research, like applied research, also has a practical
objective, but it tackles bigger and less tractable problems in
transportation. The next transportation authorization needs to continue
to provide a means of addressing the needs of applied and advanced
research which is regional and national in scope.
Fourth, in Oregon we have developed a very successful model of
collaboration between our research universities and between the Oregon
Transportation Research and Education Consortium (OTREC), the state
department of transportation (ODOT) and local governments. This
collaboration allows us to stretch our resources further and leverage
our expertise and funding across our institutions, and it ensures that
research is able to be put into practice more effectively. Oregon's
model can be used by other states and universities as a way to build a
successful research partnership.

The Value of Research

I would like to offer a number of instructive examples of how
research efforts can be applied in the real world and help government
agencies stretch public resources further and address emerging
challenges.
Cracked Bridges. A decade ago, ODOT discovered a widespread
cracking problem in a specific type of reinforced concrete girder
bridge that affected approximately 500 bridges statewide. Under
existing load rating criteria these bridges would have to be replaced,
repaired, closed or weight-restricted for heavy trucks, causing
significant economic costs to our trade-dependent state. ODOT undertook
the $1.3 billion Oregon Transportation Investment Act (OTIA) III State
Bridge Program to repair and replace hundreds of bridges, which was by
our state's standards a massive investment. In the meantime a series of
ongoing research projects were able to demonstrate that given allowable
revisions to load rating procedures, many of these bridges could be
shown to be safe with only repairs or without any work. As a
consequence, almost 200 bridges were either downgraded from replacement
to repair or removed from the list of bridges needing work entirely.
This research saved Oregon almost $500 million.
Effective Bridge Repairs. Oregon has many older reinforced concrete
bridges still in service that are showing signs of cracking and need to
be strengthened or replaced to maintain safe and efficient travel,
particularly for heavy trucks. However, ODOT simply does not have
enough money to replace all of these bridges and instead is focusing
its limited resources on cost-effective repairs that keep bridges in
service longer. To do this, ODOT has conducted research to test
effective repair techniques. Of particular concern is the capability of
girders and cross-beams in bridges to withstand forces caused by bridge
self-weight and truck traffic. ODOT has used a number of methods for
increasing the capacity of girders and cross-beams, but there was no
comparison of these techniques that could help engineers decide which
method was most appropriate for a particular situation. ODOT contracted
with Oregon State University to conduct testing on large-scale beams in
order to compare the various repair methods, analyze the expected life
and make recommendations for repair approaches. The outcome of the
research provides bridge designers with a basis for selecting repair
methods, and it provides guidance on calculating design capacity for
the repairs.
Expediting Project Delivery While Improving Environmental Outcomes.
The Transportation Research Board's Strategic Highway Research Program
2 (SHRP2) funded research carried out by OTREC faculty members to
develop an Ecological Assessment Method for Highway Capacity Projects.
This research built on earlier work by ODOT to develop a method for
systematically aligning transportation and conservation priorities to
achieve improved environmental outcomes and accelerate project
delivery. ODOT used this approach in securing environmental permits
under the $1.3 billion OTIA III State Bridge program. ODOT saved $3 for
every dollar it invested in this approach during the bridge program,
with total savings of $73 million. TRB has now funded a smaller
metropolitan planning organization in Oregon to test the methodology.
This approach could potentially transform environmental permitting for
transportation projects from a prescriptive command and control
approach to an outcome-based approach that saves time and money and
leads to better environmental outcomes.
Energy Independence and Economic Competitiveness. OTREC is
conducting research that will help develop tools for local governments
in reducing air pollution and meeting energy independence goals, all of
which links back to mobility and the economic competitiveness of our
communities. OTREC research has paved the way for advances in a number
of areas. In the area of emissions, breakthroughs have been made on
linkages between the impact of emissions and health of pedestrians,
bicyclists, public transit users and residents due to exposure to
particulate matter. Important advances are also being made in the area
of fleet replacement models that consider hybrid and alternative fuels
in addition to impacts on emissions.
Researchers are currently analyzing the relationship between
vehicle miles traveled (VMT) and economic activity to see if there is
reason to be concerned about the impact that VMT reduction might have
on local economic activity. Researchers are helping to explore wider
application of land use models and adapting analytical methods to
better reflect the relationship between land use, transportation and
travel demand for specific land use types. This is extremely important
in determining the impact of different development types on the
transportation system.
Examples of non-motorized travel research completed and underway
include integrating bicycling to improve the regional travel demand
model, understanding bicyclist route choice, investigating the
effectiveness and safety implications of various bicycle infrastructure
and the relationship between bike infrastructure and cycling activity
to the patronage of local businesses. As it relates to commercial goods
movement, one particularly innovative and completed research project
focuses on the development of multi-criteria tools for measuring and
analyzing the impacts of congestion on freight and the impact on
reliability, delay, costs and emissions.
While no single strategy will significantly reduce the
transportation system's energy consumption, together these efforts will
move us toward meeting state and national goals.

Overview of Transportation Research in Oregon

The two key components of Oregon's transportation research system
are the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) and the Oregon
Transportation Research and Education Consortium (OTREC).
Our model in Oregon has been based on partnerships and
collaboration since day one. Oregon's research program has been more
successful than many state DOT programs in finding common ground with
and leveraging assistance from University Transportation Centers. Part
of the mission of University Transportation Centers is service to and
collaboration with state transportation departments, and OTREC has been
a strong partner with the state and local governments, including MPOs,
transit districts and Port authorities.

ODOT's Research Program

Again, transportation research needs of the states are primarily
applied research to solve specific problems. The state Departments of
Transportation generally expect a research project to deliver a product
that can be put directly to use by the agency. Research interests are
broad and eclectic, though most states do have well-defined priorities
that change as problems are solved and as conditions change. Because
states expect our research results to be used, these state programs
also have a strong technology transfer or implementation component.
The research and development that Oregon carries out independently
focuses on the unique circumstances of the state: its geography,
geology, climate, state laws and existing practices. For example, most
states use the same engineering design manuals and guidebooks for
structures, pavements, highway capacity, safety and traffic control
devices. When these manuals are revised or updated, additional research
is needed to adapt them to local conditions. Recent major revisions to
the pavement design guide and the release of the new Highway Safety
Manual triggered research efforts in Oregon and in other states to make
these tools more readily usable given local conditions.
State DOTs receive research funding through the Federal-Aid Highway
Program. Under the State Planning and Research Program (SP&R), two
percent of each state's federal transportation funding is set aside for
planning and research activities. This system allows each state to
address its top concerns and identify solutions at the state level.
Since the research program is a portion of each state's federal
funding, any reduction in federal funding for surface transportation in
the next authorization bill will reduce funding for research as well,
just at the time that more resources will be needed to find the best
ways to stretch public dollars further.
States rely on others to conduct applied research which is regional
or national in scope and to pursue advanced research. For research that
is of interest for more than one state, Oregon and most other states
use the Transportation Pooled Fund (TPF) Program and/or the Cooperative
Research Programs administered by the Transportation Research Board.
These programs allow states to easily partner and leverage resources to
solve common problems of a regional or national scope. For example,
Oregon and other states recently teamed up for a pooled fund research
project to examine strategies and best practices for state DOTs to
support commercialization of electric vehicles and infrastructure, a
key emerging technology that has strong potential to advance energy
independence.

Oregon Transportation Research and Education Consortium (OTREC)

The Oregon Transportation Research and Education Consortium (OTREC)
is a National University Transportation Center that was established in
December 2006 through a partnership between Portland State University,
the University of Oregon, Oregon State University and the Oregon
Institute of Technology.
OTREC has chosen three focus areas: advanced technology,
integration of transportation and land use and healthy communities.
Each of these four institutions of higher education bring their unique
expertise to the table, providing a relatively small state like Oregon
the best opportunity to have a world-class transportation research
center. The figure above illustrates how the many disciplines at the
four campuses are interrelated around the consortium's theme.
OTREC has funded 100 research projects involving 89 faculty members
and 13 laboratories and research groups. All projects include external
public and private matching partners with a total of 42 different
entities involved. OTREC is multidisciplinary, with 22 different
academic disciplines currently participating in our projects.
Collaboration is strongly valued by OTREC, our partner universities
and our many stakeholders, and it has been woven through our activities
as an important cornerstone:

New Collaboration Among Faculty. Faculty are encouraged
throughout the proposal and project process to think of innovative and
collaborative approaches to research, education or technology transfer.
To date, 32 projects involve faculty at more than one campus and 78
have multiple investigators.

Strong Ties to ODOT and Transportation Community. More
than 42 external partners provide matching funds of cash or in-kind
support for faculty-led projects. ODOT is a primary partner, jointly
funding nearly half of OTREC's research projects selected to date.

Regional Collaboration. OTREC is part of the Region X
Transportation Consortium, made up of UTCs in Oregon, Washington, Idaho
and Alaska, as well as the four state DOTs, with input and
participation by representatives of the USDOT. The Consortium funded
one joint project focusing on regional impacts of climate change and
teamed up to offer the first long-distance, multi-campus class between
Oregon and Idaho.

National Connections. OTREC strives to meet national
transportation research and education needs and is active with the
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO), the Transportation Research Board (TRB), the Council of
University Transportation Centers (CUTC) and other national activities.
OTREC uses the national DOT priorities to guide its research
program. It is encompassed in the strategic plan, and every research
proposal needs to relate back to one or more of the national
priorities. One of the more significant activities that ensure that
federal research efforts are coordinated at the state level is the
involvement of OTREC staff and affiliated faculty in the TRB committees
and research panels. Fifteen OTREC-affiliated faculty and staff
represent 30 different committees and panels at the national level.
Participation in national-level research activities ensures that
research is better coordinated and avoids duplication.
ODOT and OTREC work very closely together to address research
needs, using State Planning and Research funding to leverage UTC
funding, thereby stretching state resources further. ODOT employees are
involved directly in governance of OTREC, and OTREC has a direct role
in governance of ODOT's research program. State Planning and Research
Program funding, which is eligible as match for UTC activities, is a
very valuable tool for fostering partnerships. State funding beyond the
State Planning and Research Program has been used to leverage federal
funds and has contributed to advancing issues of national significance.
OTREC has also fashioned similar relationships with Oregon's MPOs,
transit districts, local governments and Ports. Joint research efforts
have been established around freight and goods movement, transit
operations, active transportation and healthy communities. Those
relationships help to further leverage UTC funds.
Alongside research, OTREC's mission includes educating the current
and future workforce and sharing and implementation of research
results. OTREC has been particularly successful in elevating the number
of graduates enrolled in transportation degree-granting programs. OTREC
requires that every research project involves undergraduate or graduate
students--a strategy that helps to train the future transportation
workforce. OTREC estimates that approximately 102 graduate students and
48 undergraduate students have worked on OTREC-funded projects over the
last four years. The most prominent outcome is helping to establish a
graduate program at Oregon Institute of Technology that attracts
students from the smaller and rural communities in Southern Oregon.

Disseminating Research

The research conducted in Oregon has broad-reaching impacts on
public and private sector work in transportation, helping to better
inform and educate professionals and institutions. Researchers work
hard to communicate their research results to transportation
professionals who can put that research into action.
ODOT and OTREC have undertaken a number of efforts to disseminate
research to a broad audience. For example, ODOT Research publishes
brief summaries of research reports for use by practitioners. These are
available online and are distributed through the state's Local
Technical Assistance Program (LTAP) Center. ODOT Research staff
routinely attend agency-sponsored training events both to market
research services and to disseminate research results.
OTREC, along with many local partners, coordinates the annual
Oregon Transportation Summit. The Summit is an opportunity to showcase
important advances in research as well as an opportunity for
stakeholders to provide insight into the most pressing needs of their
agencies and organizations. The feedback obtained from the Summit has
been used to guide research emphasis areas for OTREC's annual
solicitation process.
Similarly, the Northwest Transportation Conference brings
nationally known speakers and supplements them with research and
subject matter experts from Oregon universities and transportation
agencies as well as the private sector. Presentations are often based
on recently completed research and research in progress. The program is
developed to offer something for the entire spectrum of the
transportation workforce from the snowplow operator to the chief
executive.
ODOT Research also offers a number of training events. Street
maintenance and collection schools that target the blue collar end of
the public works workforce in Oregon. Courses address recent
innovations in equipment, employee and work zone safety, signing and
roadway marking materials, storm water management and other topics
concerning innovations and new technology relevant to city and county
road maintenance supervisors and workers.
Over the past year, OTREC has focused on disseminating research
results in more usable formats and has developed a communications
strategy for what information, to whom and at what stage during a
research project the information should be communicated. OTREC
recognizes the need to translate the work of academics in a format that
can be easily understood by agencies, decision-makers and the general
public. Through a more concerted effort to develop project briefs and
news articles, OTREC has seen an increase in the media and public
interest in our research results. OTREC has also had good success in
sharing results in weekly OTREC seminars open to the public and
streamed over the Internet.
Since inception, OTREC has funded 19 education and 14 technology
transfer activities. Among the array of workshops and technology
transfer activities offered, the most significant interest nationally
is OTREC's light rail short course.
One other key element in the system of getting innovations out to
local governments is FHWA's Local Technical Assistance Program. This
program funds a center in each state, the role of which is training and
technology transfer serving the state, local and tribal transportation
agencies within the state. LTAP is the primary conduit through which
innovations developed throughout the system are put into the hands of
potential users at the local level, in a form that they can use.

Transportation Research Needs of the States

Each state differs in funding and priority needs for transportation
research, but we share many in common. These needs are necessary for
all states to increase economic competitiveness, especially in times of
recession. Increasing focus on practical design, context-sensitive
solutions, maximizing the efficiency of the existing system and
preserving the system and freight movement will allow states to do more
with less when investing their transportation dollars.

Oregon has identified a number of gaps in research:

Efficiency. In the future, increasing highway capacity
cannot be relied on exclusively to address transportation needs. We
need to find ways to use existing capacity more efficiently, encourage
development and use of alternative modes and manage growth through
strategic and effective land use planning. Research is desperately
needed in all these areas, in Oregon and nationally.

Seismic Activity. Seismic vulnerability is a major
concern in the Pacific Northwest region because of new and better
understanding of the Cascadia subduction zone 200 miles off the Oregon
coast, which presents the potential for a magnitude 9 earthquake and an
attendant major tsunami. The Japanese experience has taught the
importance of keeping lifelines open for emergency response. Research
is needed to pinpoint the risks and to prioritize remedial actions.

Mileage-Based User Fees. Fuel taxes are rapidly becoming
an obsolete tool for transportation funding as fuel efficiency improves
and alternative fuels become more prevalent. Oregon has been a leader
nationally in the move toward mileage-based road user fees. Making a
transition to a suitable alternative has a significant research
component.

Energy. One way states can help advance energy
independence and combat global warming is to use the transportation
system itself to produce clean energy. ODOT's Solar Highway program has
taken the first steps in that direction, and there are a number of
promising nascent technologies that need to be explored, evaluated and
tested.

Advanced Research

As noted previously, states focus on applied research. Advanced
research, in contrast, seeks to make progress toward a solution to a
critical transportation problem, but without expecting to reach a
solution within the scope of a single project. Advanced transportation
research currently falls within the scope and responsibilities of
University Transportation Centers and the various advanced research
initiatives of the USDOT. While the DOTs do not engage in advanced
research, it is important to Oregon and to the rest of the states that
someone is tackling the bigger problems in transportation.

Stakeholder Needs Identified in USDOT

Prioritization Oregon supports the top five key USDOT priorities.
However, a number of other key areas could be emphasized and are
perhaps not fully captured in the key priorities as currently stated.
These include the following:

Resiliency in the Face of Natural Disasters. Given the
real and present impacts of recurring natural disasters and climate
change on transportation infrastructure and communities across the
country, more research and inclusion of resiliency across all key
priorities is needed. Communities that are designed for change such as
economic conditions, fuel prices and climate will be better adept at
bouncing back in harrowing times. There are clear examples such as the
rebuilding efforts that currently continue as a result of Hurricane
Katrina and the communities recently devastated by flooding and
tornadoes.

Consider Equity Issues Across All Priorities. Vulnerable
populations from the elderly to the socio-economically disadvantaged
need greater consideration across all key priority areas. Similar to
resiliency, transportation equity is yet another cross-cutting issue.
For example, those who are most at-risk on the roads are older adults,
the poor who cannot afford more advanced vehicle safety features and
kids (where vehicle crashes are the leading cause of unintentional
injuries and deaths). Another example is providing good access to
sidewalks and better linkages between transit, pedestrian and bike
facilities that make these viable transportation options for the
vulnerable populations that cannot drive or own a vehicle. And equity
needs to include a joint transportation and land use component to
better link social and community services with disadvantaged
populations.

Align Performance Measures With New Policy Direction.
Useful measures help states and MPOs better allocate scarce
transportation dollars and better describe system performance to the
public. Prevailing performance measures that have been used to
historically characterize our transportation system are at odds with
the direction that policy decisions are headed. Measures of success are
evolving to reflect cross-modal benefits and better represent the
transportation system as a whole. The research strategic plan should
evaluate the applicability of traditional measures such as benefit-cost
ratios or volume-to-capacity ratios across all modes and explore other
options that support the Department's policy direction.

Consider Health as Another Key USDOT Priority. Given the
obesity, diabetes, asthma and other chronic disease epidemics stemming
from the lack of physical activity and air pollution in addition to the
exorbitant health care costs the U.S. is facing, health should be
included as a sixth priority. This would address issues such as
increasing walking and bicycling, as well as the issues that relate to
an aging population and safety and accessibility issues of all users of
the transportation system. Health impact assessments are also being
integrated across the country as part of the transportation planning
process and this perspective is gaining momentum at local levels.

Recognize Active Transportation as a Mode. Active
transportation, such as bicycling and walking, needs to be recognized
as a mode, particularly because it is among the most cost-effective
investments in improving the transportation system. This national
recognition may be a catalyst for cities and regions that are seeing
significant increases in bicycling, walking and non-motorized travel to
help further implement infrastructure and safety programs. It would
also encourage other areas to see active transportation as a practical
strategy among others that can help address climate change, congestion,
safety, health and equity issues.

Recommended Changes to Reauthorization of Surface Transportation Bill

In looking ahead, we feel there are some opportunities for policy
changes that would help to improve research both at the national and
state level. For the next surface transportation bill, we urge you to
consider some small but important changes that would encourage
collaboration, in turn further leveraging existing resources. These
changes include:

Broadening Federal Match for University Transportation Centers (UTCs)

USDOT should re-examine match requirements and allow other federal
sources as match (e.g., other USDOT, NIH, CDC, NSF, etc.). The next
iteration of the USDOT research strategy should foster closer
cooperation with other federal agencies such as the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency to work on greenhouse gas emission issues, the
National Institute of Health to examine linkages between transportation
and health policies, the Department of Housing and Urban Development
and the Department of Energy to explore alternative energy for
transportation. Allowing federal match dollars from these potential
partners would encourage cross-agency and cross-discipline
collaboration. In addition, federal transportation dollars from a
metropolitan planning organization (MPO) should be eligible as match.
Having a comparable program for MPOs similar to allowing federal State
Planning and Research (SP&R) funds to be used as match would accelerate
research innovation and adoption of federal priorities. For example,
Metro (the Portland regional MPO) is an active research partner with
OTREC making significant advances in modeling. They are seen as a
leader nationally in adopting and applying innovative transportation
planning and operational strategies.
While there is widespread cooperation and collaboration between
Metro and OTREC faculty, the inability to use Metro federal funding
sources (both in-kind and/or cash) is a real barrier for leveraging
local resources. In addition, the smaller MPOs in Oregon want to
partner on research but have no non-federal funding available for
research. Broadening the federal match eligibility would broaden local
partnerships, reduce duplication and improve efficiency.

Streamlining the Adoption of New Innovations

The current processes for adopting best practices and innovation
need to be examined to find ways of encouraging or rewarding research
with visible outcomes. For example, the current process for adopting
and updating the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices is
difficult and stifles innovation. The state of the technology and
innovative treatments being developed locally and regionally are
constantly evolving. However, a shortage of funding directed at
evaluating new, innovative technologies (including traffic control
devices) limits the amount of innovation possible. Innovation that is
proven and could help to advance the state of practice across the
country is often hampered by slow policy changes. A new integral part
of the DOT research program could be a way to help streamline the
process for researching, evaluating and adopting new innovations.

Research on Mileage-Based User Fees

In order to transition the transportation system to a user fee that
is more sustainable in the long term, the next surface transportation
authorization should create a research program designed to develop a
mileage-based user fee system. This should include creation of a policy
group within USDOT to oversee development of a mileage-based user fee
system, as well as funding research and development efforts consisting
of pilot projects and implementation trials that will identify the best
option for a mileage-based user fee and design the system and
technology required for implementation.

Making Better Linkages Between Research Groups

We encourage more visible connections with and between national
laboratories and research groups, including UTCs. The USDOT Research
and Innovative Technology Administration should continue playing that
role and help to communicate the work that is happening among the
various groups. These connections again would help to broaden
partnerships and promote collaboration.

Flexibility in Research

Oregon's success in working with University Transportation Centers
is not typical across the country. UTCs are expected to carry out
advanced research within a defined topical subject area. State DOTs are
interested primarily in applied research across a broad spectrum of
topics. This can make common ground difficult to find.
If the expectation is that states and UTCs should work together
then there needs to be more flexibility in the expectations placed on
UTCs regarding their research mission, so that they can respond to both
national priorities and at the same time be responsive to the needs of
the states.

Leadership and Strategic Direction

There is a need for leadership and guidance from the USDOT on
national research priorities. In order for the various players to do
their parts, goals need to be articulated and hard choices need to be
made about what is important enough to focus scarce resources on.
In a few areas there are detailed, well-articulated roadmaps for
research. An example is the Concrete Pavement Roadmap, a ten-year
strategic plan that outlines approximately $250 million in needed
concrete pavement research that will help develop a comprehensive,
integrated and fully functional system of concrete pavement
technologies. However, for most topic areas we have little more than
very high-level summaries such as Highway Research and Technology: The
Need for Greater Investment, the report of the National Highway R&T
Partnership. Development of more detailed research roadmaps in DOT
priority areas may help to provide clearer direction.

Conclusion

Thank you once again for the opportunity to address the
Subcommittee regarding transportation research needs of the states. In
a down economy, research and innovation prove invaluable in providing
new ideas and developing innovative solutions to help us do more with
less and address rapidly changing realities.
Oregon is a model for coordination and dissemination of research.
The work of OTREC and ODOT has been very successful at maximizing the
effectiveness of the money we invest in transportation research, and
our state has seen the benefits of that in several instances discussed
in this testimony.

Chairman Quayle. Thank you very much, and I would like to
thank the whole panel for their testimony today. I want to
remind Members that--of the Committee rules limit questioning
to five minutes.
The chair will at this point open the round of questions,
and I will recognize myself for five minutes.
Mr. Appel, one of Secretary LaHood's strategic objectives
is to support ``livable communities''. How does the Department
define ``livable communities''?
Mr. Appel. Livable communities in the context------
Chairman Quayle. Could you turn on your mic?
Mr. Appel. Livable communities in the context of
transportation primarily is about transportation options.
Realizing there are many different types of communities in the
country and we want to ensure our citizens have good access to
transportation to get to their libraries, their schools, their
hospitals, and their retail establishments.
And realizing that different segments of the population
such as older Americans might not have the same access to
automobiles or other modes of transportation as others, we want
to make sure that, to the extent possible, members of our
population are provided these options, so if one mode of
transportation is not available, there might be others. In an
urban area that might involve more transit. In a rural area
there might be other creative options to provide multiple ways
to get from point A to point B.
But there is no cookie cutter answer to the question of
what is a livable community because it really does depend on
the nature of the community, but the transportation options is
a major part of it.
Chairman Quayle. So will we be able to quantify success on
trying to basically achieve the objective of livable
communities? I am just trying to think of what sort of
objective ways we will be able to make sure that what DOT is
doing and what we are trying to do is actually going to be
accomplished?
Mr. Appel. Yeah. Part of the Research and Innovative
Technology Administration that I have is the agency known as
the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, and so BTS is one of
several groups within the DOT that are looking at things like
performance measurement associated with strategic goals.
So to take an example of a project that the Bureau of
Transportation Statistics that is relevant to this question, we
are looking at what we call the inter-modal connectivity
database, looking at to what extent our communities are making
good connections between one mode of transportation such as a
rail line to another such as bus line or something else.
To measure transportation options you often want to measure
is it feasible to use a mode of transportation to get from
point A to point B and if you take that mode of transportation,
are you going to be able to connect to another mode to get
where you want to get. There are quantitative ways to measure
this by looking at the level to which one mode is providing
connectivity to another.
So that is one area that we are looking at. Do we have all
the performance metrics in place right now? Not yet. It is kind
of an ongoing process, but we are looking at that kind of
metric, that kind of measure to say are we providing these
transportation options.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. Great. Mr. Halikowski, one of the
challenges within the Transportation Research Committee has
been to balance the immediate means for the short term while
also not forgetting about long-term research goals.
Besides increasing the federal cost share what other policy
changes might allow the research conducted by the UTCs to be
more focused on the long-term national needs?
Mr. Halikowski. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will
answer that this way. Arizona, as you know, does not have a UTC
at this time. Right now the Department of Transportation is
working with the three State universities to establish a UTC,
and to put it in more practical terms of what we are looking
and trying to do with the UTC is this, as some of the previous
speakers have pointed out, the States do a pretty good job with
applied research. For example, pavement durability, you know,
bridge design, things like that. However, when it comes to some
of those larger questions of economic issues and what effect
transportation projects will have on the environment, on the
social demographic, and on the economy, we look to the UTC to
perhaps answer those larger questions and guide us through let
us say a state-wide transportation plan.
So as I look out into the future as to what UTCs might be
able to do on a national level, it would be more of that idea
of what is the national plan and how do you coordinate that
across 50 different jurisdictions.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. Thanks, and Dr. Feller, in your
testimony you spoke very strongly about the harm that earmarks
and the existence of too many UTCs have done--in setting
research priorities. Do you think that the Administration's
decision to make the UTC Program completely competitive and
increase the grant size to about $2 million per consortia
addresses that concern?
Dr. Feller. I have limited detailed information about the
proposal, but certainly I would certainly endorse going to a
smaller number. In fact, I would start from a premise of
starting at least one in each region, but building it as an
award criteria, inter-state, inter-institutional collaboration.
Two million dollars is certainly better than the $500,000, but
I am not even sure that is enough. I would go for multi-year,
long-term funding, and if I could just turn to your previous
question, the way to ensure that the UTCs address important
questions is to make this competitive and make the award based
upon the importance of the novelty of the challenge of the
questions that they are willing to address and show the
capability of addressing, and if they do that, in most cases
this will require collaboration with institutions in other
states and other jurisdictions and other partners.
Chairman Quayle. Okay. Thank you very much.
The chair now recognizes the Ranking Member, Mr. Wu, for
five minutes.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and if I have
enough time in five minutes, I am going to ask three hopefully
quick questions, all aimed at, well, moving from the amount of
research to earmarking to long term versus short term.
In the background materials for this hearing and also for
the hearing in the last Congress and the Congress before that
what I have seen is that about one percent of the federal
transportation budget is allocated towards research. To the
extent that you all know, how does this compare with other
fields? Is this an under-allocation to research?
For anyone to address.
Okay. All right.
All right. We will come--well, then let us jump to the
earmarking of projects.
Mr. Gehr and Dr. Feller, you both addressed in your
testimony how you feel that this damages federal research. Is
it the case that the entire federal allocation to research at
UTCs and more is earmarked by the time it goes out the door?
Mr. Gehr. That has been our experience under SAFETEA-LU.
When it was passed, as I mentioned, it was over-programmed.
There were more projects identified than there were funds
authorized to pay for those.
So when that occurs, it takes away the flexibility that the
research centers have to provide the creativity and the
innovation when things have already been designed what they are
to do rather than put it on a performance-based or an outcome-
based program, you know, with appropriate competition for the
award of those dollars.
Dr. Feller. If I may add, the TRB report, special report
295: Federal Investment in Highway Research, contains the
statistic that about 62 percent of the UTC funds are earmarked.
I think the point that I would note is earmarking is not a one-
time thing. Earmarking as I pointed out in my paper is a
contagious issue. It is viral. Once one group gets earmarking,
you reduce the opportunity for competitive funding. I have
interviewed university provosts and vice presidents for
research who have had checklists of things that they were
coming to Congress for to be earmarked.
So, again, why compete in a game that essentially provides
for lobbying and earmarking? It all--so it becomes systemic. It
is not a one-time thing. The same groups, the same researchers
get the earmarks year after year, and essentially the system
runs downhill. You have no quality to check. I think Mr. Gehr--
you have no opportunity to assess the quality of the work that
is being done.
Mr. Wu. And the earmark projects tend strongly toward
short-term rather than long-term research. Is that correct?
Dr. Feller. That is the general observation that has been
made.
Mr. Wu. And in addition to the 80/20 allocation, what are
some other mechanisms that you or the panel have in mind for
shifting from short-term toward more long-term, more high-risk
and high-return projects, research projects?
Dr. Feller. If I could turn the question upside down, and I
have seen this and just in terms of evaluating NSF's Science
Technology Centers, researchers seek to answer the most
important question for which they can get resources. So if you
deregulate the system and have open competition, you will
essentially unleash the creativity, the opportunity of
researchers in the transportation field and in those fields
that believe that their work can contribute to safety, cost
reduction.
Once you do that, the question really--you will have the
Congress, the transportation, Department of Transportation will
be able to see what is out there rather than prescribe who gets
what to do what. I would not focus so much on the 80/20. That
is valuable. It is certainly an important step forward, but I
would basically say if you provide for an open competition
geared against the set of overarching priorities that the
Congress sets, that the DOT is charged with implementing, you
will be both--you will be delighted and the transportation
community will be delighted at the richness and the creativity
of American engineers and scientists.
Mr. Wu. Thank you very much, Dr. Feller.
With a couple of seconds I have left, Ms. Peterson, you
addressed in your testimony the need to ensure resiliency in
the transportation infrastructure in case of natural disaster,
and this is a particular interest of mine and a particular--of
importance to the Pacific Northwest.
Can you expand upon that and the current state of research
in disaster resiliency, and I think that we have learned some
particular lessons in the Chilean experience.
Ms. Peterson. Well, within Oregon itself just with the
tsunami that hit the West Coast of Oregon I think we have a lot
of examples of economic, communities that are going to be at an
economic disadvantage if we don't find ways to make sure that
our transportation infrastructure can be put in place quickly
after something happens in terms of environmental streamlining
and the way we have done outcomes-based type of work but also
with the type of pavement and how the pavement can drain. I
mean, there are all sorts of technologies to allow for high
water and that sort of thing.
So I guess I would point to the type of research going on
and the type of infrastructure we build and the type of
environmental streamlining that we have shown to be able to do
in Oregon to be able to get infrastructure back in place as
quickly as possible with still good environmental outcomes.
One thing I just wanted to mention in terms of competition
is that competition is a good thing, especially when we are
trying to achieve federal objectives. There are smaller local
objectives that we also need to keep in mind that could become
federal over time, and we need to be able to have some sort of
consistent funding for those localized things that could at
some point become part of a federal agenda.
We also need to make sure that the flexibility of the types
of money that can be used for match is a key part of moving
forward. If we increase the match, if we continue the match,
there is all sorts of federal money that is not allowed to be
matched at this time. So I would love to follow up with you on
those types of things in the future as well.
Mr. Wu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Illinois, Mrs.
Biggert, for five minutes.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding today's important hearing on transportation research,
and my first question is for Mr. Appel.
Under DOT's new approach for allocating for fiscal year
2011, funding for the UTC Program, the agency--you said that
there will be 20 consortia to conduct research, and my concern
is that this has just discontinued the funding for fiscal year
2011, for the 59 programs that are now in existence. What
greater benefits does DOT's new approach of selecting 20
consortia seek to achieve when compared to the current UTC
System? And do you plan on or anticipate capitalizing on the
expertise that has been developed by many of the institutions
participating in the program in order to ensure that we build
on the expertise? Or is the objective to, just to created
entirely new centers?
For example, the new idea of competitively bidding to the
20 university-based consortia appears to exclude the National
Laboratories where there has been extensive modeling,
university--and simulation with the universities and simulation
capabilities being used by DOT, and it seems that if we are
going to make good use of our existing dollars in a tight
budget year, we should use those existing shared resources like
high-performance computing capabilities that the government,
universities, and the private sector already depend on. It
seems like you are just cutting everything off to start over.
Mr. Appel. Certainly we want to capitalize on some of the
great capabilities that are out there at the universities.
Yesterday in Portland, Oregon, I met with the leaders of many
of the existing 59 University Transportation Centers, and I
made clear to them that one of the primary criterion moving
forward in the University Transportation Center Program is a
demonstrated track record of excellence in transportation,
research, education, and workforce development. And I would
fully expect that a lot of the existing programs will
demonstrate such a track record and will be very well
positioned in a competition moving forward.
That is not to say that there are not other universities
outside the program that can also show or demonstrate a track
record in that area. So we anticipate that there will be a mix
of programs that already exist and perhaps programs that are
new to the game to build the strongest pie of Transportation
Research Programs moving forward.
Mrs. Biggert.With this rapid transition in funding, how is
that going to--everything stops until you have a competition,
and when will that be--when will the awards be available?
Mr. Appel. Yeah. We certainly have to recognize that
universities have timeframes, and they have schedules, and they
have deadlines, and getting as consistent as possible a flow of
funding is an important thing to them. In the context of that
we also had to look at the process that Secretary LaHood was
asked to undertake, which is to review all programs in this
category in the Department, not just the university programs
but research programs in general to determine whether earmarks
or other term-limited programs were, indeed, sufficiently
funded. And the Secretary and his team across the Department
went through a rigorous process to make that determination and
ultimately made the determination that these programs had been
sufficiently funded. The funds still are important to be used
for the University Transportation Center purpose, and we want
to very rigorously, yet very expeditiously move forward in
getting the next rendition of the program.
So, no, we don't want to stop and start over again. We want
to maintain as much momentum as we can, and so in the design of
the competition we are trying to do this in the most, not only
rigorous, but fastest way we can.
Mrs. Biggert. Okay. The other question was, will the
National Labs be involved, or will they be included?
Mr. Appel. The national labs play a very major role in
transportation research across the Department. The UTC Program
is just one of many research programs of the Department, and
the national labs such as the national lab------
Mrs. Biggert. But they have been involved in this with the
universities.
Mr. Appel. There have been partnerships with the
universities, and there also have been grant funding that has
flowed directly to National Labs, and we fully anticipate that
the kinds of advanced computing capabilities, super computing
capabilities at some of the National Labs and modeling
capabilities will be part of the mix in research moving
forward.
For the university program itself, we are trying to drive a
combination of research, transportation education, and
transportation workforce development, and we want the core of
that program to be universities, but at the same time we are
very open to partnerships with other entities, including
National Laboratories.
Mrs. Biggert. And these will be $2 million awards?
Mr. Appel. We are still working out what the request for
proposal is going to look like for the UTC Program. We are
actually currently looking somewhere in the range closer to 4
million, but nothing is finalized until we work through the
details to prepare a request for proposals, but, yes, something
closer to the $4 million range per university consortium.
Mrs. Biggert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mrs. Biggert.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Lipinski, for five minutes.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to follow up on a lot of the questions Mrs. Biggert
was asking. I think a number of those questions are the same
questions that I have about what is going to happen with the
UTCs with the fiscal year 2011 funding.
As you know, I strongly support the work of UTCs and was
proud to help author the research title of the last surface
transportation authorization, SAFETEA-LU, in 2005, that
designated and funded UTCs.
In particular I want to point out the work of one in the
Chicago area, Northwestern University, and some of the work
that they have done, including work related to structural
health monitoring which provides real-time strain data on
structures and the ongoing collaboration of the Business
Advisory Committee there which brings together industry,
academia, and government to identify key transportation issues
and implement workable solutions. And these are the types of
things I think that we all want to see going on at UTCs.
My understanding is that the Department, in the
redistribution of the fiscal year 2011 UTC dollars, said that,
and I think you just mentioned this, I just want to better
understand it, the Department believes that all 59 UTCs
designated in SAFETEA-LU have been sufficiently funded to carry
out their original purpose.
Now, what exactly does this mean that they have been
sufficiently funded that they have completed their purpose or I
just want to get a clear sense of that.
Mr. Appel. Well, they were originally set up in SAFETEA-LU
as a four-year program, and they have completed the purpose set
out of over a four-year period, in each case setting out a
different strategic objective, and over a four-year period
addressing that objective.
We believe there has been great work done across these 59
centers and ultimately the Secretary made a determination that
based on what was originally laid out for this term of the
program they have done that, and yet in anything involving
ongoing research or education, we believe that there are
opportunities for building upon that and moving forward.
Mr. Lipinski. I just wanted to also make sure I understand
that so universities can partner up with national labs, and
what you are--the plans right now, I know the RFP is not out
yet, but is that part of your------
Mr. Appel. We are still working it through, and there are
multiple types of partnerships. There is sort of the core
program at what are the universities affiliated with the core
program, and then who will they partner with to achieve further
results. We are still working out the details of that, but we
certainly want to be in contact with this Committee, with
individuals that helped prepare the original SAFETEA-LU. We
want to align as much as possible with the principles of the
original SAFETEA-LU, at the same time building upon it to make
an even stronger program.
So bottom line it is an important question to address. We
haven't finalized it in the development of the RFP.
Mr. Lipinski. I just wanted to--I would say I think we all
agree that we want to be spending our money wisely, and but I
do share Ms. Biggert's concerns about money running out at
these UTCs that are doing good work.
Mr. Appel. And I have toured the UTC you are talking about,
and you are absolutely right. There are--there is some
incredibly good infrastructure work being done, not only at
that university but their ability to collaborate with other
strong engineering programs around the country is exactly the
kind of spirit we are talking about, which is to take very good
programs and encourage partnerships with other good programs
around the country.
Mr. Lipinski. And I want to make sure that we are--another
concern is limiting the amount of money. I am not sure that
that--the $2 million or the $4 million as you say you are
considering now is enough money, but the last question I have
is what is your timeframe right for announcing more information
on having the RFP out there?
Mr. Appel. We have a team very much focused on planning for
this RFP in the weeks ahead. We hope to get a good solid
amount, more information in the next few weeks or a small
number of months, and we want to launch the competition as soon
as we can as long as we have done that in a rigorous way. I had
a good dialogue with the existing university transportation
leaders yesterday as I mentioned, and we heard from them about
what is on their mind. They want to make sure that they have
enough time to respond to the RFP. This is coming out in the
summertime where a lot of faculty are perhaps traveling or away
from the university, so we want to hear from everyone about
what timing works best for everyone, both for existing programs
and potential future programs.
Mr. Lipinski. If the chair would indulge me 1 more minute,
I have one quick question.
Chairman Quayle. One more minute.
Mr. Lipinski. I just want to follow up, Mr. Appel, on your
testimony discussing RITA's efforts to improve the
accessibility in exchange of high-quality transportation
information through partnerships with the National
Transportation Library.
Mr. Appel. Yeah.
Mr. Lipinski. This is similar to a proposal I believe that
I put forth two years ago when the Science Committee marked up
the surface transportation R&D title. That proposal that I put
in would have established a national clearing house for
transportation R&D results at NTL.
Could you tell me a little bit more about your initiative
including whether it includes any efforts to promote the
dissemination of or transfer of R&D results to industry and to
government transportation workers?
Mr. Appel. First of all, we are extremely appreciative of
your leadership on the--on this topic of national
transportation library collaboration. We have, as you know, we
have a national transportation library at DOT, and it is a
virtual library with connectivity to State DOTs and their
libraries and universities around the country, and we are
developing a broader effort known as the Transportation,
National Transportation Knowledge Network, to as much as
possible maximize that connectivity.
So we are moving very aggressively down this road of
finding databases around the country that are relevant to
transportation decision making, making sure that the widest
range of stakeholders has access to them, and we want to
continue to build on that. We feel that these are very highly-
leveraged dollars. In other words the investment we make in
setting up frameworks for this kind of communication has a very
high payoff because we are providing access to information that
essentially already exists and can be much more applicable when
you provide better access to it.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Appel. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
Fleischmann, for five minutes.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Wu. Panel, thank you very much for being here this morning.
This is very important to me. This morning I found out that I
am going to be serving on the Transportation and Infrastructure
Committee in addition to this Committee and very excited about
that. In addition to that, ORNL, the lab, is in my district,
third district in Tennessee, and I know they do a lot of
research.
I am trying to get a handle on, and I want to hear from all
of you all about this. What do you think is--and it is a two-
part question, the highest value of research activity that you
all do or that DOT does, what is the best and in the event that
we have to cut, which is likely, what should be cut and why?
So I would like to know what you all think the best is and
where you think if we have to cut, what should go and why? And
Mr. Appel, I will start with you, sir.
Mr. Appel. That question would take a lot of thought. We
have--I mentioned earlier in my testimony that we have 14 what
are known as research clusters, basically different scientific
disciplines of research that all contribute to the overall
research efforts, and so for example, a couple of the clusters
involve human factors like lifting the effect of fatigue on
either a truck driver or a pilot of an aircraft. So that is a
human factors cluster.
Or there might be--there is a cluster more towards
infrastructure, which looks at getting better pavement in a
roadway that is going to last longer or provide a safer
environment. It is actually very difficult to compare the
results of the research in something like human factors or
pavement design because they come at transportation from very
different angles, and they both contribute to safety. We are
not--we try not to be in a position of ranking one versus the
other. What we try to do is look at the resources we have in
each area and make the best possible use of those dollars to
drive the best human factors work, the best infrastructure
work, the best structure work, and the like.
So I am not in a position right now to pick one program
that is the best or one program that could go. I would just say
that within each scientific discipline we try to prioritize to
show high-impact work within that discipline.
But you mentioned Oak Ridge National Lab. I just want to
take a quick opportunity to thank the people of your district
for Patricia Hu, who is our new director of the Bureau of
Transportation Statistics, which is part of RITA, she served on
the team at Oak Ridge National Lab for close to 30 years, and
we recruited her last year, and she is now leading our national
transportation statistics efforts, and we know that she was a
loss to Oak Ridge National Lab, she is a tremendous gain for
DOT, and we appreciate it.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Halikowski. Mr. Chairman, I assume I am next in line
for that question. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Fleischmann, I am going to
give you an answer that I think folks who are looking for a
definite yes or no probably dislike, and that answer is they
are all important because about a little over a year ago I
became Chair of the Standing Committee of Research for AASHTO,
and when I looked at the picture, it is complex, and it is
diverse of the types of research that are done for
transportation, but there is a reason for that.
The research takes place at many different levels, whether
it be local, State, or federal, and as we see we have got
research that these panelists have talked about on technology
transfer. There is particular research that may be conducted by
the U.S. DOT. You have various agencies within the DOT with
transit, highways, safety, motor carrier safety, railroad, and
innovative technology.
So it is very difficult to give you a definite answer. To
say which one of those are the most important depending on
where you are standing at any particular time it may be very
important.
In response to your second question as to which of those I
would cut, again, my answer would be since they are all
important, I don't think any of them should be cut. You might
want to look at perhaps some sort of--if you are going to do a
reduction, something more proportional along those lines, but
to pick a particular one out to cut out of the program I think
is very difficult to do because this research system is very
intertwined.
Mr. Fleishmann. Thank you. Mr. Gehr.
Mr. Gehr. Yes, Mr. Fleischmann. Kind of like the previous
speaker let me hit your second question first, and I will go
back to Mr. Wu's question earlier of all of us about how much
is spent in research in other areas, and while we are not in a
position to know what that is, I would tell you that if--and I
will take Mr. Wu's word that it is one percent of the Federal
Transportation Bill spent on research, I will also say that
about one percent of our GDP is invested in transportation in
this country.
And while I would not suggest we cut that one percent, in
fact, it should be increased, I would not suggest that we cut
the one percent of our federal transportation dollars that are
going to research because they are all important.
Some of the more important areas, you know, as I mentioned,
the Long-Term Bridge Performance Program, which is a long-term,
20-year program, needs to keep moving forward. Bridges are
critical elements of our transportation system, whether it is
for highways or transit or rail. All of those systems have
bridges associated with them, and all it takes is for one
bridge to go out, and you have lost an entire system. So that
should continue as a very critical element.
The Intelligent Transportation System Program, again, is
another long-term investment looking to the future to make the
more--most effective and efficient use of the systems that we
have, and that is what technology does for us. We have to look
beyond the short term to do that. We have to look at the very,
very long term, and the federal labs such as ORNL and some of
the others working on concert with the State DOTs, the Federal
Government, and even those of us in the private sector are
looking at those kinds of issues, and so they, too, should
continue and not be cut.
Mr. Fleischmann. I think my time is up, isn't it, Mr.
Chairman, or------
Chairman Quayle. Your time has expired, Mr. Fleischmann.
Mr. Fleischmann. Yes, sir. Thank you all.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Fleischmann.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr.
Cravaack, for five minutes.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Appreciate you allowing
me to be here a little bit late. Sorry. I was in another
committee, so may apologies to the panel.
Ms. Peterson, thank you very much for being here, and I
just have a couple questions. Very interesting in my district
is the mileage charge, and could you kind of tell me how much
it would cost to actually implement a program such as that? I
live in a very rural community. Going to the grocery store
might be an hour event, so if you could comment on that, I sure
would appreciate it.
Ms. Peterson. Chairman Cravaack, the--Oregon has been
looking at this in very small steps towards a vehicle miles-
based utility fee. We started with two very small communities
in Oregon and looked at the effectiveness of it and how it
would be implemented.
I think the question that you have raised is the question
that our legislature has raised. I think that what we have done
is we have looked to two more small steps. One is to in this
legislative session that ends in a couple of weeks, one is to
charge electric vehicle users a VMT because right now they are
not paying anything, so the legislature is still mulling over
how that would work, and it wouldn't have been implemented if
passed until 2017.
So because of those questions that you raised and others
that have been raised around privacy, how do you actually
implement a system where people's information is protected. So
we are working towards the answers to those questions.
The other issue specifically on costs for the entire system
was something that was going to be looked at in the five years
between now and implementation.
The second part of the proposal was to do an opt-in, a
voluntary opt-in, whether you are electric or a gas-powered
vehicle, and the rate that they were talking about charging
that would be equivalent to a gas tax was about $1.60 per--I am
sorry. One point six cents and that was too high in the
estimation of the electric vehicle folks in terms of getting an
incentive over the next five years to get those vehicles out on
the road. So we were looking at having that and then bringing
it up over time.
So that is where it is right now. It is still in
conversation. I think what we are going to end up with is an
all-voluntary opt-in, second-stage program. But in the rural
communities I highly doubt we would get any voluntary opt-in. I
think this is more geared at this point towards the urban
areas.
Mr. Cravaack. Okay, and just to--make sure I understand,
you really don't know what your initial upfront costs will be
for the capital investment?
Ms. Peterson. No, because I think what they would do once
given permission from the legislature is go out for an RFP.
Mr. Cravaack. Okay. All right.
Could I get just some other comments from the panel on what
your feelings are in regards to a mileage tax versus how we
currently tax right now and what moving forward, obviously we
have to take care of our infrastructure. It is vital we take
care of our infrastructure, but can you give us some comments
on what you are feelings are regarding mileage-based tax and
how it can be--actually be implemented.
Mr. Appel. From the research and technology perspective at
U.S. DOT we come at it from a perspective of if we look at
intelligent transportation systems infrastructure that will
help relieve congestion, help improve safety, we want to ensure
that any investments we make in technology provide the maximum
flexibility for different financing systems moving forward.
So from the research perspective I don't want to weigh in
specifically on what form of financing is the best versus
another, but what I do want to say is that we want to look at
technologies that are as accommodating as possible to whatever
the future environment would look like, and one great thing
about intelligent transportation system investment is the
benefits can really extend to future frameworks that we might
not even anticipate today. If we put in a good infrastructure
that involves good communication between vehicles and
infrastructure, it can accommodate lots of ways of doing
business in the future.
Mr. Cravaack. With that said, can you ensure the privacy of
the U.S. citizen at the same time?
Mr. Appel. We think that is a fundamental priority of any
intelligent transportation system. If an intelligent
transportation system technology is about safety and efficiency
and environmental sustainability and good finance and
techniques, it requires the buy-in from the users, from the
people, and in order to get that buy-in we need to absolutely
ensure privacy. So that will be top of our list for any
implementation.
Mr. Cravaack. Thank you. Appreciate that.
Mr. Halikowski. Mr. Chairman, a VMT issue is something that
I think you have to look at from a national perspective.
Certainly the technology I think is probably there to do such a
system, but as you point out, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Cravaack, there
are many, many other questions that go into what you do with
the VMT system involving the number of miles traveled in less
populated areas, privacy, all of those issues.
However, having said that, the other fundamental question
we face, of course, is does gasoline tax as a method of funding
transportation continue to be the workhorse it was since the
1950s, and the answer to that is obviously with an 18.4 cent a
gallon federal gasoline tax, fuel, economy, and inflation
continues to erode that. Whether it is VMT or some other
solution, there is a funding gap that has to be addressed. All
of them have difficult questions surrounding them.
Mr. Gehr. Mr. Cravaack, I would agree. I have been in
transportation for 40 years in this country. We have been
talking about the death of the gas tax for most of that time.
When that comes, I don't know, but it still has to be part of
the mix.
But at the same time, you know, through the research that
we are talking about today, we need to investigate all other
options available to us, you know, for augmenting revenues for
transportation. VMT is one, and yes, the technology is there,
it can be done, but as in many of these it is more the
institutional issues on, you know, how you collect it, how you
distribute the revenues, and the privacy issues, and those
sorts of things that become more and more difficult or more
difficult than the technology aspects.
So it is VMT that we are talking about today, and it may be
something else tomorrow, but all of those other issues need to
be dealt with as they are moving forward.
Ms. Peterson. I would just add that Oregon was the first
State in the union to have a gas tax, so the fact that we are
looking to move away from it, I mean, it shows you the
difficulties in transportation as a utility model. We just
don't have it set up, and so as resources get tight, you know,
with federal government aid, just like sewer and water we need
to figure out how do we provide the infrastructure as a
utility.
Mr. Cravaack. Well, thank you very much, and thank you for
the indulgence, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Cravaack.
I would like to thank the witnesses today for their
valuable testimony and to the Members for their questions. The
Members of the Subcommittee may have additional questions for
the witnesses, and we will ask you to respond to those in
writing. The record will remain open for two weeks for
additional comments from Members. The witnesses are excused,
and this hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:19 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
Appendix I:

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by The Honorable Peter Appel, Administrator, Research and
Innovative Technology Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation

Questions submitted by Chairman Ben Quayle

Q1.  You mentioned in your testimony that one of the Administration's
goals is to ``simplify the existing surface transportation research
program.'' Could you elaborate on what this means? Please provide
details.

A1. As detailed in the Department's technical assistance provided to
the Committee, the Administration seeks to maximize the effective use
of scarce surface transportation research resources by eliminating the
multiple earmarks, designations and funding categories as found in
Title V of the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation
Equity Act: A Legacy For Users (SAFETEA-LU). As has been often shown,
the over-designation of Title V resources within SAFETEA-LU's multiple
programs has severely limited the Department's ability to apply
resources where they are most needed to address the most urgent
national transportation research needs.

In addition to pursuing the research principles I noted in my
testimony, the Department specifically seeks to:

Authorize the Secretary to develop and implement
incentives to accelerate multimodal deployment of Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITS) technologies and research results flowing
from the ITS Research Program, and to enhance transportation
investments and the return on those investments.

Focus the Federal role by restructuring the highway
research and technology development and deployment program activities
in the following core areas:

1.  Improving highway safety,

2.  Improving infrastructure integrity,

3.  Strengthening transportation planning and environmental
linkages,

4.  Reducing congestion, improving highway operations, and
enhancing freight productivity,

5.  Assessing policy and system financing alternatives, and

6.  Exploring next generation solutions, capitalizing on the
Turner-Fairbank Highway Research Center, aligning national challenges,
and disseminating information.

Authorize a highway technology and innovation deployment
program to test, evaluate, and accelerate the delivery and deployment
of technologies ready to be implemented or in the last stages of
development.

Focus the transit research program on nationally
significant research, development, demonstration, deployment and
evaluation projects that the Secretary determines will improve public
transportation.

Enable cooperative research and evaluation programs
addressing priority highway safety countermeasures.

Conduct motor vehicle safety research, development, and
testing programs and activities, including new and emerging
technologies that may impact motor vehicle safety.

Questions for the Record from Representative Lamar Smith

Q1.  Some competing legislative proposals before the Congress seek to
extend the federal weight limit on trucks to 97,000 pounds while
equipping the tractor-trailer with an additional sixth axle. Such a
weight increase and lengthening of tractor-trailers raises several
safety concerns, especially with the wear and tear on brakes of such
trucks and ability of such larger trucks to operate safely on our roads
with other vehicles. However, larger semi-trucks would generally mean
fewer trucks on the road, which could also save money in operating a
fleet of such trucks.

a.  Has the Department of Transportation researched the pros and
cons of increasing vehicle weight limits on tractor-trailers?

b.  Has the Department reached any conclusions based on this
research about the economic benefits and ability of trucks with
increased weight limits to operate safely?

A1. On the National Network, which covers approximately 200,000 miles,
States are required to allow access to commercial motor vehicles (CMV)
that have a 48-foot trailer or twin 28-foot trailers, and are up to 102
inches wide. On the Interstate Highway System, a subset of the National
Network, Federal law limits the gross vehicle weight of CMVs to 80,000
pounds (there are, however, multiple grandfathered provisions allowing
higher weights in various States). There is no Federal weight
restriction on the rest of the National Network or on State and local
roads beyond the National Network.

In some legislative proposals, a 6th axle is proposed to be added
to the tractor-trailer combination, to form a tridem axle arrangement
at the rear of the trailer. The Department of Transportation researched
the potential impacts of changing truck size and weight in the 2000
Comprehensive Truck Size and Weight (CTSW) Study, and has recently done
additional analysis on pavements. The CTSW study examined impacts on
pavement, bridges, roadway geometry, safety, traffic operations, rail
freight, shipper costs and vehicle miles traveled for several
scenarios. The 97,000-pound 6-axle tractor semitrailer was one of the
configurations analyzed in the international scenario (see Figure 1).
This scenario allowed up to 51,000 pounds on a tridem axle group for a
4-axle short wheel base truck, an 8-axle double trailer truck and the
6-axle tractor semitrailer. Regarding pavement impact, follow-up
analyses related to pavements found that tridem axles do not result in
more pavement damage than tandems. However, the loading of the trailer
is critical. If the trailer is evenly loaded with the additional
weight, it results in the load on the forward tandem being greater than
the 34,000 pounds currently allowed and less than 51,000 pounds on the
rear tridem. This overload on the forward tandem axles will cause
additional pavement damage.

Regarding bridge impact, a 6-axle 53-foot tractor semitrailer
configuration would not meet the current Federal Bridge Formula B (BFB)
and would not be allowed to operate on the Interstate system. To remain
within the requirements of the BFB, the trailer would need to be
lengthened to 59 feet and the rear tridem spread to 20 feet (see Figure
2). Even though this extended configuration would conform to the BFB,
the configuration would increase the stresses on most bridges by up to
15 percent more than the stresses produced by the currently legal
80,000-pound 5-axle tractor semitrailer. Additionally, due to the
spacing of the tridem axles the tires would scrub and chaff, causing
the vehicle to handle very poorly in turns. A 59-foot trailer would
also present safety and roadway geometry challenges, as the turning
radius for this configuration would be increased compared to a current
53-foot trailer and would require a change to current law to amend the
length restrictions in almost all States.

Based on current research, the Department has not reached final
conclusions concerning the ability of trucks with increased weight
limits to operate safely. However, the Federal Highway Administration
and the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration have found that
loading additional weight within existing trailer dimensions raises the
center of gravity, increases rollover propensity and reduces vehicle
stability and control. There are significant safety concerns when a
used tandem rear axle trailer is modified to a 3-axle trailer (by
addition of an axle), as the trailer may not be structurally sufficient
to withstand the added stresses placed on the frame and body when
turning and braking due to the added 17,000 pounds (approximately 20
percent) of weight.

The commercial truck roadside inspection vehicle Out-of-Service
rate for trucks for 2010 was 20.3 percent, meaning that over 1 in 5
trucks inspected were placed Out-of Service for vehicle-related safety
deficiencies. Raising the Federal weight limits on trucks will not
improve the safety of the motoring public without commensurate
increases in commercial truck safety enforcement programs.

From a fleet perspective, versus that of an individual truck,
allowing higher productivity trucks will result in less fuel
consumption, emissions reduction, and fewer trucks on the road for a
given tonnage of freight. Balancing these economic benefits with safety
and infrastructure preservation concerns is the challenge in adjusting
CMV weight limits.

Questions submitted by Representative Randy Neugebauer

Q1.  Secretary LaHood recently decided to discontinue funding in FY
2011 for University Transportation Research Centers (UTC) and make the
program completely competitively-funded. I believe competition is a
good thing, and is a driving force behind the innovation and prosperity
our country has always enjoyed. I understand that UTC's structure may
be reworked in the next surface transportation authorization bill, on
which the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee is working
tirelessly. Since this issue may come up again, I'm interested in
knowing how the Department of Transportation proposes to ensure
continuity and stability of transportation research during the
transition period to implement Secretary LaHood's decision. How do you
plan to make sure of that? Additionally, how can you make certain that
current research initiatives will not be disrupted as a result of the
changes?

A1. The FY 2011 UTC competition is a primary vehicle for ensuring the
continuity and stability of transportation research during the
transition period. In light of the determination that a project or
activity received sufficient funds to carry out the purpose for which
the project or activity was authorized, the Secretary is using program
funds to continue the competitive component of the UTC Program per
SAFETEA-LU Sections 5506(e) and (f) to ensure that a strong cadre of
university-based transportation research and education programs receive
funding. At the same time, RITA continues its work with existing UTCs
during their grant closeout periods. This will ensure that ongoing
research projects are completed and that existing UTCs can meet the
commitments they have made to graduate-level students working towards
advanced degrees in transportation.

Relative to the upcoming UTC competition, RITA formed a multi-modal
task group which includes the Federal Transit Administration (FTA),
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), Maritime Administration (MARAD),
Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA), Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
(FMCSA), Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
(PHMSA), and the Office of the Secretary (OST). The group was charged
with developing priority research areas, based upon U.S. DOT strategic
goals, for the UTC Program Request for Proposals (RFP) that was
published on Grants.gov on July 26, 2011.

Q2.  An important aspect of maximizing return on investment in research
and development is identifying and addressing duplicative programs. How
does the Department of Transportation identify redundancies? Can you
assure us that they will be addressed properly? Since other agencies
conduct similar transportation-related research, could you explain how
DOT coordinates with other offices to leverage resources and eliminate
duplicative efforts?

A2. The Department coordinates research in a variety of ways--
internally, across the Administration and with stakeholders. Through
the Research, Development & Technology (RD&T) Planning Council and RD&T
Planning Team, the Department addresses critical research areas and
ensures that RD&T resources are invested wisely to achieve measurable
improvements in our Nation's transportation system.

The RD&T Planning Council is composed of the heads of the operating
administrations, and other senior DOT leaders. It works to ensure
coordination at the highest levels of the Department. The RD&T Planning
Team is comprised of each operating administrations' Associate
Administrators for RD&T. Through monthly meetings the Planning Team is
aware of each other's RD&T activities and can identify additional
opportunities for coordination and collaboration. The RITA
Administrator chairs the Planning Council and RITA's Associate
Administrator for RD&T chairs the Planning Team. Working together,
these two entities create an environment of cross-modal planning and
collaboration of Departmental RD&T. This collaborative environment
identifies, addresses redundancies, and adds significant value as
research leaders come together and learn from one another.

In addition, U.S. DOT engages in cooperative and joint research
with stakeholders and partners across the transportation sector,
including other Federal agencies, State and local agencies, academia,
industry, and not-for-profit institutions, including the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), the
Transportation Research Board (TRB), and the American Public
Transportation Association (APTA).

During the past year and working closely with the Planning Team,
RITA formed 14 Research Clusters. These clusters were departmentally-
funded and composed of U.S. DOT elements and stakeholder researchers
which facilitated information sharing and research collaboration at a
working level. A key component of the effort is a social media portal
http://www.transportationresearch.gov/dotrc/default.aspx, which is
fostering cross-cutting, multi-modal collaborations among RD&T
stakeholders, both inside and outside of the Department. Furthermore,
RITA convenes bimonthly, DOT-only meetings of these clusters to improve
information sharing and collaboration within the Department.

RITA actively works to move transportation research and
technologies into the marketplace. When making research grants, RITA
requires all of its grantees to submit research in progress and final
research reports to TRB's Transportation Research International
Documentation (TRID) database and the Research in Progress (RiP)
database, both of which are publicly searchable. TRID, which contains
published research reports, is the world's largest and most
comprehensive bibliographic resource on transportation information. RiP
contains abstracts of transportation research in progress, and allows
researchers and other users to search for proposed research ideas in
order to foster collaboration and reduce duplicative research projects.
RITA uses the TRID and RiP databases to serve as a repository for all
research conducted by the UTC and Advanced Research Programs, including
final peer-reviewed research reports and research that is in progress.
RITA also encourages other modes to do the same.

Questions submitted by Representative Daniel Lipinski

Q1.  Could you elaborate on the recently initiated Transportation
Technology Transfer program at the Research and Innovative Technology
Administration (RITA)? How does this program enhance DOT's ability to
identify and support technology transfer or product commercialization
of University Research Centers? Is there a need for a single transfer
technology coordinator to unify DOT's diverse efforts across the modes?

A1. RITA initiated and is now leading U.S. DOT's technology transfer
efforts in support of its mission, the Technology Transfer
Commercialization Act of 2000 (42 U.S.C. 7261(c), and the Stevenson-
Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (15 U.S.C. 3701 et seq.). RITA
is actively involved in technology transfer activities within and
outside the Department, a few examples are:

Initiating the transfer of research into application;

Engaging the DOT laboratory representatives in
discussions about establishing an intra-DOT working group to refine the
technology evaluation process;

Leading webinars for Departmental researchers to share
their results widely; and

Involvement of RITA's Office of Chief Counsel (OCC) on
intellectual property issues. (DOT Order 1100.75A, September 30, 2008,
specifically identifies that the OCC ``provides legal advice to the
RITA Administrator and provides a comprehensive program of legal
services to RITA and intellectual property legal services to the U.S.
Department of Transportation.'')

Also, RITA works with other Federal agencies on technology transfer
activities. RITA's roles include being U.S. DOT's representative in the
Federal Laboratory Consortium for Technology Transfer and an active
participant in the Inter-agency Working Group on Technology Transfer,
which is chaired by the Department of Commerce. Through these efforts
and others, RITA is finding ways to leverage technology transfer
practices from other Federal agencies to the Department.
Within U.S. DOT, RITA works closely with other operating
administrations in support of university research centers. RITA
organizes events for university researchers to demonstrate their work,
particularly the work that has been deployed or is in the final stages
of deployment.
Recently, at U.S. DOT, RITA hosted an event at which over 85
university researchers from 25 different universities demonstrated
their deployed technologies through exhibits and presentations. The
event's theme was Technology Transfer and the presentations highlighted
the deployment process.
Further, universities must inform the Department of potential
inventions developed from Federal funding by submitting invention
disclosures. This is a mechanism by which U.S. DOT tracks technology
transfer activities of Federally-funded research to ensure that the
appropriate ``interest'' language is included with provisional or full
patent applications. Interest language clearly identifies that the
Department has an interest in the invention and that ``the Federal
agency shall have a nonexclusive, nontransferable, irrevocable, paid up
license to practice or have practiced for or on behalf of the United
States any subject invention throughout the world.'' 35 U.S.C. Sec.
209(d)
The Norman Y. Mineta Research and Special Programs Improvement Act
(P.L. 108-426, 118 Stat. 243, November 30, 2004) specifically grants
powers and duties to RITA, powers and duties as prescribed by the
Secretary for ``coordination, facilitation and review of the
Department's research and development programs and activities'' [The
Mineta Act, Sec.  4(a)(2), Powers and Duties of the Administrator].
Part of RITA's mission is to coordinate and foster research activities
across all DOT modes, thus the modes are inherently RITA's internal
stakeholders. These stakeholders play major roles in the diverse areas
of the Department's research, and regardless of technology-transfer
application, the technology transfer process will be similar. There are
multiple means that RITA uses to effect technology transfer
coordination with the modes; a technology transfer coordinator
dedicated to improving the Department's technology transfer and
commercialization results is one of those means.
Responses by Mr. John Halikowski, Director, Arizona Department of
Transportation;
Chair, American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials
Standing Committee on Research

Questions submitted by Chairman Ben Quayle

Q1.  According to your testimony AASHTO recommends the maintenance of
the State Planning and Research Program in its current, formula-based
configuration with a 25 percent minimum set aside for research,
development, and technology transfer activities. What do you think the
federal investment in research should be as a percentage of all highway
programs?

A1. Currently, less than 1% of the federal-aid highway program is spent
on highway research by the Federal Highway Administration and the 50
states through their federally funded state planning and research
program. Supplemented with significant additional funds from state,
local, and private funding sources, the US transportation research
program has been and will continue to be efficient and effective in
providing us with solutions and advancing the technical knowledge
needed to keep our system running smoothly. The State DOTs rely heavily
on research that leads to practical solutions to their most challenging
problems, and it is critical to ensure that the discoveries made
through this research are communicated and transferred into practice.
As mentioned in the question, SAFETEA-LU requires that States set
aside 2 percent of the apportionments they receive from the Interstate
Maintenance, National Highway System, Surface Transportation, Highway
Bridge, Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement, and Equity
Bonus programs for State planning and research activities. Of this
amount, States must allocate 25 percent for research, development, and
technology. These activities involve research on new areas of
knowledge; adapting findings to practical applications by developing
new technologies; and the transfer of these technologies, including
dissemination, demonstration, training, and adoption of innovations by
users.
The current funding formula allows the transportation research
program to ebb and flow with the size of the overall transportation
program. While there is not enough funding for transportation in
general to make needed improvements to our system, the proportion of
research funding to overall funding has worked well in the past and we
feel it will continue to allow for reasonable research and
implementation efforts.

Q2.  Many of the witnesses mention that most states have instituted
some type of performance management process, but these are not
standardized. Does the Federal DOT require any performance measurements
or evaluation when states applying for or after they receive research
funding? What would states need to help standardize this process?

A2. Currently, one of the requirements for using State Planning and
Research (SP&R) funds is that the State DOT must develop its own unique
management plan. This management plan establishes a process for
conducting its research and technology (R&T) program. The processes
that State DOTs use to manage their research programs vary based on
such factors as the size and complexity of the program. Procedures also
vary from State to State for developing the management plan and
selecting needed research projects. Most States work with universities
and other stakeholders as part of their research program.
Although States tailor their management processes to fit their
individual needs, FHWA \1\ has established minimum requirements for
this process. The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Division
Administrator certifies the State's management plan before it is
implemented. The proposed use of planning and research funds must be
documented by the State DOTs and any subrecipients of the funding in a
work program that is acceptable to FHWA. Title 23, CFR Section 420.207,
states that a State DOT's research, development, and technology (RD&T)
work program must, at a minimum, consist of a description of the RD&T
activities to be accomplished during the program period, estimated
costs for each eligible activity, and a description of any cooperative
activities, including the State DOT's participation in any
transportation pooled fund studies, technology transfer activities, and
the National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP). During the
development of the work program, States are required to search the
Transportation Research Board's (TRB) Transportation Research
Information Services (TRIS) database to ensure that another State is
not already conducting the planned research.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/research/general/spr/
staterd.cfm
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to these current requirements, the state DOTs, through
AASHTO, have also identified a number of areas where coordinated,
collaborative strategic policy research is needed. These areas include
such traditional engineering-related topics as safety, preservation,
and project delivery, but also performance management to ensure that we
manage our systems as efficiently and effectively as possible.
Performance goals are different from state to state based on the goals
each is trying to achieve, the research they are conducting, the gaps
in knowledge they need to fill to advance their particular programs,
etc. At the national level, performance measures must be general enough
to encompass the wide variety in programs and goals across the country.
Thus, standardizing each state's process so that it becomes one-size-
fits-all will not be as effective as if each state develops its own
processes to meet its own needs.
Responses by Mr. David Gehr, Senior Vice President, Highway Market,
Parsons Brinckerhoff; Chairman, American Society of Civil Engineers
Transportation Policy Committee

Questions submitted by Chairman Ben Quayle

Q1.  In your opinion is the current UTC system overly focused on
applied research in order to meet the needs of the state, instead of
long-term national goals to create transformation technologies? Besides
increasing the federal cost share, what other policy changes might
allow the research conducted by the UTCs to be more focused on long-
term national needs instead of immediate ones? What other
recommendations do you have to ensure the UTCs are conducting research
for the greatest benefit?

A1. ASCE is concerned that the current UTC program is overly focused on
applied research, which while meeting the needs of states, does not
properly address the long-term, high risk research that will create
transformational technologies and push forward the nation's surface
transportation system. Much of the technology necessary for a future
surface transportation system already exists, however UTCs can properly
apply that technology for the greatest benefit of the nation.
Universities work well in high risk, long term research, which is why
new legislation should emphasize their role and ensure that the best
universities are selected through a competitive process.
Competition will need to be the key component required to have
UTC's perform the long-term advanced research. The program needs to be
competitive in order to award approximately forty UTCs through the
research title and five to ten through the transit title. Additionally,
the different types of UTCs should be eliminated, in order to allow all
UTCs in the research title to fall into the same ``tier'' and therefore
receive the same level of funding. The funding should amount to
approximately $2 million per center annually. This would provide enough
critical funding for each center to develop significant, long-term
research projects, rather than projects that only last one year.
Additionally, in order to have UTC's do more collaborative research
that is advanced in nature, the silos that exist in transportation
research should be broken down, to expand the allowance for federal
funds to match UTC federal funding. In SAFETEA-LU, State Planning and
Research funds that go to state departments of transportation are
allowed to match federal UTC funding, as is funding that goes to the
states to support the Local Technical Assistance Program. In the
upcoming authorization bill these funds should not be allowed to match
federal UTC funding, but federal funds from other cabinet level
agencies, for instance the Department of Energy or Department of
Commerce, should be allowed to match federal UTC funding. This will
encourage expanded, multi-disciplinary, advanced research.

Q2.  Many of the witnesses mentioned that most states have instituted
some type of performance management process, but they are not
standardized. Does the Federal DOT require any performance measurements
or evaluation when states applying for or after they receive research
funding? What would states need to help standardize this process?

A2. ASCE is not familiar with the Federal DOT process for performance
measurements or evaluations. In general, ASCE is broadly supportive of
the inclusion of performance measurements, as it is a critical part of
good governance, however the organization does not have a policy on the
matter. Setting certain measurements and requiring evaluations to take
place over the course of a research program allows for the government
to guarantee that funding is being properly utilized. This level of
transparency should be essential to any government program. It should
be noted however, that measurements and evaluations during the course
of research should not create an undue burden on research facilities,
to the point that research results would be delayed. The federal
government should use caution in developing performance measurements
that could become another ``unfunded Federal mandate'' on the states.
The measures should also have a degree of flexibility to allow for the
measurement to be tailored to the research being performed and not a
standard one size fits all type of approach.
Responses by Dr. Irwin Feller, Professor Emeritus of Economics,
Pennsylvania State University; Senior Visiting Fellow, American
Association for the Advancement of Science

Questions submitted by Chairman Ben Quayle

Q1.  In your testimony you remark that is it difficult to evaluate the
value of transportation research because there is very little evidence
to make a convincing case for its value. Can you explain what it would
take to increase the evidence base?

A1. Prefacing my answer to the question, ``Can you explain what it
would take to increase the evidence base (on the value of
transportation research)?, is again the qualifier contained in my
written testimony that I have not conducted an extended literature
review, and that there may be studies on the value of transportation
research with which I am not familiar. More generally though, basing my
answer on experiences with what has underlain evidence-based studies
from other Federal agencies, I see 1 short-term and 1 long-term
approach as offering a productive, complementary means of generating
the desired evidence.
The short-term approach is to organize a more extensive and
systematic review of the evidence on the value of transportation
research than I am currently able to provide and to compare and
contrast the methodologies and data bases found in this review with the
state-of-practice currently employed by other Federal agencies. I have
participated in or consulted similar such efforts for NIH, NSF, DOE,
USDA, and NIST, and see few obstacles for conducting such an exercise
for DOT. One standard approach would be for RITA to contract for such a
literature review. Far preferable in my view would be to follow the
practice of other Federal agencies and have RITA contract with the
National Academies for such a workshop.
The longer term approach is for RITA to develop an evaluation
program element specifically designed at providing systematic evidence
of the value of transportation research. Here the preferred approach in
my view would be to couple a strengthening of RITA's internal
evaluation capabilities with allocating via a competitive process some
portion of UTC funds to those centers that develop a specialized
capacity for program/project evaluation.

Q2.  In your opinion, is the current UTC system overly focused on
applied research in order to meet the needs of the states, instead of
long-term national goals to create transformational technologies?
Besides increasing the federal cost share, what other policy changes
might allow the research conducted by the UTCs to be more focused on
long-term national needs instead of immediate ones? What other
recommendations do you have to ensure the UTCs are conducting research
for the greatest benefit of the nation?

A2. My earlier testimony that the UTC system is overly focused on
applied research in order to meet the needs of the states, based in
large part on review of written TRB reports and interaction with
transportation practitioners during my service on the RTCC, has been
reinforced by my subsequent interactions with UTC administrators, who
have confirmed and detailed this assessment. Increasing the federal
cost share is only part of what needs to be done to have the UTCs
direct their activities at national goals to creative transformational
technologies. Indeed, without additional policies/requirements, simply
increasing the federal share may allow states to further leverage their
modest investments to shape local rather than national research
objectives.
Two additional, complementary steps, at a minimum are required to
guide the UTCs to national objectives. First, UTC awards should be
based on competitive, merit-review processes with proposals evaluated
on the basis of their potential to achieve stated national
transportation research objectives. Thus, following a consultative
process involving stakeholders, members of the transportation research
community, and researchers in cognate fields (e.g., materials
research), DOT should identify and prioritize a set of national
transportation research needs, allowing room for blue sky initiatives,
towards which existing UTCs can respond. Selection panels likewise
should be constructed broadly of individuals qualified to judge the
national potential of the proposals under review. The second step is to
establish formal review criteria to assess performance under an award,
with substantive penalties, including termination, for non-performance,
and to construct review panels broadly representative of the user and
performer communities.
Responses by Ms. Lynn Peterson, Transportation Policy Advisor,
Office of Governor John Kitzhaber (OR)

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Additional Material for the Record
Statement Submitted by Representative Randy Neugebauer

Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this Technology and Innovation
Subcommittee hearing on transportation research priorities. In a time
that calls for severe fiscal restraints and strict consideration of all
federally funded programs, prioritizing projects and maximizing return
on investment is more important than ever. American families are being
forced to stretch each and every dollar as far as they can, and the
federal government should be doing the same. As such, I believe that
this hearing is timely, I expect that we will hear important ideas on
how we can improve the effectiveness of our transportation research
investments, as well as how programs are currently undergoing efforts
to make the most out of the funding they receive.
Administrator Appel: Secretary LaHood recently decided to
discontinue funding in FY 2011 for University Transportation Research
Centers (UTC) and make the program completely competitively-funded. I
believe competition is a good thing, and is a driving force behind the
innovation and prosperity our country has always enjoyed. I understand
that UTC's structure may be reworked in the next surface transportation
authorization bill, on which the Transportation and Infrastructure
Committee is working tirelessly. Since this issue may come up again,
I'm interested in knowing how the Department of Transportation proposes
to ensure continuity and stability of transportation research during
the transition period to implement Secretary LaHood's decision. How do
you plan to make sure of that? Additionally, how can you make certain
that current research initiatives will not be disrupted as a result of
the change?
An important aspect of maximizing return on investment in research
and development is identifying and addressing duplicative programs. How
does the Department of Transportation identify redundancies? Can you
assure us that they will be addressed properly? Since other agencies
conducted similar transportation-related research, could you explain
how DOT coordinates with other offices to leverage and eliminate
duplicative efforts?

Thank you.


