- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-47]FISCAL YEAR 2018 BUDGET REQUEST FOR U.S. CYBER COMMAND: CYBER MISSION FORCE SUPPORT TO DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OPERATIONS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 115-47]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2018

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES HEARING

ON

FISCAL YEAR 2018 BUDGET REQUEST FOR

U.S. CYBER COMMAND: CYBER MISSION

FORCE SUPPORT TO DEPARTMENT OF

DEFENSE OPERATIONS

__________

HEARING HELD
MAY 23, 2017

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
25-869                  WASHINGTON : 2018

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES

ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York, Chairwoman

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               RICK LARSEN, Washington
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana         JIM COOPER, Tennessee
LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming, Vice Chair      JACKIE SPEIER, California
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
Kevin Gates, Professional Staff Member
Lindsay Kavanaugh, Professional Staff Member
Neve Schadler, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Langevin, Hon. James R., a Representative from Rhode Island,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and
Capabilities...................................................     2
Stefanik, Hon. Elise M., a Representative from New York,
Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities..     1

WITNESSES

Rogers, ADM Michael S., USN, Commander, U.S. Cyber Command.......     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Rogers, ADM Michael S........................................    30
Stefanik, Hon. Elise M.......................................    29

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Franks...................................................    45
Mr. Langevin.................................................    45
Mrs. Murphy..................................................    46
Ms. Stefanik.................................................    45

FISCAL YEAR 2018 BUDGET REQUEST FOR U.S. CYBER COMMAND: CYBER MISSION
FORCE SUPPORT TO DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OPERATIONS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, May 23, 2017.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:37 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Elise M.
Stefanik (chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ELISE M. STEFANIK, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM NEW YORK, CHAIRWOMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND
CAPABILITIES

Ms. Stefanik. The subcommittee will come to order. I want
to welcome everyone to today's hearing of the Emerging Threats
and Capabilities Subcommittee of the House Armed Services
Committee [HASC].
With the President's budget request released just earlier
today, this is our first opportunity to explore this request
and the major implications for key defense missions. I think it
is fitting that the first area we will dive into is cyber. This
is an increasingly important domain of warfare and an area
where we have increased our emphasis on overseeing the
Department's progress in building and maintaining cyber forces
to protect, defend, maintain, and, when necessary, conduct
offensive operations in cyberspace.
As we move towards developing the fiscal year [FY] 2018
NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act], I have made cyber
and cyber warfare one of my main priorities. In the coming
weeks, Chairman Mac Thornberry and I, in addition to my ranking
member, Jim Langevin, and the HASC ranking member, Adam Smith,
plan to introduce standalone cyber warfare legislation that
strengthens congressional oversight of sensitive military cyber
operations, including mandating prompt notifications to
Congress in the event of unauthorized disclosures.
We look forward to continuing to work with U.S. Cyber
Command [CYBERCOM] and the Department of Defense [DOD] as we
finalize this draft legislation to ensure such notifications
are responsive to our needs but without adding undue reporting
burdens on the Department of Defense.
In addition to our focus on strengthening congressional
oversight in the area of cyber warfare, other key focus areas
will include provisions to strengthen our own cyber warfare
capabilities and provisions that enhance our international
partnerships across the globe.
In order to more thoroughly understand all of these issues,
I would like to welcome our witness today, Admiral Mike Rogers,
who serves as the Commander of U.S. Cyber Command and the
Director of the National Security Agency [NSA].
Let me now recognize Ranking Member Jim Langevin for any
opening comments he would like to make.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Stefanik can be found in the
Appendix on page 29.]

STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
RHODE ISLAND, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS
AND CAPABILITIES

Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And welcome, Admiral Rogers. I want to thank you for
testifying before us today. It is always a pleasure to have you
before the subcommittee. And thanks for bringing along a crowd.
It makes it a little more of an interesting hearing.
So the President's budget for fiscal year 2018 was
delivered just this morning, as the chair stated, and so I look
forward to hearing about priority investments in cyber and
about any potential new legislative initiatives relating to
cyber.
Last year, Congress passed legislation establishing U.S.
Cyber Command as its own unified combatant command. This
subcommittee worked diligently on the underlying legislation
because we recognized the importance of a trained and ready
force able to conduct effective cyber operations in concert
with other military and U.S. Government efforts, consistent
with the appropriate legal authorities and policies.
The FY 2017 NDAA also formalized the relationship with the
Principal Cyber Advisor to ensure advocacy and oversight of the
command. We also provided U.S. Cyber Command with limited
cyber-peculiar acquisition authorities 2 years ago, and I would
like to acknowledge the thoughtfulness by which the Department
has implemented this authority.
Today I look forward to hearing about where these two
initiatives stand, both the process by which necessary
resources are being transferred from STRATCOM [Strategic
Command] to CYBERCOM and the new resources being provided as
necessary for effective implementation.
Clearly, we have made progress employing military cyber
operations over the years. We have been building the Cyber
Mission Force, but now we must make sure that they are ready
and stay ready for a threat that morphs on a daily basis. The
persistent training environment, of course, is key to that end.
Although the cyber domain is not new, there is still much
that we are learning, and we must leverage those lessons
learned. We must assess the force we are building, how we
employ it, in order to ensure CYBERCOM is postured correctly
and that the tools and capabilities are the best that we can
provide them.
So next week, I am going to be traveling to NATO [North
Atlantic Treaty Organization], the NATO Cooperative Cyber
Defence Centre of Excellence, to attend its annual conference
in Tallinn, Estonia. I expect that CyCon [Conference on Cyber
Conflict] will provide extraordinary insight on how our NATO
allies view the cyber domain and how international laws are
applicable. And it will provide me with insight on how we can
increase cyber collaboration against Russian aggression.
Admiral, I would also appreciate your views on how we may
strengthen collaboration with our NATO allies.
So in closing, I just want to echo what the chair said
about the importance of formalizing notifications to Congress
of sensitive cyber military operations. The cyber quarterly
brief provides us a forum to oversee cyber operations, and I
was especially pleased with the participation of the Joint
Staff and OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense] at the last
engagement. However, in our oversight capacity, I believe that
we must work with the Department to obtain timelier, more
standard notifications, as the chair mentioned, and I know that
we are going to work toward that end.
So with that, I thank you, Admiral Rogers, for appearing
today. Thank you for what you are doing at NSA and U.S. Cyber
Command.
And with that, I will yield back.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Jim.
I also would like to remind members that immediately
following this open hearing the committee will reconvene
upstairs in 2337 for a closed classified roundtable discussion
with our witness.
Admiral Rogers, you are now recognized for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF ADM MICHAEL S. ROGERS, USN, COMMANDER, U.S. CYBER
COMMAND

Admiral Rogers. Thank you. Chairwoman Stefanik, Ranking
Member Langevin, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for
your enduring support and the opportunity today to talk about
the hardworking men and women of the United States Cyber
Command.
I look forward to discussing the command's posture, and I
welcome the opportunity to describe how U.S. Cyber Command
conducts efforts in the cyberspace domain and supports the
Nation's defense against sophisticated and powerful
adversaries.
The Department of Defense recognized 7 years ago that the
Nation needed a military command focused on cyberspace. U.S.
Cyber Command and its subordinate elements have been given the
responsibility to direct, operate, secure, and defend the
Department's systems and networks, which are fundamental to the
execution of all DOD missions.
The Department and the Nation also rely on us to build
ready cyber forces and to be prepared to employ them when
significant cyber attacks against the Nation's critical
infrastructure require DOD support.
The pace of international conflict and cyberspace threats
has intensified over the past few years. Hardly a day has gone
by during my tenure at Cyber Command that we have not seen at
least one significant cybersecurity event occurring somewhere
in the world. This has consequences for our military and our
Nation at large. We face a growing variety of advanced threats
from actors who operate with ever more sophistication and
precision.
At U.S. Cyber Command, we track state and non-state
adversaries as they continue to expand their capabilities to
advance their interests in and through cyberspace and try to
undermine the United States national interests and those of our
allies.
Conflict in the cyber domain is not simply a continuation
of kinetic operations by digital means. It is unfolding
according to its own logic, which we continue to better
understand. And we are using this understanding to enhance the
Department's and the Nation's situational awareness and to
manage risk in the cyber arena.
I would also look forward to updating you on our
initiatives and plans to help do that. Our three lines of
operation are to provide mission assurance for DOD operations
and defend the Department of Defense information environment,
to support joint force commander objectives globally, and to
deter or defeat strategic threats to U.S. interests and
critical infrastructure.
We conduct full-spectrum military cyberspace operations to
enable actions in all domains, ensure U.S. and allied freedom
of action in cyberspace, and deny the same to our adversaries.
Defense of DOD information networks remains our top priority,
of course, and that includes weapon systems and their platforms
as well as data.
To execute our missions, I requested a budget of
approximately $647 million for fiscal year 2018, which is
nearly a 16 percent increase from fiscal year 2017 due to
additional funding for Cyber Command's elevation per the fiscal
year 2017 NDAA, building out Cyber Mission Force and cyber-
specific capabilities and tools and JTF-Ares [Joint Task Force-
Ares] support in the fight against ISIS [Islamic State of Iraq
and Syria].
We are completing the buildout of the Cyber Mission Force
with all teams scheduled to be fully operational by the end of
fiscal year 2018, and with the help from the services,
continually increase Cyber Mission Force readiness to hold
targets at risk. Your strong and continued support is critical
to the success of the Department in defending our national
security interests in cyber.
As you well know, I serve as both Commander of United
States Cyber Command and Director of the National Security
Agency. This dual-hat appointment underpins the close
partnership between Cyber Command and NSA, a significant
benefit right now in cyberspace operations. The institutional
arrangement between these two organizations, however, will
evolve as Cyber Command grows to full proficiency in the near
future.
The National Defense Authorization Act in a separate
provision also described conditions for splitting the dual-hat
arrangement, which can only happen without impairing either
organization's effectiveness and ability to execute their
missions. This is another provision I publicly stated I support
pending the attainment of certain critical conditions.
Cyber Command will also engage with this subcommittee on
several other matters related to the enhancement of the
command's responsibilities and authorities in the coming year.
This would include increasing cyber manpower, enhancing the
professionalization of the cyber workforce, building defensive
and offensive capability and capacity, and developing and
streamlining our acquisition processes.
These are critical enablers for cyberspace operations in a
dynamically changing global environment. And most or all of
these particulars have been directed in recent NDAA acts. Along
with the Office of the Secretary of Defense for Policy and the
Joint Staff, we will talk with you and your staffs to iron out
the implementation details of that legislation.
The men and women of Cyber Command are proud of the roles
that we play in our Nation's cyber efforts and are motivated to
accomplish our assigned missions overseen by the Congress,
particularly this subcommittee. We work to secure and defend
DOD systems and networks, counter adversaries, and support
national and joint warfighting objectives in and through
cyberspace.
The command's operational successes have validated concepts
for creating cyber effects on the battlefield and beyond.
Innovations are constantly emerging out of operational
necessity, and the real world experiences in meeting the
requirements of national decision makers and joint force
commanders continue to mature our operational approaches and
effectiveness over time.
At the same time, I realize cybersecurity is a national
security issue. It requires a whole-of-nation approach that
brings together both public and private sections of our
society.
Our Point of Partnership program in Silicon Valley and
Boston has proven to be a successful initiative to link our
command to some of the most innovative minds from industry,
working together on cybersecurity as we face 21st century
threats together in the private and public sectors.
This, combined with agile policies, decision-making
processes, capabilities, and command-and-control structures,
will ensure that Cyber Command attains its potential to counter
our adversaries.
The men and women of U.S. Cyber Command thank you and
appreciate your continued support as we confront and overcome
the challenges facing us. We understand that a frank and
comprehensive engagement with Congress not only facilitates the
support that allows us to accomplish our mission but also helps
ensure that our fellow citizens understand and endorse our
efforts, which are executed on their behalf.
I have seen the growth in our command's size, budget, and
mission, and that investment of resources, time, and effort is
paying off; and more importantly, it is helping to keep
Americans safer in the cyber arena, not only in cyberspace but
in other domains as well. And I look forward to continuing the
dialogue across the command and its progress with you in this
hearing today and over the months to come.
I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Rogers can be found in
the Appendix on page 30.]
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Admiral Rogers.
We now turn to questions. First, I want to thank you for
your service and your leadership.
My first question is very broad. Last year's NDAA directed
the elevation of Cyber Command to a full combatant command.
What steps need to happen before the changes to the Unified
Command Plan take effect?
Admiral Rogers. So, first, the Secretary of Defense and the
President need to make a decision, the Secretary of Defense
making a recommendation, the President ultimately making the
decision as to the timing and the process we will use. And that
process is ongoing, and I don't want to speak for the Secretary
or the President, but I know that that process and that
discussion is ongoing.
Given the language in the NDAA and in anticipation of this
possibility, we have spent much of the last year working our
way through the specifics of how we would do that. And if a
decision is ultimately approved, we are prepared to apply that
and to do it in a timely manner in accordance with the
direction in terms of the timeline provided to us via the
President and the Secretary of Defense.
Ms. Stefanik. What are the specifics? As you said, you are
assessing the specifics you would do to take action. What are
they specifically?
Admiral Rogers. So if I could, until we have an ultimate
decision, I would rather not get ahead of my leadership,
because I think I owe them that, and to get into the how, if
that would be all right, ma'am.
Ms. Stefanik. Yes.
Part of your responsibilities that we enshrined in section
923 of FY 2017 NDAA when we elevated CYBERCOM to the full
combatant command involved development of doctrine and tactics
related to cyber. What role do you have in advocating for or
driving doctrinal development for the individual services when
it comes to cyber?
Admiral Rogers. So as the senior operational commander in
cyber in the Department, it is the partnership between that
cyber team, if you will, and our fellow operational commanders
and policy makers that help shape: So what is the doctrine that
should shape how we employ this capability that the Department
is developing?
If you look at what we have done over the course of the
last year, the efforts against ISIS, things we are doing
against other real world challenges, they are shaping the way
we are looking at how do we build the force of the future, what
are the concepts for its employment.
If you go back a couple years, for example, I can remember
a year ago, 2 years ago, one of our fundamental concepts was we
are always going to deploy forward and full teams. One of the
things we found with practical experience is we can actually
deploy in smaller sub-elements, use reach-back capability, the
power of data analytics.
We don't necessarily have to deploy everyone. We can
actually work in a much more tailored, focused way, optimized
for the particular network challenge that we are working. We
are actually working through some things using this, for
example, out in the Pacific at the moment.
Ms. Stefanik. A few weeks ago in your testimony in front of
SASC [Senate Armed Services Committee], you were asked your
opinion about whether we should be considering the
establishment of a cyber service, and at that time you said
that you were not a proponent. Could you explain a bit more as
to why you feel that way?
Admiral Rogers. Yes, ma'am.
So the reason I am not a--I certainly understand others
have a different view--the reason I am not a proponent of that
is, my concern is, if we are not careful, we will view cyber as
this very technical, very specialized, very narrow mission set.
And my view is cyber fits within a broader context. And if you
want to be successful in the ability to achieve outcomes within
the cyberspace arena, you need to understand that broader
context.
And I am afraid that if we go the service route, we will
tend to generate incredibly technically proficient but very
narrowly focused operators. And one of my takeaways from being
a member of the Department of Defense for the last 36 years is
we are best optimized for outcomes when our workforce has a
much broader perspective.
And I also think back--because I am a big fan of history--I
think back to the dialogue in the 1980s when I first joined,
was first commissioned in the military. In the aftermath of the
failure of Desert One and the effort to rescue those U.S.
hostages being held in the embassy in Tehran, we had a lot of
dialogue about is SOF [special operations forces] so
specialized, so poorly understood by the broad conventional
part of the military, so needing of specific attention that we
should create a separate SOF service.
We ultimately decided that the right answer was to create a
joint warfighting construct. Thus, in 1987 was born Special
Operations Command [SOCOM]. And in addition, we said that that
operational entity needed to be a little uniquely structured.
It not only should be a warfighter, but it should be given
budget resources that enable it to not only employ capability
but to determine the operational capabilities that actually,
and drive the investments that actually generate the
capability.
I think that that is a very effective model for us to think
about for cyber and Cyber Command vice just automatically
transitioning to the idea of a separate service.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you. My time is about to expire.
I now recognize Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Elise.
So, Admiral, Congress has provided CYBERCOM with limited
cyber-peculiar acquisition authority. So I want to first of all
commend the thoughtfulness by which the provision was
implemented. But can you please provide a general overview of
how that authority will be executed and overseen in the
command.
Admiral Rogers. So as you are aware, we sat down between
OSD from a policy and technical perspective and Cyber Command
from an operational perspective and asked ourselves: What is
the best way to implement this acquisition authority that was
granted to us by the Congress?
Again, we thought SOCOM offered a good model. We actually--
Cyber Command actually approached our teammates in SOCOM and
said: Look, you have a skill set, you have personnel who are
much more proficient in this area than we.
So SOCOM was kind enough to actually identify the two
initial individuals that we have hired who are going to provide
our acquisition, oversight, and certification, if you will.
Those individuals were put in place just a couple months ago.
The authorities are now almost all finished.
What you are going to see starting this summer is we have
identified an initial set of priorities about where we want to
apply this authority in terms of acquisition, and you will see
that play out over the course of the next couple of months. We
have just got a couple of things we have to finish ironing out.
But you are going to see us actually implement this over the
course of the next few months in the summer.
Mr. Langevin. So it has not, the authority has not been
used yet?
Admiral Rogers. Not yet. There are some specific technical
and oversight and control things I have to make sure are in
place before we start spending the money and using this. That
will all be finished within the next month or so, I think.
Mr. Langevin. Can you speculate, just provide an example of
what you think the authorities may be used for.
Admiral Rogers. So what I have asked is we have already
identified, for example, a series of capabilities through Cyber
Command's Point of Partnership, we call it, out in Silicon
Valley. So I already have a structure that is interacting with
the private sector.
Now I want to overlay this acquisition authority to
actually now--I actually purchase, if you will, and acquire
some of that capability from the private sector that we have
been talking to them about now for the last few months.
So I try to work the requirement piece in anticipation of
gaining the acquisition authority. Now that we have got that
pretty much done and I overlay the acquisition authority, you
are going to see us start to enter into some specific contracts
very focused on a couple of specific mission sets. Defense
capability for cyber protection teams is the first area we are
going to focus on.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Very good.
So I mentioned in my opening statement that I am going to
be attending the annual cyber conference at NATO, the
Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence next week. What
is Cyber Command's relationship with the center and NATO? And
in your opinion, how can we cooperate more closely with our
NATO allies? How can that cooperation be strengthened?
Admiral Rogers. So, for example, like yourself, I was just
out there last June, spoke at the same conference you will be
going to next month. Every time I am in Estonia I spend time at
the center and actually talk to them. The points I try to make
to my NATO teammates are a couple-fold.
First, under the NATO framework, the center represents the
positions of the members of the alliance that participate in
the center, not necessarily the alliance as a whole. So for
example, not all 28 nations--29 now with Montenegro--not all 29
nations actually participate in the center. I would like to see
if we can somehow more formally tie the center to NATO's policy
development, for example. I think that could really accelerate
some things.
Also, I am trying, because capacity is certainly a
challenge, and I am trying to both meet our own priorities as
well as help key allies in the NATO alliance. One of the things
I am interested in is I have created a partnership with
European Command. We are talking about potentially placing an
individual maybe in the center in the course of the next year
or so to more directly link with ourselves.
I would also like to see what could we potentially do
within the exercise framework that the alliance is starting to
create in cyber now. I have already extended invitations to
them to observe and participate in our exercise framework, but
I would like to do the same thing, if I could, within the NATO
arena.
Mr. Langevin. So you know that, obviously, the Congress
passed the CISA, the cyber information-sharing legislation, and
that is something, obviously, domestically.
Admiral Rogers. Right.
Mr. Langevin. But also we have robust cyber threat
information sharing, for example, with the Israelis.
How are we doing with robust cyber threat sharing
information with our NATO partners?
Admiral Rogers. Right now, most cyber sharing tends to be
focused in many ways on a nation-to-nation basis. That is
another one of the challenges that I am interested in with
Cyber Command, how can we work that more formally or military
organization to military organization so we are doing this once
and not 29 different times, as it were.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Very good.
Well, my time has expired. I do have additional questions,
but if we don't get to a second round, I will submit them for
the record. I appreciate your getting back to me on them.
But thank you, Admiral, for the work you are doing, and
thanks for your service to the country. I yield back.
Ms. Stefanik. Dr. Abraham.
Dr. Abraham. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, Admiral,
for being here. I appreciate it.
Admiral Rogers. Thank you.
Dr. Abraham. The other services in the armed services
certainly have their own cyber commands. What is CYBERCOM doing
as far as the manning and the concept of operations as far as
having duplicative issues within those services----
Admiral Rogers. So, remember, the way----
Dr. Abraham [continuing]. To prevent the duplication?
Admiral Rogers. So the way we are structured, each of those
service primary operational cyber commands is a subcomponent of
U.S. Cyber Command. So whether it is Army Cyber, Coast Guard
Cyber, Air Force Cyber, Fleet Cyber, MARFORCYBER [Marine Forces
Cyber], they have an operational relationship to me. And so
that is how we try to work the joint and the service piece in a
very integrated way.
I am the first to acknowledge--and I was a service
component commander before this job. I was the Navy's guy. I
was Fleet Cyber Command. In those service structures, they are
both OPCON [operational control] to me in the execution of
their joint responsibilities, but they also have additional
service responsibilities. And I try to be the connecting loop
partnering with them and also partnering with the service
leadership to make sure that from a service and a joint
perspective within the Department we are aligned and focused on
priorities and outcomes.
Dr. Abraham. All right. And so let's parlay that into our
other Federal agencies. It seems all of them certainly have a
cyberspace department, so to speak. CYBERCOM, as far as
coordinating mechanisms between other Federal agencies, could
you explain that a little bit, please?
Admiral Rogers. So we coordinate directly, primarily, in
the rest of the government with the Department of Homeland
Security [DHS]. That is particularly driven by the fact that
one of Cyber Command's three missions is, if directed by the
President or the Secretary of Defense to defend critical
infrastructure against acts of significant cyber consequence,
we would do that in partnership with DHS.
And so because of that, we are closely aligned with them.
And, in fact, I just was talking with the team yesterday.
Between the private sector--in the private sector the U.S.
Government has designated 16 different areas. Think about
finance, transportation, aviation. There are 16 different
segments that the Federal Government has designated as critical
to the Nation's security, that infrastructure.
We have picked one of those 16 segments to do a test case,
if you will, between DHS, Cyber Command, that private sector,
as well as NSA, from an information and intelligence sharing--
that would be the NSA role--to try to get down to execution-
level detail about so how would we really do this day-to-day.
Because my experience as a military individual has taught me, I
don't like to do discovery learning when I am moving to contact
against an opponent. It tends to be high loss rate, incredibly
inefficient and ineffective, often very resource intensive, and
much slower.
So I am interested, how can I create those relationships
and exercise them now before we get into a major incident
directed against one of those 16 segments.
Dr. Abraham. Okay. I think I have time for one more
question.
What is CYBERCOM's supporting role in NORTHCOM [Northern
Command], PACOM [Pacific Command]? And has the DOD codified
that relationship so that if there is an incident or accident,
that that could be really instituted very seamlessly if such an
event should happen?
Admiral Rogers. So our role on the defensive side is to
support and ensure the continued operation, for example, of
those networks, weapon systems, and platforms that those
operational commanders and others count on to execute their
missions.
In addition, we generate offensive capability, particularly
for PACOM and other geographic commands outside the United
States, because we don't really see, I don't think, right now
in my mind, how would we apply cyber offensive capability in
the United States. That is not the role of the DOD. Our focus
inside the United States would be largely defensive.
One of the things that is a focus area, I have set out a
series of goals for 2017. One of those goals is increased cyber
Reserve and Guard integration, to get to the question that you
are really driving at: How do we make sure that for a domestic
incident that all elements of DOD are aligned, and we all know
how we are going to do this, and all the forces know what their
role is going to be, the command and control is all outlined,
so NORTHCOM knows what they are going to do, I know what I am
going to do, PACOM, because they have a portion of a domestic
responsibility, so that they know what they are going to do?
I would like to use the defense support to civil affairs,
which has been an ongoing process we have used for decades, I
would kind of like to use that as a test model. I am a big fan
of let's use what is working elsewhere, let's not try to create
something different or unique for cyber to the maximum extent
that I can.
Dr. Abraham. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thanks, Admiral, for coming.
I would like to go back to the question of a unified Cyber
Command, because your answer--I wasn't concerned about the
answer--the portion of the answer, like we are still working it
out. I was concerned because I thought I heard you say
something that runs counter to what we told you all to do, and
that is the decision is made to do this, and that the Secretary
and the President don't need to make a decision to actually do
a unified command. The law, as I understand----
Admiral Rogers. But the time--they will drive the----
Mr. Larsen. The timing of that, that is something separate.
Admiral Rogers. Right. So that is my only point, is the
timing piece.
Mr. Larsen. If that is your only point, that is fine. I
thought I heard something else.
Admiral Rogers. No. I apologize if I miscommunicated. You
have clearly provided a legal framework. It is what you are
doing. You know, absent a change in the law, that is what we
have to execute.
Mr. Larsen. Okay. I appreciate that.
And I would like to go back as well to something the chair
was exploring with you, and it has to do with having a cyber
service or not. I actually agree with you in not having one.
But it does beg the question, though: To have that capability,
what flexibility do you need in personnel? What flexibility do
you need in contracting? Just kind of what flexibility do you
need to fully utilize and even develop a formal framework so
you are using Active Component, Reserve, Guard, as well as the
contractor community?
Admiral Rogers. So among the ways that we try to ask
ourselves: So if we are going to go with a service-based
approach, which is really what we are executing, how would you
do it? We came up with a couple of baseline principles, if you
will.
The first is, it doesn't matter what your service is and it
doesn't matter if you are Guard or Reserve. We build to one
standard. And so we have created within a joint framework for
every position within the Cyber Mission Force we can tell you
what the pay grade is, and we can tell you what the
qualification standards are, and we can tell you what the
duties are that are assigned to the position. Because I said,
look, we have got to create one integrated force, and if we do
1,000 different variants, I can't optimize that.
The second thing we said was the structure of the teams
needs to be the same regardless of whether it is a particular
service, Guard, or Reserve. The analogy I used was, it doesn't
matter if we have an F-16 squadron in the Guard or in the
Active force, there is one squadron nomenclature for an F-16
that we can then employ anywhere globally, because we know
everybody is built to the same standard. Even as we acknowledge
there are some variances, but everybody is built to the same
standard.
So that was another principle. I said, the only way we can
make a service-based approach work is that Active or Reserve,
Guard or Reserve, it doesn't matter. We are building to one
standard.
If we stick to that framework, I am very comfortable that
we can make a service approach work for us. If we insist on
variance, if we insist on everybody doing their own thing, I am
the first to admit, boy, this is not a model that is going to
generate the outcomes that we need. I am the first to
acknowledge that.
Mr. Larsen. And the role of the private sector?
Admiral Rogers. So the private sector, when I look at them,
a couple things come to mind. Number one, they are providing,
they are the ones who are going to provide the human capital,
whether that human capital ends up wearing a uniform, whether
it is part of our civilian government workforce, or it is
contractor force, they all start in the private sector.
So it is one of the reasons why I spend a fair amount of
time at Cyber Command and as the Director of NSA for that to
the same extent in some ways, with the academic world, with
private industry, about: So tell me how you create a workforce.
What works for you? What incentives are you using? What has
failed that in hindsight you say to yourself, ``Boy, don't go
down this road because it really failed spectacularly for us''?
Even as I acknowledge there is a difference between government
and the private sector, but I still think there are some things
that we can learn from each other.
In addition, I think two other areas come to mind for me
with the private sector. The first is technology. The days when
DOD is going to be the engine for technological innovation and
change I think are long behind us. That is just not the DOD
model. That is why we created the Point of Partnership in
Silicon Valley and in Boston. It is why I thought the
acquisition piece was so important for us. We have got to be
able to tap into that private sector in terms of acquisition of
technology and capability.
And then the last area, which is a little bit
counterintuitive in some ways, when it comes to the generation
of policy, concepts, thought, the private sector can play a
huge role here.
I think back to the beginnings of nuclear deterrence and
nuclear policy, for example. If you go back in the 1950s and
you read much of the thought process, much of that was flowing
from the academic world. Hardly anybody remembers now that
Henry Kissinger in the 1950s and early 1960s was a professor at
Harvard who was writing about concepts of nuclear deterrence,
nuclear employment that ended up, he and others, ended up
shaping the strategic vision we had. And I would like to see us
do the same thing in cyber.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you.
Ms. Stefanik. Ms. Cheney.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And thank you,
Admiral Rogers, for your service and for being here today.
Secretary Mattis, before he became Secretary, in talking
about the Budget Control Act [BCA] and sequestration, said no
foe in the field could do our military as much harm as has been
done to us through sequestration and the Budget Control Act.
As we begin the process of looking at the 2018 budget, I am
interested to know to what extent you were able to factor in
strategy and threats and sort of strategic thinking about what
needs to be done as you put together the budget for Cyber
Command and to what extent you have still been hamstrung by the
BCA and by those cap numbers.
Admiral Rogers. So like any entity, it is all about
prioritization for us. So we spend a lot of time figuring out
with finite resources, even with growth, with finite resources
how are we going to prioritize.
So our input for the fiscal year 2018 budget in truth in
lending, we just rolled it out as a government, as a Department
this afternoon, during the midday today, so I have not yet seen
the specifics yet. I know what the broad number for us is, but
I haven't seen the sub-elements of that, so I will talk
broadly. I apologize, but I will talk broadly.
For the 2018 input, we tried to identify those priorities.
At a macro sense, in no particular order, I have been arguing
manpower; investment in core capabilities; and then, number
three, how can I accelerate number one and number two, how can
I do both of those faster.
Because in some ways, even though as the WannaCrypt
ransomware issue that we have been going through shows, there
is capability in the Department. There are a lot of motivated
men and women who are doing some good work. We were not
impacted by WannaCrypt, and that wasn't from a lack of effort.
We had spent significant time starting in March asking
ourselves how might this play out, how do we position ourselves
in the case of--because Microsoft had put out the patch for the
vulnerability. We, as Microsoft users, saw that and started
asking ourselves how might an opponent attempt to exploit this
vulnerability even as we were working to patch.
It is one of the reasons why we use a defense in-depth
strategy. There is no one single solution. There is no one
single way to fix this problem. It is layers built on top of
each other. That really has been the key to our success.
So we are asking ourselves how can we do this faster. Every
day, one of my biggest concerns is--and I have never really had
this same viewpoint in almost 36 years of commissioned
service--every day I literally think to myself, we are in a
race to generate more capacity and more capability at the same
time that I am watching a host of global actors do the exact
same thing.
And so we are trying to sustain both staying up with them,
but, quite frankly, my objective is to get ahead of the problem
set. I don't like reacting to things. It is not an effective or
efficient way to do business, and I don't think that is what
the Nation wants from us.
So until I am able to bore into the specifics of the
budget, that kind of gives you a broad sense of what I thought
we needed to focus on.
Ms. Cheney. So would you say, Admiral, that the budget as
it has been proposed provides the resources necessary to regain
superiority in areas that we have lost it?
Admiral Rogers. It certainly moves us along that road, but
no one should think for one moment that this mission set, not
unlike some others, is going to require increased and sustained
investment over time. This is not going to be a 1 or 2 years we
have increased you by some reasonable number, which has been
the case for the last 2 years, and that is all you are going to
need.
If you look at the scope of the challenges associated with
this mission set and from where we are starting, we have got a
lot of hard work ahead of us.
Ms. Cheney. And would you talk a little bit about how you
are going to measure success and how you are going to measure
progress along that path of regaining superiority?
Admiral Rogers. So there are a couple components to it.
First, we have developed a set of--we are in the process of
developing a set of metrics, so how do we truly assess
readiness for this force that we created.
We focused for the first few years on assessing initial
operating capability [IOC] and final operating capability
[FOC]. It is when you hear us talk in slang about IOC and FOC.
And you heard me in my remarks, we achieved IOC essentially on
time, October 2016. We have until 30 September, 2018, to
achieve FOC. I think we are on track for that.
But one of the things I tell the team is that doesn't get
to warfighting. And in the end, it is about our ability to
actually operate in a sustained heavy environment. Just like
when we are building a brand new carrier or a brand new fighter
wing, for example, it is not enough just to say we have got all
the pilots, we have got all the parts. It is about training. It
is about assessing readiness. So we are working our way through
how are we going to do that.
Then it is other things like we ask ourselves are we
driving down defensive penetrations, are we driving down
malware infections. There are some specific metrics that we
think that we can use to give us a sense, particularly on the
defensive side, are we being more effective or not.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. O'Rourke.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you.
Help me understand a little bit how we make clear to other
countries in the world the consequences of cyber attacks. With
conventional weapons in conventional wars there may be an
understanding of what the consequences will be should one
country attack another with a certain kind of weapon. What is
our level of dialogue with other countries, including those
countries we view as threats, including those countries who, I
think, we know who have attacked us, about what the
consequences are going forward?
Admiral Rogers. So if I could in an unclassified session, I
am not going to get into specifics associated with particular
nation-states. And it hasn't been a one-size-fits-all approach,
which is true broadly for strategy for us, I would argue, as a
Nation. It is not a one-size-fits-all approach. We try to
optimize the way we are looking at this particular challenge
set based on whatever the particular actor that we are dealing
with. What works for one won't necessarily have the same kind
of impact as what will work for another.
There are a couple--first, let me talk about a couple basic
things. We have been very public and acknowledged the fact that
we are using cyber offensively against ISIS, not just because
we want ISIS to know that we are contesting them, but because,
quite frankly, we also think it is in our best interest for
others to have a level of awareness that we are investing in
capability. And we are employing it within a legal Law of Armed
Conflict framework, not indiscriminately, but we are employing
it.
We have also acknowledged very publicly in unclassified
strategy documents, for example, for the Department's
cyberspace strategy, that we are developing offensive
capability, that we believe that deterrence is an important
concept that we have got to work our way through. We are trying
to communicate to the world around us that we are aware of the
kinds of activity we are seeing out there. Some of it we view
with concern.
As a result, we think it is in our own Nation's best
interest to have a set of capabilities that both generate
greater options for our policymakers and our operational
commanders, but at the same time help communicate to others
around us you don't want to go down this road with us.
I think the reaction or the way WannaCrypt played out in
the United States, for example, is a very good example of that.
Hey, look, in a major malware effort that took down many
systems in lots of other parts of the world, did not have the
same level of effect on us here in the United States. That is
not by chance.
Mr. O'Rourke. Let me ask you a question about that. To what
degree are we treaty bound to assist an ally who is attacked
through cyber not kinetically, and are we already assisting
allies who are? And maybe to use that most recent example that
you just gave.
Admiral Rogers. So that is a bit of a legal question. That
is not my lane. But I will give you my thoughts from my
perspective as an operational commander.
For example, NATO has been very direct in saying that they
view cyber as a natural continuation of the standing Article 5
framework where attack against one is an attack against all,
even as NATO acknowledges the application of Article 5 is
through a decision framework in the North Atlantic Council, and
it is done on a case-by-case basis. But broadly that is the
intent. That has been communicated in multiple forms, in
multiple ways.
For other nations, you would have to ask somebody who is a
little bit smarter about the specifics of the standing mutual
defense treaties that we have.
Mr. O'Rourke. Okay. Let me ask another question then.
Because we know the Russians attacked the integrity of our
elections here, because we know they have done that in other
countries, because past behavior is a good predictor of future
behavior, whose responsibility is it in this country? And then
maybe for the record on for our allies when our allies'
elections are attacked.
But is it Cyber Command? Is it DHS? Is it both? Should the
RNC [Republican National Committee] or the DNC [Democratic
National Committee] be attacked going forward, for example,
whose responsibility is that?
Admiral Rogers. So under the current framework, which could
change, but under the current framework the Department of
Homeland Security has overall responsibility for the provision
of capability and capacity within the Federal Government in
support of the private sector, broadly.
Cyber Command in its defined mission of, if directed, as I
said, to support the defense of critical infrastructure, we
would partner with DHS to do that. We would do that, Cyber
Command, by attempting to interdict that activity before it
ever reached that U.S. network. Quite frankly, we wouldn't
focus on blue or friendly space. We would be out in gray and
red space, if you will, trying to stop the activity from ever
getting there.
Mr. O'Rourke. It is yours before it gets here. Once it gets
here, it is DHS.
Admiral Rogers. Yeah, simplistically. Then once it gets
here, DHS has created a sector framework. Cyber Command also
has a set of capabilities in the form of national cyber
protection teams that we would also deploy in partnership with
DHS to support among those 16 specific critical infrastructure
areas.
Again, it is one of the things I mentioned earlier that I
want to test. We are going to start using one particular sector
that is a little bit more mature than some of the other 15.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Franks.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Madam Chair. And thank you,
Admiral Rogers. Thank you for your service to the country, and
your job is so very important to us all.
You stated that your first mission priority is defense of
DOD information networks. Would you suggest that that means
that defensive operations doctrinally will take precedence over
offensive operations?
Admiral Rogers. No, because I remind the team: Look, we
have three missions, and we have to be capable of executing all
of them. I can't go to my boss and say: Hey, I really just
chose to focus on number one.
Now, don't get me wrong. Like any commander, I have to
prioritize. And so as I am looking at the challenges out there,
I have told the team we will prioritize against number one,
even as we acknowledge we still have to execute those other two
missions.
But like any other operational organization, at times I
have to prioritize resources, focus. But it isn't: Well, it is
just one and not the others. We have got to do all of them.
Mr. Franks. Yeah. Well, as you know, the DOD relies upon
the civilian power grid for 99 percent of its power
requirements, without which, I am told, that it becomes
impossible in CONUS [continental United States] to effect the
DOD mission. Do your priorities include protecting the U.S.
power grid and other critical infrastructure against cyber
attacks?
Admiral Rogers. So, again, I don't have responsibility for
the defense of that in the United States.
I will say, one of the things I am interested to see if we
can maybe look at doing differently, and I am having this
conversation in particular with TRANSCOM [Transportation
Command] at the moment, right now, when it comes, for example,
to critical infrastructure that the DOD counts on to do its
mission, when it comes to cleared defense contractors who
either are generating the capabilities that we use, advanced
fighters, for example, and other platforms, as well as private
industry, for example, for TRANSCOM that provides services,
lift, movement of cargo, under the current structure the
Defense Security Service [DSS] has overall responsibility for
the interface with those private companies, not TRANSCOM, for
example, even though they work for TRANSCOM or they provide a
service based on a contractual relationship with TRANSCOM, and
not necessarily with us.
I would like to see, is there a way to bring those
operational commands, Cyber Command, DSS, and that private
sector together in a much more integrated way, because what we
are finding right now is I will become aware of activity, I
will pass that to DSS, DSS passes that to the private sector.
That doesn't come across to me always as the fastest, most
efficient, most agile way to do business, and I would like to
see if we can maybe try to change that.
Mr. Franks. Well, Admiral, you know that that has been one
of the challenges in the past, that sometimes the whole notion
of protecting the grid from cybersecurity challenges kind of
walks the 13th floor of humanity.
Admiral Rogers. Right.
Mr. Franks. Because we, the Department, your department
consider that a civilian responsibility. Of course, the
civilian response is that that is a national security issue and
should not be our responsibility. And my fear, of course, is
that neither has the sufficient focus on it necessary. And
given it is your stated----
Admiral Rogers. Yes, sir.
Mr. Franks. Yeah. So it is worth always touching base on.
How will Cyber Command's posture improve once it is
elevated? Do you believe you will have all the resources and
authorities you require to accomplish your assigned missions?
And what do you expect your number one challenge will be in
terms of Russia, China, Tehran, ISIS, someone else?
Admiral Rogers. Okay. So let me try to unpack it, and if I
forget one, please just let me know, sir.
So first, what is the benefit of elevation, why have I and
others recommended that that is a smart course of action, even
as I acknowledge the decision is not mine, as we have already
talked? That is outlined within legislation. Now it is a timing
issue absent a change to the legislation.
In the Department's processes, when it comes to how we
develop budgets, how we articulate prioritization, how we
develop broad policy, it is generally built around the idea
that the combatant commanders are the primary voices for the
operational end of those processes, not subunified commands,
combatant commanders.
So one of my concerns has been we talk about the importance
of cyber--and I acknowledge that there are other priorities in
the Department--and yet, for some--not all but for some of our
processes the cyber expertise is not embedded in the current
structure because you put it one level below.
So I believe that elevation plugs us more directly into the
primary decision-making processes within the Department, which
are really optimized for combatant commanders. It also makes us
faster, because now I have got one less layer that I have to
work through. I have been very blessed in my time at Cyber
Command.
The Strategic Command commanders I have worked with,
General Hyten and--boy, how quickly we forget, I can picture,
he was a good flag officer, a friend--they were great to team
with, because I would tell them: Look, if we are going to
insist everything I do flows through Offutt [Air Force Base], I
can't get to timeliness, I can't get to speed. And this helps
address that.
Ms. Stefanik. The time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Cooper.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Apparently, two of our colleagues have introduced a bill
that would allow private sector U.S. companies to hack back,
active defense. I hadn't realized before that this is
apparently illegal today absent a law change. So could you
reflect on this proposal and whether it is a good idea or not?
Admiral Rogers. So broadly--and I will only speak for Mike
Rogers, because I am not in the policy lane but I have an
opinion--as an operational commander, my concern is while there
is certainly historic precedence for this, nation-states have
often gone to the private sector when we lacked government
capacity or capability.
We did that in the Revolutionary War, letters of marque. We
didn't have a Navy. We went to the private sector, gave them
authority and protection via our government to say go out and
capture cargos from the Royal Navy and from the British
merchant fleet.
My concern is, be leery of putting more gunfighters out in
the street in the Wild West. As an individual tasked with
protecting our networks, I am thinking to myself, we have got
enough cyber actors out there already. Just putting more out
there I am not sure is in everybody's best interest.
And I would also be concerned about the legal liability you
might--and I am not a lawyer--about the legal liability. I
would think that you would have some liability issues
associated with taking actions with second- and third-order
effects that you don't truly understand when you actually
execute it. That is just my concern.
Mr. Cooper. Are other countries doing this? Are you
familiar with any other countries that have enabled their
private sector to be aggressive?
Admiral Rogers. There may be equivalent legal frameworks
out there, certainly not that have come to my attention and not
that I have a discussion about.
Mr. Cooper. I was curious, you used a gunfighter analogy,
because some people have thought that NRA [National Rifle
Association] might set up a whole new wing of activity for
this.
But to the extent that private business in this country
feels disconnected from government or that, as you pointed out
earlier, government response is too slow or that certain
national security interests are not recognized as being
national security interests even when it is protecting the
grid, I think you are probably going to see greater pressure.
Admiral Rogers. Right. I would agree.
In some ways, it goes back to--again, showing you my war
college education. I don't want you to think as a taxpayer I
didn't listen when I was sent to service colleges.
In the Westphalian construct, the application of force has
generally, for the last several centuries, been viewed as a
mission or a right of a sovereign state, not something that the
private sector does. We don't use, for example, for us, we
don't use contracts to actually drop and fire weapons. We don't
use mercenaries to do that. We use uniformed military.
I would just be concerned that going that route, again,
argues against the broad principles we have used about the role
of the state and applying force kinetically or nonkinetically.
Mr. Cooper. We don't use those tools, but in our degraded
Westphalian system, we don't know who we are being attacked by.
It might be state actors, quasi-state actors, probably private
actors. Who knows?
Admiral Rogers. Although it depends on the situation. But I
am the first to acknowledge 100 percent attribution is probably
a standard we are going to be driving for for a long time and
not necessarily achieve immediately.
Mr. Cooper. What percentage of accuracy in attribution
would you give us today?
Admiral Rogers. Oh, it depends on the actor. If you take,
for example, speaking now on the NSA side, if you take a look
at the efforts we did in the intelligence community assessment
with respect to Russian efforts to influence the 2016 election
process, really high confidence, very fine-grain attribution.
If you take a look at WannaCrypt, for example, we are 10
days into this, and collectively, both the private sector and
the government, we are still working our way through who is the
actor or actors associated with this. So it tends to vary.
There is no single concrete answer.
Mr. Cooper. So with the elections, we are close to 90
percent, 95 percent, and with this we are 60 but raising it?
Admiral Rogers. I don't know. I have never really thought
about it from a number.
Mr. Cooper. Okay. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chair. Admiral, it is a long
way from Auburn University.
Admiral Rogers. War Eagle, sir.
Mr. Scott. I hope you never lose a war or win a ball game.
I am University of Georgia graduate.
Admiral Rogers. Oh, I have a brother who went to the
University of Georgia and a sister-in-law.
Mr. Scott. He is a good man. He is a good man.
Admiral Rogers. Misguided individuals. I love them, but
they are misguided.
Mr. Scott. Was he the one holding Uga when he bit the
Auburn player?
All kidding aside, thank you for your service.
And we talk a lot about how fast technology changes and the
acquisition process being a problem throughout the Department,
but I would like to hear your comments on the personnel again.
You speak to this in your comments.
When you get the young man, the young woman out there that
is the best and the brightest, there are opportunities in the
private sector versus there are opportunities in the public
sector under your command. The challenges there. And the issue
of, what percentage of your personnel are civilian versus
uniform?
Admiral Rogers. Roughly, we are about 80 percent military,
about 20 percent civilian. That is kind of what we are building
to. It varies in some areas, but it is about 80-20.
Mr. Scott. I know we have a tremendous number of wonderful
people in uniform. Some of the people that we see that seem to
be the best and the brightest in the technology field aren't
exactly the people that you imagine going to boot camp.
Admiral Rogers. Right.
Mr. Scott. How do we recruit in case--I mean, do we have a
system in place to allow those people to serve?
Admiral Rogers. So it is one of the reasons why we have
tried to come up with a total force concept for us--Active,
Guard, Reserve, civilian, contractor--that within that pool of
five subpopulations, if you will, we can match almost any
individual.
``Hey, I really want to get into this. I want to serve the
Nation. But I have no desire to deploy or be put through the
physical fitness standards of the uniform law. Boy, I would
love to work for you as a civilian.''
``Hey, I like mobility, I am going to try the contractor
route so I can move around a little bit.''
We try to build a structure that enables us to try to
attract a pretty broad swath.
The positive side to me is, boy, when you get people in the
team--I was just talking to one of the service review panels.
One of the services out there has created--has asked a party of
gray beards to take a look at how they manage the Cyber Mission
Force within their service and to answer the question: Are they
really optimized for the future?
And I coincidentally this morning was just sitting down
with this retired former chief of their service. And I said,
``Well, you have talked to the teams,'' because they did that
as part of their process. I said, ``Tell me what you are
hearing from them, because I have a sense, but I am curious
what you are hearing.''
And he said to me, ``The most amazing thing is every team
we talk to, these men and women are so motivated and love what
they are doing. I mean, that is a real plus for you. They
really are into this mission. Because their self-image is they
are the digital warriors of the 21st century.''
The challenge, I think, we have got to work with the
services who provide this manpower capability, how do we manage
it effectively over time, and how do we also build into this
the fact that we have got to acknowledge there are some areas
we are going to need to do differently? We can't put a person
in this once and then spend all that time training him and then
they don't do it for another 10 years. That is ridiculous to
me.
On the other hand, I realize that there is more than just
the Cyber Mission Force, that the services are asking
themselves: How are we building a broader workforce to address
cyber?
So I am working with the services about what percentage of
the eligible trained population makes sense, what kind of
policies we should have with respect to retouring them so we
sustain some level of capability and experience over time and
we are not starting all over again every 3 years.
That is one of the challenges at the moment that one
service is trying to deal with. Their model, I am trying to
argue, we have got to make some changes to. We just can't
afford to retrain everybody every 3 years. I just don't think
that is cost effective, and it is a little demoralizing to the
men and women.
Mr. Scott. I think this is going to be one of our greatest
challenges going forward in how we handle the cyber war, if you
will.
Admiral Rogers. Right.
Mr. Scott. And not just with your issue. We hear the same
thing about the drone pilots and how dedicated they are and how
determined they are and the need for flexibility----
Admiral Rogers. Yes, sir.
Mr. Scott [continuing]. With where they work and the time
that they work. And I recognize, from a pay scale, we are
nowhere close to what they would get in the private sector.
Admiral Rogers. Right. But on the other hand----
Mr. Scott. So I appreciate their commitment to the country
and your commitment to the country as well.
Thank you.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Chairwoman Elise Stefanik, for your
extraordinary leadership on organizing this hearing.
And it is just an honor, Admiral, to be back with you, and
we appreciate your innovative service to address the issues of
cyber defense.
As the former chairman of the Subcommittee on Emerging
Threats and Capabilities, I am keenly aware of the huge
challenges that lie before us and the extraordinary men and
women that you have put together to serve in your command.
Cybersecurity is a 24-hour-a-day, 365-day-a-year
responsibility that requires instantaneous analysis, response,
and deterrence. After each cyber attack, we have the
circumstance of where the government officials are grappling
with whether or not it constitutes a mere nuisance or an act of
war.
It is for this reason I introduced the Cyber Attack
Standards of Measurement Study Act, H.R. 1030, which would
require the Director of National Intelligence, the Homeland
Security Department, FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], and
Secretary of Defense to conduct a study to determine
appropriate standards that could be used to quantify the damage
of cyber incidents for the purpose of determining appropriate
response.
And two questions. Do you believe that there exists an
interagency definition for cyber act of war? And secondly, do
you believe that we have a common metric to measure cyber
incidents which could benefit the interagency response?
Admiral Rogers. I think there is a broad, certainly in the
kinetic world, there is a broad definition out there of an act
of war. But even in the kinetic world, it is still somewhat
situational. And so I fully expect that our experience in cyber
is going to be something similar.
It goes to one of the previous questions in some ways.
Articulating those concepts in a way that actors understand
that you may be tripping a threshold that will trigger a
response, I think that is in our best long-term interest. That
helps, I think, help the nation-states, actors, groups out
there understand there are potential prices to pay here, and at
some point you will trip a threshold--again, depending on the
scenario--and that is not a good place for you to be.
We are clearly still working our way through there. And I
am not a policy guy, I am the operational guy, so I try to
figure out what do we do once the policymaker makes that
determination.
Mr. Wilson. And then thank you for recognizing, too, it
could be nation-states, it could be other actors. What a
challenge. And so we are so grateful for your service.
One of the first challenges that you have are updating
antiquated infrastructure.
Admiral Rogers. Yes, sir.
Mr. Wilson. I am grateful that the district I represent is
adjacent to Fort Gordon, home of the Army Cyber Command. Can
you please describe the amount of infrastructure modernization
that needs to occur and how the demand differs across the Army,
Navy, Air Force, and Marines?
Admiral Rogers. So as we saw--and I will use WannaCrypt as
an example--as we are working our way through the services,
because I have overall operational responsibility, the services
physically own much, under the current network structure, the
services still own much of the infrastructure. So I partner
with them in attempting to address that infrastructure
cybersecurity.
One of the things we continue to find is we are still
carrying a lot of very old infrastructure that offers potential
increased vulnerability. And the ``defense in depth'' approach
we use is designed to help mitigate that, but I literally just
sent a note to a service chief earlier this week and senior
leaders in that service and said: Look, at some point these
vulnerabilities down at the tactical level that interact with
acquisition will become potential points of exploitation by
others that have the chance to negate some of that defense in
depth. So we have got to address this.
I find we have talked a lot about manpower, but in some
ways, to me, the acquisition piece, that is even harder,
because it is long term, it is huge sunk cost, and it is
competing against priorities like: So do you want me to buy
more F-35s? Additional, you know, carriers? Do you want more
brigade combat teams?
In a world of finite resources, you have got to make those
resource tradeoffs, and, in general, the acquisition world
hasn't historically always been incentivized for cybersecurity
outcomes as its primary metric.
Mr. Wilson. Well, thank you very much. And we look forward
to working with Chairwoman Stefanik to back you up in every
way.
Admiral Rogers. Thanks.
Mr. Wilson. And with my time running out, I do want to
thank you for the participation by the National Guard and your
efforts. And what has been the level and what more can we do to
help you in this regard?
Admiral Rogers. Boy, so if we just look at Cyber Command,
we have over 100 guardsmen and reserves every day supporting
us. Every day we currently have Guard components activated on
the defensive side, on the offensive side, in some of our
specialized capabilities. So the Guard is a day-to-day player
for us.
If you also look at what the Guard is doing from an--oops,
sorry ma'am.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much.
Ms. Stefanik. Time has expired. They are calling votes, and
so I want to get to everybody.
Dr. Wenstrup.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Madam Chair. Admiral, good to be
with you here today. I appreciate it.
You were talking about various structures of how we set up
our command and where we are headed. I am curious what our
adversaries are doing. What do we know about how they are
structured and looking at what they are doing and maybe guiding
us in some way?
Admiral Rogers. In some ways, it is kind of interesting.
Again, I am not going to get into a classified discussion. But
broadly, Cyber Command is viewed as: Wow, this is a really
interesting concept that the U.S. has created, what can we do
to attempt to emulate at least parts of it?
I am not arguing that it is perfect or that everyone else
in the world wants to. But, in general, I spend a lot of time
talking to allies, and they will often say to me: Well, we may
not opt to go the same particular structure you have created,
the process you went through, the capabilities you have
developed, the way you have created an organizational
operational construct that is focused on generating outcomes,
hey, we are really interested in doing that. Is there a way we
can potentially partner?
So part of the Cyber Command's mission set right now is you
spend a lot of time with foreign partners around the world. And
I can't--I am the first to acknowledge I have to prioritize
here, but as part of the broader Department strategy, I have
prioritized different areas of the world that we are really
heavily focused on right now in terms of partnership, helping
those nations develop cyber capability.
Dr. Wenstrup. That is our allies. And you mentioned, in a
different setting, go into more detail what our adversaries
are----
Admiral Rogers. Right. If I could, I would be glad, in a
closed session and share some interesting thoughts there.
Dr. Wenstrup. Another time. That is fine. I appreciate
that.
You did mention that we wanted people to know some of the
things we were doing to counter ISIS, and maybe that is kind of
hitting them, but a shot across the bow for others. Have you
felt that it has had an effect?
Admiral Rogers. I certainly hope so, because, quite
frankly, again, one of the reasons we opted to publicly
acknowledge this was we wanted other actors to be aware that we
are developing and employing--again, within a legal framework--
but we are developing and employing those capabilities.
There certainly is an increased awareness by some actors
around the world as they look at us, as they try to study us,
about capabilities and kinds of things we are doing. Again, I
am not going to get into specifics, but we are certainly aware
of that.
Dr. Wenstrup. Yeah, in another setting I might like to hear
more about that.
Admiral Rogers. Yes, sir, I would be glad to.
Dr. Wenstrup. Yeah, we will have that opportunity, I am
sure.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Admiral Rogers. Yes, sir.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Admiral Rogers, for your testimony.
At this time, they are likely to call votes in the next
couple of minutes or so. After votes are finished, we will
reconvene in Rayburn 2337 upstairs for the closed portion of
this.
If there are additional questions from the members, please
feel free to submit them for the record, and then we can
anticipate a response from you.
Admiral Rogers. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Stefanik. This committee is adjourned, and we will
reconvene.
Admiral Rogers. Thank you, ma'am.
[Whereupon, at 4:46 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

May 23, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

May 23, 2017

=======================================================================

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. STEFANIK

Ms. Stefanik. I am aware that staff from the legislative branch
have been participating in DOD's Cyber Guard exercise series over the
past 2 years in an effort to better defend our own networks. Cyber
Guard helps to prepare for a major cyber event by training for a whole
of nation approach led by DOD, DHS, FBI, with private sector
participants for CI/KR sectors and the legislative branch. Are there
other training opportunities that would make sense for the legislative
branch to participate in, such as other Continuity exercises or smaller
scale cyber technical or operational training?
Admiral Rogers. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LANGEVIN
Mr. Langevin. The Fiscal Year 2017 National Defense Authorization
Act also formalized the relationship between the Principal Cyber
Advisor and CYBERCOM to establish a service-like secretary. A service-
like secretary is critical for advocacy and oversight of the command
and for ensuring operations are synched with policies, as well as
civilian control of the military. In light of the law, what steps has
CYBERCOM taken to enhance the relationship between OSD and the command?
Admiral Rogers. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Langevin. The Persistent Training Environment is key to a ready
force. What is the status of the effort based on funding provided to
date? What can we expect in FY18 both in funding and capability
delivery?
Admiral Rogers. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Langevin. The military services are making significant
investments in cyber training and cyber centers of excellence. Although
I'm pleased to see the investment, I want to ensure coordination and
avoid duplicative efforts. How are you encouraging the services to
leverage respective centers of excellence, and investment in training
generally?
Admiral Rogers. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Langevin. Academia and industry have much to offer the
Department of Defense in the cyber domain, from strategic thinking to
experienced personnel to technology. Please describe the relationships
CYBERCOM has with academia and industry. How have these relationships
benefited the Department?
Admiral Rogers. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FRANKS
Mr. Franks. You stated your first mission priority is defense of
DOD information networks. Will defensive operations doctrinally take
precedence over offensive operations?
The DOD relies on the civilian power grid for 99% of its power
requirements. Do you believe your priorities include protecting the
U.S. power grid and other critical infrastructure against cyber
attacks?
Admiral Rogers. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Franks. How will Cyber Command's posture improve once elevated:
Do you believe you will have all the resources and authorities you
require to accomplish your assigned missions?
Who do you expect your #1 challenge to be? Russia, China, Iran,
ISIS, someone else?
Admiral Rogers. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mr. Franks. In your opinion, what are we missing in our thinking to
get to an effective comprehensive approach that allows for deterrence
and rapid response capabilities?
What do we know about the cyber doctrine and military structure of
our adversaries and allies?
While we may have some sense of Russian and Chinese actors, do we
have any understanding of other actors and has doctrine been
established to counter threats from them (Syria, Iran, Israel, Germany,
etc.)?
Admiral Rogers. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MRS. MURPHY
Mrs. Murphy. I am encouraged that the Department is moving forward
on creating the Persistent Cyber Training Environment, which will be a
training platform to allow cyber forces to train in simulated network
environments. The Army's Program Executive Officer for Simulation,
Training, and Instrumentation (PEO STRI), based in Orlando, was tapped
as the lead to develop and acquire the Persistent Cyber Training
Environment, which will also incorporate the work of the National Cyber
Range in Orlando.
In your view, what is the value of the Persistent Cyber Training
Environment for readiness? What individual and collective training gaps
will the Persistent Cyber Training Environment fill?
Admiral Rogers. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mrs. Murphy. Earlier this year the Committee heard from LTG Joseph
Anderson (Deputy Chief of Staff, G-3/5/7) that our commanders don't
have the facilities or capabilities to understand what cyber does for
them, both from a defensive and offensive perspective.
How might the Persistent Cyber Training Environment help increase
cyber fluency at leadership levels in the Army, and across the
services?
Admiral Rogers. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]
Mrs. Murphy. You stated in your testimony that CYBERCOM is working
to synchronize cyber planning and operations across the joint force,
and that CYBERCOM is helping the combatant commands build cyber effects
into their planning processes. How exactly is CYBERCOM doing this?
Admiral Rogers. [The information was not available at the time of
printing.]

[all]
