- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-30] NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2018 AND OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.

[H.A.S.C. No. 115-30]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2018

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

MEETING JOINTLY WITH

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ON

THE CURRENT STATE OF U.S. TRANSPORTATION COMMAND

__________

HEARING HELD
MARCH 30, 2017

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
25-146                       WASHINGTON : 2018

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

JOE WILSON, South Carolina, Chairman

ROB BISHOP, Utah                     MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
STEVE RUSSELL, Oklahoma              TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 CAROL SHEA-PORTER, New Hampshire
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
MARTHA McSALLY, Arizona, Vice Chair  ANTHONY G. BROWN, Maryland
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             RO KHANNA, California
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin
Margaret Dean, Professional Staff Member
Brian Garrett, Professional Staff Member
Jodi Brignola, Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND PROJECTION FORCES

ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia, Chairman

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama, Vice Chair   JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          MADELEINE Z. BORDALLO, Guam
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin            JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
PAUL COOK, California                SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
STEPHEN KNIGHT, California           A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
David Sienicki, Professional Staff Member
Phil MacNaughton, Professional Staff Member
Jodi Brignola, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Courtney, Hon. Joe, a Representative from Connecticut, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.........     2
Wilson, Hon. Joe, a Representative from South Carolina, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Readiness......................................     1
Wittman, Hon. Robert J., a Representative from Virginia,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces.......     4

WITNESSES

McDew, Gen Darren W., USAF, Commander, United States
Transportation Command.........................................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

McDew, Gen Darren W..........................................    33
Wilson, Hon. Joe.............................................    29
Wittman, Hon. Robert J.......................................    31

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Ms. Hanabusa.................................................    59
Mr. Langevin.................................................    59

THE CURRENT STATE OF U.S. TRANSPORTATION COMMAND

----------

House of Representatives, Committee on Armed
Services, Subcommittee on Readiness, Meeting
Jointly with the Subcommittee on Seapower and
Projection Forces, Washington, DC, Thursday,
March 30, 2017.

The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 9:02 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Joe Wilson
(chairman of the Subcommittee on Readiness) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOE WILSON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
SOUTH CAROLINA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Wilson. Ladies and gentlemen, I call this joint hearing
of the Subcommittee on Readiness and Seapower and Projection
Forces of the House Armed Services Committee to order.
I am pleased to welcome members of the Seapower and
Projection Forces and the Readiness Subcommittees to the
hearing today for an unclassified session on the current state
of U.S. Transportation Command [TRANSCOM].
I would especially like to thank Congressman Rob Wittman,
chairman of the Seapower and Projection Subcommittee, and
Congressman Joe Courtney, the ranking member of the Seapower
and Projection Forces Subcommittee, joining us today in our
effort to better understand the topic.
This hearing follows a series of hearings and briefings
highlighting the individual readiness challenges of each
military service, which further confirms that our services are
indeed in a readiness crisis.
The cornerstone of the U.S. military is its service
members. Underpinning their success is the ability of our
soldiers, sailors, airmen, and Marines to go where they are
needed and to have fully operational equipment ready to be
used.
While I firmly believe the United States military remains
the world's best, I am concerned about shortfalls in readiness
and the trend lines that we see. U.S. Transportation Command
enables our military to deliver an immediate and powerful force
against U.S. adversaries anywhere in the globe through airlift,
air refueling, and our strategic sealift.
As members of these subcommittees know, U.S. Transportation
Command will always answer the Nation's call. But there are
challenges that demand our attention today to ensure the
readiness of our military. I reiterate my belief that the first
responsibility of the Federal Government is to provide for the
security of its citizens, to accomplish for citizens what they
cannot do for themselves. Therefore, it is our responsibility
as members of these subcommittees to continue to better
understand the readiness and force structure situation of the
United States Transportation Command, to understand where we
continue to take risk and understand where more attention is
needed.
I would like to welcome our distinguished witness who we
are honored to have with us today. General Darren W. McDew,
U.S. Air Force, Commander of the United States Transportation
Command. And I do like to point out that Congressman Wittman
and I were both commenting just now, a distinguished graduate
of the Virginia Military Institute of Lexington, Virginia.
I thank you for testifying today and look forward to your
thoughts and insights as you highlight the current state of the
U.S. Transportation Command.
I would like to now turn to the ranking member of the
Seapower and Projection Forces Subcommittee, also ranking in as
member of the Readiness Subcommittee, Congressman Joe Courtney,
for any remarks you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wilson can be found in the
Appendix on page 29.]

STATEMENT OF HON. JOE COURTNEY, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CONNECTICUT, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you again
to my colleague from Virginia, Mr. Wittman, for coordinating
this joint hearing this morning. It is a good, efficient way to
get, you know, the message out to as large a group of us as
possible.
And I think this hearing offers an important opportunity
for our two panels to receive a timely update on the readiness
status of the U.S. Transportation Command, which plays a
critical but too often overlooked role in our airlift and
sealift capabilities. Getting the people, supplies, and
equipment to the locations they are needed when they are needed
is one of the foundational pieces of our Nation's ability to
project power around the globe.
Under TRANSCOM, the mix of organic military assets and
commercial partners makes a powerful combination that must be
carefully managed and sustained. And while I believe that
TRANSCOM remains ready today to fulfill its important mission,
I am concerned about some of the longer term challenges it will
face without action by Congress.
For example, while the emerging buildup of our Navy fleet
has received significant attention in the recent months, the
state of our sealift capabilities is just as important. Many of
the sealift ships that reside in the fleet today are the result
of congressional urging and funding due to insufficient
prioritization and planning within the executive branch.
As the Navy potentially embarks on an increased
shipbuilding initiative for combatants to support the new FSA
[Force Structure Assessment], it is just as critical that our
sealift requirements are not once again sidelined. America's
Ready Reserve fleet and the vessels within the Maritime
Security Program [MSP] are strategic and irreplaceable national
assets. And like other strategic assets, we must ensure that we
do all we can to maintain, support, and replace the ships that
comprise them.
I am deeply concerned, however, that we have not paid
enough attention as a nation to the health and viability of our
pool of vessels or the mariner pipeline needed to crew them. As
we look at addressing some of the more urgent near-term needs
facing our sealift capability, it is important as well to have
a clear and long-term path towards fully recapitalizing our
sealift fleet and the mariners needed to man them.
In the near term, I believe we need to take action to
ensure that the MSP has the resources and support it needs.
Chairman Wittman and I have teamed up to lead a bipartisan
letter of more than 50 other Members to the House appropriators
urging them to fully fund the Maritime Security Program for
fiscal year 2018. The Maritime Security Program provides an
extremely cost-effective means of ensuring critical sealift
capability during times of crisis and deserves strong support
as we consider the budget in the months ahead.
I am also proud that the Seapower Subcommittee has led the
way to assure that we continue to have the ability to train the
next generation of mariners that will support our sealift
needs. Last year, we authorized the construction of a national
security multimission vessel that will replace the aging fleet
of training ships allocated to our State maritime academies.
Together, these institutions provide the majority of our
Nation's trained mariners, and this program is key to ensuring
that we protect and grow this vital pipeline.
Equally important to America's ability to deliver the fight
is our strategic airlift capacity. This subcommittee has
strongly supported the recapitalization of key assets, like the
KC-46A tankers, while also backing cost-effective modernization
efforts of other platforms like the C-130H fleet and the C-5Ms.
While each service must balance competing efforts to restore
readiness, as we have heard during the state of the Air Force
hearing last week, continued modernization efforts in our C-
130H fleet must be prioritized as a relatively inexpensive
means of maintaining critical capacity.
And we heard a shout out for Virginia a few minutes ago. I
just want to recognize that the C-130H airlift wing of the
Connecticut Flying Yankees, I say that grudgingly as a Red Sox
fan, are deployed right now overseas supporting the important
mission in the Middle East. And, again, that was a lot of hard
work, and I want to thank the Air Force and the Air Force
Reserves for basically getting that flying mission back in
action again.
And again, I want to thank the general for being here
today, and again, salute his outstanding service to our Nation.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman Courtney, and thank you
for being dual-hatted today, serving as also the ranking member
of the Readiness Subcommittee. Congresswoman Madeleine
Bordallo, I know, would want to be here today, but she is back
in Guam, the beautiful territory of Guam, to provide a
presentation on--her annual presentation on service in Congress
to the people of Guam, and we know of her great affection for
the beautiful territory of Guam.
I now turn to the gentleman from Virginia and chairman of
the Seapower and Projection Forces Subcommittee, Congressman
Rob Wittman, for any opening remarks that he may have.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT J. WITTMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM VIRGINIA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SEAPOWER AND
PROJECTION FORCES

Mr. Wittman. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, General McDew, welcome. Thanks so much for all of your
time and effort on this extraordinarily important issue. And in
deference to that great school there in Lexington, ``Go
Keydets.''
I also want to thank Chairman Wilson for offering to have
this joint subcommittee hearing today. And I believe that there
are a number of overlapping issues with the Readiness
Subcommittee, and I look forward to working with the
distinguished gentleman from South Carolina to make sure we
move these issues forward in this year's NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act] markup process.
General McDew, as you know, we are a seafaring nation, and
this was the vision of our Founding Fathers when they
commissioned the U.S. Navy in 1775, and our seafaring nature is
now the bedrock of our economy. Today, merchant ships carry
around 90 percent of everything, with that total amount having
more than tripled since 1970. Unfortunately, our national
security--unfortunately for our national security, this
seaborne trade is being increasingly outsourced to other
nations, and our own merchant fleet is in rapid decline.
Between the years 2000 and 2014, our U.S. commercial fleet
has shrunk from 282 vessels to 179 vessels, a reduction of
almost 40 percent. This decline in our commercial fleet
increasingly represents a national security challenge because
the mariners that support our commercial sector will be used
extensively by the U.S. Transportation Command during times of
war or mobilization. The Maritime Administration has indicated
that our commercial sector does not have sufficient mariners to
sustain a prolonged mobilization of our Ready Reserve forces.
Our Nation cannot presume that a foreign-owned maritime
sealift component will be available during times of conflict to
deploy into contested waters. Our Nation needs U.S. mariners on
U.S.-flagged ships.
As our strategic airlift capabilities, today we depend on a
much smaller fleet to move cargo, personnel, and to medevac the
wounded from more remote battlefields than during the Desert
Storm era. Even with the larger Desert Storm force, a 1993 RAND
study found that more than 60 percent of our troops and 23
percent of the cargo airlifted in or out of the theater went by
the private sector.
In future major theater wars, the Civil Reserve airlift
fleet may be asked to absorb even more of the demands for cargo
and troop movements. I am concerned that outdated planning
assumptions need to be reviewed. The new administration has
made it clear that it wants to increase Army and Marine Corps
force structure. However, at the same time, areas of the globe
are becoming less permissive for civilian aviation operations
to deliver these additional soldiers and Marines to their areas
of operation. I believe TRANSCOM should thoughtfully consider
how to best increase strategic airlift capacity in its ability
to operate in contested environments around the globe.
I thank Chairman Wilson for working within the Seapower and
Subcommittee Projection Forces Subcommittee on this important
issue, and I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wittman can be found in the
Appendix on page 31.]
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman Rob Wittman of Virginia.
We now begin with the opening statement from General McDew.
We look forward to your testimony today.

STATEMENT OF GEN DARREN W. McDEW, USAF, COMMANDER, UNITED
STATES TRANSPORTATION COMMAND

General McDew. Good morning, Chairman Wilson and Wittman,
Ranking Member Courtney, and distinguished members of both
subcommittees. It is an honor and I am nearly giddy this
morning to have the privilege to be here with you today
representing the fine men and women of the United States
Transportation Command. I thank you for your continued support
of our dedicated professionals who are all working together to
provide our Nation with a broad range of strategic capabilities
and options.
I also want to emphasize the vital role that you mentioned
that our commercial industry, who I call our fourth component,
plays in our success. As I appear before you today, I can say
confidently that your United States Transportation Command
stands ready to deliver our Nation's objectives anywhere and
anytime. We do this in two ways.
We can provide an immediate force tonight through the use
of our airlift and air refueling fleets, and we can provide
that decisive force, when needed, through the use of our
strategic sealift and surface assets. You see evidence of this
every single time you read or watch the news.
When North Korea increased its provocation of our Pacific
allies, America responded with assistance. USTRANSCOM delivered
that assistance in the form of missile defense systems,
personnel, and support equipment flying 3,000 miles within a
matter of hours. When you read about America's brigade combat
teams rolling through Europe, it was USTRANSCOM's ability to
provide a decisive force to reassure our European allies. When
America needed B-2 Stealth bombers to fly 11,000 miles from
Missouri to Libya and back to deliver over 100 precision
weapons, our air refuelers got them there.
From national disasters to epidemics to acts of war, the
men and women of USTRANSCOM are standing ready to deliver this
Nation's aid, assistance, and hope to a world in need. These
missions must execute seamlessly and without fail. All the
while these great professionals quietly manage a myriad of
daily tasks around the globe, which most Americans will never
hear or read about.
It takes, I believe, great diligence, skill, and innovation
to provide that kind of readiness for America, and since 1987,
nearly 30 years now, the men and women of USTRANSCOM have never
let this Nation down. I am proud to serve next to them, and I
say with confidence that our organization is ready to respond
when our Nation calls. Now, I have great confidence, but my
confidence comes, however, is not without concern.
The environment we operate in today is increasingly
complex, and we expect future adversaries will be more
versatile and more dynamic, forcing us to adapt, change, and
evolve. Furthermore, as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs General
Joe Dunford laid out in his vision for our future, we are
viewing potential adversaries through a transregional,
multidomain, and multifunctional lens. Properly understanding
the potential threats from China, Russia, Iran, and North
Korea, as well as worldwide global violent extremists, in the
global context, is of utmost concern, and it is a concern for
our national security.
In each of these scenarios, I believe, logistics plays a
critical but often overlooked role. Today, USTRANSCOM is
critically examining how we execute our logistics mission in
the contested environments of the future, a space we haven't
had to operate in, at least logistically, for a very, very long
time. We are exercising in wargaming scenarios, forcing
planners to account for transportation's vital role and
potential loss.
Earlier this year, USTRANSCOM held its first ever contested
environment war game, imagining a scenario where we didn't,
hard to believe, dominate the skies or own every line of
communication. This war game uncovered a surprising amount of
lessons learned, which we have already started absorbing into
our tactics, techniques, and procedures accordingly.
I am also concerned about our national strategic sealift
capability. A delay in recapitalizing our military sealift
fleet creates risk in our ability to deploy forces across the
globe. These concerns are compounded further by merchant
mariner shortages and the reduction of U.S.-flagged vessels.
Today, our resources make us capable of meeting today's
logistics needs. However, if we don't take action soon, many of
our Military Sealift Command [MSC] vessels will begin to age
out by 2026. A significant portion of the DOD's [Department of
Defense's] wartime cargo capability moves on these ships.
My final concern is one that runs throughout our operations
and no doubt concerns us all. The cyber threat. We aren't the
only government agency to face these threats, but USTRANSCOM
has a unique problem set. Unlike other combatant commands,
commercial industry plays a vital role in how we accomplish our
mission. The DOD's information network is relatively secure,
but how do we guarantee the security of military data on
commercial systems?
In short, we operate in an ambiguous seam between DOD and
DHS [Department of Homeland Security]. Our mission includes
both dot-mil and dot-com domains. We are accelerating several
initiatives and also our thinking to help try to close that gap
between DOD and DHS.
Also, before I conclude, I would like to extend my
gratitude to Ms. Vickie Plunkett, a member of the Readiness
Subcommittee professional staff, for her dedication and her
work with USTRANSCOM. To our Nation's benefit, she has always
asked the tough questions, and she knew how to match Congress'
intent to the capabilities TRANSCOM delivers. We thank her for
all she has done for the Nation and wish her the very best in
retirement.
Thank you again, Chairman Wilson and Wittman and Ranking
Member Courtney and members of the subcommittees, for inviting
me,interesting, inviting me to speak to you today. I
respectfully request my written testimony be submitted for the
record, and I look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General McDew can be found in
the Appendix on page 33.]
Mr. Wilson. General, thank you very much. And we have just
been notified that we may be having votes around 10:00, and so,
fortunately, we have Margaret Dean here who is going to
maintain a strict 5-minute rule beginning with me, and so it
shall begin.
And I am really grateful, again, that you are here and the
challenges that you have indicated that become even more
gruesome as you approach 2026. But additionally, in line with
that, every week we read about potential adversaries
challenging our freedom of navigation by air or sea in areas
such as the South China Sea, Straits of Hormuz, and the Baltic
Sea.
Is TRANSCOM prepared to deliver combat capability in these
potentially contested areas?
General McDew. Chairman, this is a new challenge for us.
For 70 years, we have had domain dominance. We haven't been
challenged in any domain for as long as I can remember in my
military service and long before that, so it is definitely
something we are now coming to grips with.
Our contested environment war game that we had recently
that had 64 different agencies, part of it every COCOM
[combatant command], everybody in the logistics community, some
commercial partners and others, has brought us to the
realization that we can't always assure that everything we send
in a direction will make it. We can't always be sure that we
will have the clear lines of communication that we need.
We haven't, to this point, planned for any losses in
logistics. It is 100 percent success, and 100 percent of the
things get there at 100 percent of the time. I don't think that
is a valuable proposition going forward to think that way, so
we are changing the way we think, and we are putting it into
every exercise to try to get at it differently.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much for being so proactive. And
you mentioned, of course, cyber as a threat. With the threats
increasing, are they impacting readiness? Are there any threats
or challenges in this domain that are unique to TRANSCOM and
may not be currently addressed by DOD or the interagency? If
so, what is being done to ensure operational security in the
cyber realm?
General McDew. Chairman, we spent--about a year ago, we
started down a path of discovery on cyber. We were not ready to
have this kind of dialogue a year ago when I sat in front of
you. I was understanding that the threat was approaching, but I
didn't understand the depth of the problem. We have had three
cyber roundtables over the last 18 months, and in those cyber
roundtables we have had academia, we have had business leaders,
we have had hackers join us to take us from cyber awareness to
cyber knowledge. And now we understand how nervous we should be
in this domain.
The seam that exists between DOD and DHS is a real seam for
us. Because we have 90 percent of my activity on a daily basis
runs through the commercial networks, we are becoming more and
more vulnerable because those commercial assets are part of
national security. Our industrial base is part of national
security in my realm, and I don't believe that we protect the
rest of the Federal Government the same way we protect inside
of DOD. So that is our challenge, and we are trying to bridge
that gap and make that understanding more relevant.
Mr. Wilson. Well, again, thank you for being so proactive,
and the changes over the past year certainly are positive.
Our government continues to operate under a continuing
resolution. The military services are taking risks to prevent
capability gaps. How will a full year of continuing resolution
impact U.S. Transportation Command's readiness? Are there
cascading impacts to the service members or their families? Are
we breaking faith with the service members and their families?
General McDew. Chairman, a continuing resolution is not
good for anybody, really. Directly impacting U.S.
Transportation Command, they are not as prevalent as they are
in the services, but that is a direct indirect on USTRANSCOM.
So as the services individually take risks in their
portfolio because of their lack of ability to plan or to
program for different things, and they take risks in what they
can continue to operate, it disproportionately impacts the
logistics and transportation communities. If a Marine decision
is made to take a risk in logistics, if an Air Force makes the
decision to take risk in logistics and so on, all of those are
compounded by the time they come to my joint command at U.S.
Transportation Command. And what I have seen over--through
sequestration and years of continuing resolutions, is that is
starting to now hurt in ways in the services and now in my
enterprise.
Luckily, I have the transportation working capital fund
that allows me to continue to operate, but the resourcing, the
ability to get after how many C-5s we have available and
flying, how many C-17s are in the Active Duty force, all of
those are impactful now.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much.
We now proceed to Congressman Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, General. I am just going to ask
really one area and give some of the members a chance to jump
in because I know we are going to have votes coming up pretty
fast.
So again, one of the--your command really is an interesting
one because you kind of have your feet in a lot of different
other agencies that fall outside of DOD. And, you know, one of
the issues that we have tried to work on Seapower over the last
couple of years is really this workforce issue in terms of just
making sure that we have merchant mariners ready to perform the
mission that you quarterback. And obviously, one of the big
needs is having training vessels at the maritime academies.
And again, that is not directly under your portfolio, but I
just wonder if you could sort of--we put some authorizing money
to jump-start design and construction of some new vessels, and
if you have any thoughts or perspective, we would--you know,
that would be helpful in terms of trying to create a record as
we go into next year's NDAA.
General McDew. As you know, the merchant mariner force is
the bedrock to how we move the force in our country. It makes
the difference between us being the most powerful military in
the world and us not being the most powerful military in the
world. There are nations around the world that wish they had
the power projection ability we have.
The mariner force we have today is insufficient to go to
war for an extended period of time. We have got to continue to
grow and nurture that seed corn that comes from the State
military academies. I have met with many of them. I am about to
do another commissioning or graduation speech and another one
pretty soon. Some great Americans serving their nation in a
powerful way, and we have got to give them better training
tools, and we need to change it fast.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you.
We now proceed to Chairman Rob Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General McDew, thanks again. Thanks so much for your
service.
I wanted to talk about the--well, for you to give us your
perspective on the--first of all, the importance of the Ready
Reserve fleet. Secondly, today, is there the capacity there for
a full mobilization, if necessary? And this other realm is, if
we lose a couple of hundred additional merchant mariners, is
Ready Reserve fleet even in a position to be able to begin an
initial activation for moving supplies and personnel to an
engagement? So can--give us your perspective on that.
General McDew. Thanks, Chairman. The Ready Reserve fleet,
about 61 strong ships, is aging rapidly. We have ships as old
as 54 years in the fleet, and the average age is somewhere
around 39 years in this fleet. Not optimal. We are working very
strongly with the United States Navy on a recap
[recapitalization] program that is going to have to be
multifaceted.
But to get to the core of your question, are we ready right
now? We have found some readiness cracks over the last few
months on being able to activate these ships and get them
underway. We believe we have the numbers of ships to be able to
start the initial deployment and maybe the second round of
deployment, but maybe beyond that, we are starting to be hurt
by how available these ships will be and the capacity of the
mariners.
I think the first impact we will have is the mariners--we
will fall short of the mariners. So 11,280 by MARAD [U.S.
Maritime Administration] is what we need, but that has some
assumptions that all of those mariners will be available right
when we need them. I am not sure that is an assumption we can
hold to.
There are larger numbers of mariners out there, but the
standards we put on them, we would like our mariners to have at
least 18 months of relatively current training before we put
them onboard to go to war, so there is other things we have got
to look at. The NDAA this past year put together a working
group to get after the mariner question in more depth. U.S.
Transportation Command will work with the Coast Guard and MARAD
to get after those numbers and more.
Mr. Wittman. I want to look at a little bit now about our
airlift capacity. As you know, you have been looking at what
the increased demand signal will be for increasing the number
of soldiers and Marines, and the airlift capacity that goes
along with that in having to move those individuals to
theaters, if necessary. We know that the Civil Reserve Air
Fleet [CRAF] has a certain amount of capacity. We also know
that within the current lift capacity within the Air Force, it
is--it has been static at best.
We know the C-17 line now is closed. We do know, though,
that we have 27 C-5s in storage at the Aerospace Maintenance
Regeneration Group out in Tucson. The question then becomes is
looking at CRAF and looking at the current capacity with
airlift within the Air Force and TRANSCOM assets, should
TRANSCOM consider increasing the strategic lift capacity by
returning the C-5 aircraft to service through the C-5M model
conversion program as we are upgrading or bringing those
aircraft back in? Should that be something that we look at to
make sure that going forward we have that capacity?
General McDew. Chairman, thanks for that question and the
opportunity to talk a little bit about airplane stuff, which I
don't get a chance to talk to about much anymore. Our capacity
on the lift side is being challenged. As we drew back forces
from overseas locations, I mean, when I was a youngster, there
were 300,000 soldiers in Europe. Now, there is about 60,000
soldiers in Europe. As I talked to General Scaparrotti, his
concern is how we can get the forces to him in time. That
primarily, without great indications and warnings, will be
airlift and air refueling, so that is a concern.
I would first like to start with where the Air Force is
taking risk in its portfolio today. So a couple of years ago,
the Air Force decided to put two squadrons of C-17s in back of
inventory, purely a fiscal decision, not because the airplanes
weren't performing or the squadrons weren't performing, and
took down two flagged on Active Duty, put them in backup
inventory. We also put eight C-5s in backup inventory. What
that has done is put us closer on the risk scale of what we can
move when.
The plan is for the Air Force to be able to afford to bring
those airplanes back from backup inventory into primary
inventory and put them in the Guard and Reserve.
I love the Guard and Reserve. I am a big advocate for the
Guard and Reserve, but what we now have is a problem of
balance. We now have so much assets in the Guard and Reserve
because, initially, we thought it was going to be cheaper and
that risk was more affordable there, but then it becomes a
timing issue. Those guardsmen and reservists aren't at their
duty locations every single day ready to respond immediately.
When they come up on duty 30 days in, I have great faith
and confidence in their ability, but what can we do to hasten
those airplanes being brought back into primary inventory,
because we need those assets to get to moderate level of risk.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you, Chairman.
And we now proceed to Congressman John Garamendi of
California.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Wilson.
I guess I was surprised when I found my colleague and chair
of our--the Navy talking about the Air Force. So here I am, I
am going to talk about the Navy. So let's go at that.
The mariner issue, there has been some discussion--my
apologies for having to step out. There was another general
who--Mr. Oliver--General Oliver who wanted to talk about some
of the issues that are your turf also.
Where to go here. In your written testimony, General, you
talked about the problem of the Ready Reserve, the MSP, and the
fact that we don't have--we will not have many mariners in
another 10 years or even 5 years. And I understand, in my
absence, Mr. Courtney brought up the issue of training and the
training ships, all of which are important, but the fundamental
problem is there won't be any place for these mariners to work.
And I believe some of the earlier discussion centered on the
fact that our commercial maritime fleets all but disappeared,
and so we may train people, but where are they going to work.
And so what I want to really get into here is detailed on
how--what your plans are to deal with the Ready Reserve fleet
and then the MSP fleet. The MSP, I believe, there was a
discussion earlier about the necessity of the subsidy. I think
we are in agreement on that. Whether there is money for it or
not, that is another question.
But nonetheless, that is not where I want to go. I want to
go to the ships. I want to hear your discussion about what to
do with the ships for the Ready Reserve. I noticed that they
are aged. So, please, if you will get into that in some detail
with us.
General McDew. Congressman, the Ready Reserve fleet is a
vital part of our portfolio to be able to project--a vital part
of our portfolio to be able to project the Army particularly to
war. Those 60 ships are the ones we have available initially to
get moving.
You are correct. We are having an issue with the maritime
community writ large, the lack of cargo. But if you get back to
the Ready Reserve fleet, we are working with the United States
Navy to recapitalize that fleet that is averaging now 39 years
of age. Some of them are as old as 54 years. We are starting to
see cracks in their availability. When we activate those ships
for readiness, they are not always getting underway.
Now, right now, today, I have got five of those ships
globally engaged working fine. But we need more than just the
five, and I am sure we have more availability than just five,
but we are finding that we don't have 100 percent availability
of those ships.
The recap of those ships will take a multifaceted solution.
Rebuilding new ships is where we all want to go. That won't
happen very, very quickly. I would guarantee that the CNO
[Chief of Naval Operations] of the Navy probably doesn't want
to put my sealift ships at the top of his list when he is going
to recap the Navy. I understand. So but that is part of the
portfolio.
The other part is to see if we can service life extend some
of our younger ships out a few more years to bridge the gap.
And I believe we ought to consider what we can do with some of
the ships we are using every day in the Maritime Security
Program, those U.S.-flagged ships with U.S. mariners that we
are using every single day, can we buy some of those used ships
and put them in the Ready Reserve fleet to augment that force?
Some of those ships are available at 10 to 15 years of service,
and we can use those for a number of years as a bridge.
Mr. Garamendi. In doing so, we come up against what I think
is a fundamental issue, and that is, are they American built?
And this is something we are going to have to wrestle with as a
team here. And I think most of us are advocates of buy America,
build America, and we may find that some of those ships that
you want to buy may not be American made. We need to work our
way through that.
I am going to take my last 40 seconds here to really lobby
my colleagues here on the dais.
We can expand the American maritime fleet, the commercial
maritime fleet by requiring that the export of oil and gas be
on American-built ships. And we can start at 10, 15 percent and
then ramp it up. That would give us an opportunity for mariners
to be trained and ready for the Ready Reserve or the MSP.
We can also build ships by requiring that those ships be
American built. There is legislation to do this. This is part
of what the subcommittee in the Transportation, Coast Guard,
and Maritime Committee is working on, so I am going to lobby my
members here on that.
But we really need detailed plans, General, from you on how
you are going to transition this. It fits directly with the
work that we are doing over in the Transportation Committee.
And it is possible, it is going to take some money, and
frankly, it is going to take some of that 54 additional ships
that the Navy wants to be the--to be this piece of it.
With that, I best yield back because I am 37 seconds over.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman.
We now proceed to Congressman Austin Scott of Georgia.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, great to see you. I want to reiterate the
importance of our merchant marines and the Merchant Marine
Academy; whatever challenges we have there, we need to overcome
those challenges and move forward. Those young men and women
there are a tremendous asset to the United States, and I know
that you couldn't function without them.
I want to go back to what my friend Rob Wittman brought up
on the C-5s. I represent Robins Air Force Base, obviously, one
of the three Air Force depots. We do depot level maintenance on
the C-5 Galaxy, the C-17 Globemaster for the strategic airlift,
the C-130 Hercules for tactical airlift. You stated that we are
seeing stress on the strategic airlift fleets, in your
testimony.
Would you please expound on these stresses and what the
concerns are? And can you outline for me the plan for large
airlift platforms like the C-5, if we intend to bring them
back? And then one final question. I am extremely concerned as
we look at Europe, because we don't have--I mean, the rail
system is not there to move forward. The gauges are different
on rail. Do we have the ability to land those C-5s in the areas
that we would need to land them for any type of conflict in
Europe?
General McDew. If I step back for just a second,
Congressman, on your question, it is a matter of capacity. So
our strategic airlift capacity is what it is. It depends on
what we will ask the community to do and to what level of risk
we are willing to assume.
I can always tell you that I could use double the numbers
of C-17s and C-5s that we have, but that may not be practical.
One, we can't make any more C-17s, and it may not be practical
to bring all those airplanes back and modify them. But we may
not need all of them if we manage the risk on the ones that we
do have.
I would say that the number of airplanes we have in the
backup inventory and our plans to wait to bring them back on
active inventory for a couple of more years as the Air Force
can afford them is one that puts us in greater risk than I
believe we should take. And when we bring them back on active
inventory, I believe they should go back to an Active Duty unit
and bring those airplanes back so that they are readily
available more quickly.
As I talk to General Scaparrotti about Europe and the
problem set that he faces, he will tell you that response
quickly is going to be important. The rail gauge issue in
Europe is a big one. Most of our command spends time all around
the globe every single day in looking at our master plan for
access and points that we can use, ports, rail, and airfield,
all around the globe.
So I believe we have some places in Europe we can go. Are
there as many as we used to have? Probably not. Are we as
practiced at rolling through some places in Europe as we once
were? Not, again. But we are going after trying to exercise in
a different way. General Scaparrotti is leading that effort for
Europe, but we are also working the other combatant commands
for similar issues around the globe.
As we have drawn back forces into the United States, how
will we project power, how will we project aid, how we can
project our assistance to these nations that rely on us.
Mr. Scott. General, if you decided today, if we as a
country decided today that we were going to bring back a squad
of those C-17s, how long would it take to have that squad, the
command and control of the squad, as well as the units ready to
fly?
General McDew. I am going to speak slightly out of my lane
because I am--although I am wearing a nice-looking blue uniform
right now, I am not in the Air Force this moment, and so I
would have to defer a little bit to my air component. But I
believe right now we have not fully drawn down those aviators
in those Active Duty units that were just stood down about a
year ago.
They are slightly overmanned today, but we are going to
slowly bring those down if we don't do something relatively
quickly because that is what the budget will do. It will bring
down to 100 percent manning. If we react today, which I don't
think we can, we can maybe salvage those crewmembers and not
take them down with a plan to bring them right back up with the
airplanes.
Mr. Scott. So if we act today, it would not take that long
to bring the units back?
General McDew. I don't believe so, and I don't want to
speak too much out of turn because, like I said--but I believe,
right now, those units, in Charleston in particular, are still
overmanned with C-17 crew members, and we could probably bring
those airplanes back out of backup inventory into primary
inventory and use those crewmembers to still man those
airplanes.
Mr. Scott. General, thank you for your service.
Mr. Chairman, my time is expired. My concern is, if we do
this in BCT [brigade combat team] numbers, if you take down a
BCT, it takes a couple of months to take one down, it takes 3
years to bring it back. And that is my concern with the actions
we are taking.
With that, I yield the remainder of my time.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman.
General McDew. I am not sure that the Air Force has the
capacity to rapidly generate that many pilots right now anyway
if we let them all go away.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman.
And we now proceed to Congresswoman Colleen Hanabusa of
Hawaii.
Ms. Hanabusa. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, General, and thank you for acknowledging
Vickie, who made my first transition here very easy.
General, I want to talk--I am kind of following up from
Congressman Garamendi, because one of the things that I am
interested in is the military sealift portion of it. I am--I
was interested in your testimony from pages 9 to 10 when you
talked about the MSP program, and then you also spoke about the
Jones Act. And you do say, in your testimony, that by
subsidizing a robust domestic maritime industry, including U.S.
industrial shipyard infrastructure for building, repairing, and
overhauling U.S. vessels, and we are of course talking about,
in terms of the Jones Act, that is the only requirement that we
build America, and in addition, they also have to have the
mariners staff.
So on the MSP program, you have about 60 U.S.-flagged. Is
that about correct?
General McDew. That is right.
Ms. Hanabusa. And we, meaning Congress, has authorized, and
the military subsidizes it, the program, to the tune of about
$186 million. We, of course, do not subsidize any Jones Act
carriers. First, tell me, are we--is there a requirement that
while they receive the subsidy, that they be manned, quote/
unquote, manned, not to be sexist, but manned with our mariners
only?
General McDew. Yes.
Ms. Hanabusa. So they have our mariners, but they are not
built in the--in the U.S.
General McDew. Those ships are not required to be built in
the U.S., but they have to be U.S.-flagged----
Ms. Hanabusa. Right.
General McDew [continuing]. And U.S. mariners on board the
ships when they carry our goods.
Ms. Hanabusa. So when we are looking at a situation like,
for example, we all can recognize that our shipbuilding
industry depends too heavily on the military, and what we
really would like to see is a robust commercial aspects of it.
I am sure my colleagues from San Diego and Norfolk would agree
with me that what we don't have is that component with the MSP
program. However, we do subsidize them, correct?
General McDew. I like to use the word ``stipend.''
Ms. Hanabusa. Okay. So what is the stipend that they
receive?
General McDew. They receive a stipend, basically, to stay
with us. Congresswoman, as you may know, back in the 1950s,
there were 1,500 ships sailing under U.S. flag in international
trade.
Ms. Hanabusa. That is a little before my time, but okay, I
will take your word for it.
General McDew. I am old. 1,500 ships, but today, there are
only 78 in U.S. international trade. We are still a maritime
nation, from what I understand, but that is--that is the
decline you are talking about.
Ms. Hanabusa. So how does the stipend work? So I mean, what
do they get the stipend for?
General McDew. They basically get the stipend to being
available to move our goods and services when we need them and
to be ready to go to war when we need them.
Ms. Hanabusa. But they do not have to be actively engaged
in any military activity at the point that they receive the
stipend, though.
General McDew. No.
Ms. Hanabusa. So they can be moving commercial goods and
receive the stipend.
General McDew. Yes.
Ms. Hanabusa. So we--and do you know, on an average, what
the stipend is that we provide to the MSP program? And is it
like per vessel, per route? How do you do it?
General McDew. It is per vessel.
Ms. Hanabusa. Okay.
General McDew. It is currently $3.2 million per ship--$3.5
[million] per ship.
Ms. Hanabusa. Is that in a year?
General McDew. Per year.
Ms. Hanabusa. Per year.
General McDew. It is authorized up to $5 million, and in
the out-years of the plan, it goes to $5.2 [million], I
believe.
Ms. Hanabusa. So they could never move any military goods
or services, whatever we may call upon them, and they will
still receive that stipend per year?
General McDew. Theoretically, that could happen.
Realistically, I can't imagine it happening. I use those ships
daily.
Ms. Hanabusa. But it may not be the same ship. There are
60-some-odd number of them, correct?
General McDew. That is right.
Ms. Hanabusa. So you could be using one or two or whatever
the number may be.
General McDew. I can get you the exact numbers, but we have
a robust use of those 60 ships.
Ms. Hanabusa. I would appreciate that. But isn't also a
major component of it that they do not in any way compete with
our domestic, quote, Jones Act ships? Isn't that a requirement
under the law that established the MSP program?
General McDew. I would have to double-check that one. I--
the Jones Act allows us to have additional ships in U.S. trade
with U.S. flag. It also provides additional mariners. So the
Jones Act, for me, is part of the overall readiness of our
maritime industry and our ability to go to war, because it
provides----
Ms. Hanabusa. I agree with that, General, but the Jones Act
has that additional requirement that keeps our industrial base
there, which your MSP program does not. So what I would like to
know, if you would, is to provide me all that information. And
I would also like to understand, with the chair's permission,
how is it that we are subsidizing non-U.S.-built ships and our
U.S.-built ships are the ones with all these additional
constraints on, and it doesn't help my colleagues with the
great shipbuilding yards in their neighborhood.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congresswoman.
We now proceed to Congressman Bradley Byrne of Alabama.
Mr. Byrne. Good morning, General. We are pleased to have
you here. Before I get started on my questions, I want to let
you know my Uncle Jack was a merchant marine officer during
World War II. Tragically, he and all hands went down on his
ship while they were performing a very important task for the
American military. So I am always conscious of the fact that
these mariners are not only performing an important task, they
too are in harm's way, and I appreciate that.
I want to talk to you about the expeditionary fast
transport vessel, the EPF. I was in Singapore last month and
saw two of them at dock preparing to be loaded. I would like to
know how you and TRANSCOM are using those ships. They seem to
be pretty good ships, seem to be utilized a lot. I would just
like to know in general how you are using them.
General McDew. Thanks, Congressman. First, for the
mariners. During World War II, I believe they were one of the
largest groups of losses that we had in any single grouping in
World War II. I think some 9,000-plus mariners were--civilian
mariners were lost during the war. They are valiant servants of
this Nation, and we can't do what we do in U.S. Transportation
Command without those mariners.
On the vessels that you just mentioned, they are underneath
the United States Navy. I don't have direct access to those
ships, those vessels. Our Military Sealift Command and through
the U.S. Navy channels is how those will get used, but they are
not part of the TRANSCOM portfolio.
Mr. Byrne. And let me ask you once again to go over the
continuing resolution. I was listening very carefully to what
you said because, you know, we are imminently going to have to
make a decision about that. If you would, go down a little bit
further in your testimony and tell us very precisely, as
succinctly as you can, if we adopted a continuing resolution in
April, what would it do to you?
General McDew. And again, Congressman, the--directly,
because of the transportation working capital fund, which is a
revolving fund that allows me to continue operating without--
basically, allows me to continue operating yearlong, because I
have to be ahead of the fighting force. If you--we decided to
deploy the fighting force, I can't wait for the money to move
because I have got to move ahead of time.
So directly, not that much of a direct impact on U.S.
Transportation Command. Indirectly, if the CR causes the Air
Force to stop flying, which I just read this morning, if the
Air Force has to stop flying 6 weeks--the last 6 weeks of the
quarter, that will impact my ability to maintain ready pilots
and crews to man those ships--man the airplanes. And
conversely, if the other services have to take risks in order--
because they don't have the money they thought they were going
to have to have--because the CR really is a budget cut. You are
planning on the money from last year, so it is in--somewhat of
a cut. So if you don't have that money available and you have
to stop operating, then it starts to impact my ability to do my
job.
Mr. Byrne. Well, I know you said it is indirect, but it
sure feels like it is direct, because you are not able to carry
out the function that you are supposed to be carrying out as a
result of it.
General McDew. I only say it is indirect because I can't
know how the services are going to take the risks when the CR
comes on them. I can make assumptions that they might reduce
this or reduce that, but until they actually get faced with it
and make the actual decision, then it becomes my problem.
Mr. Byrne. Do you plan as if you are going to have those
planes at your disposal? Or do you plan--or do you have
contingency plans if they are not there?
General McDew. My contingency plans are always being
worked. That is the nature of the business we are in. We always
have to plan, so that is why we have the civil side of our
work. If--you know, if I don't have the military side, I can,
through the Civil Reserve Air Fleet, potentially get after some
additional civilian aircraft to do that if we are in a
permissive environment. If it is nonpermissive, then our next
step would be the Guard and Reserve. There is a lot of options
we can take, but CRs can start to impact a lot of those things
other than the civil sector.
Mr. Byrne. Well, I hope that we avoid that----
General McDew. I do too.
Mr. Byrne [continuing]. For a lot of different reasons.
We appreciate what you do, and please let us know what we
can do further to support your very important component of
defending the United States of America.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman.
We now proceed to Congressman Don McEachin of Virginia.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, I am a freshman, and so I am trying to make sure I
understand about all sorts of things and learn about all sorts
of things. Can you help me understand to what extent TRANSCOM
is reliant on civilian facilities and infrastructure?
General McDew. Broadly, Congressman, and don't be reluctant
to ask me really strange sounding questions. It is not a simple
portfolio, although it seems to be simple on the surface. We
rely on just about everything this Nation has to offer when it
comes to infrastructure: civilian rail, trucking, civilian air.
So all of that infrastructure that would impact what most
people would think would be the economic viability of a
commercial company is actually part of national security, and
in, for my case, national defense and our ability to project
power in war.
We can't move an Army unit, we can't move Marines or
anything through this country without using some commercial
port, some commercial rail, or some commercial trucking
company.
Mr. McEachin. Well, this then may be a difficult question
for you to answer, but perhaps not. Do you see any significant
investments in civilian infrastructure that is needed to help
you complete your mission?
General McDew. We always need improvements in rail, road,
seaports. We are always working with commercial entities to
ensure that the latest technology is incorporated, that cyber
defenses are incorporated in these.
My request, if I could make one of you, is anytime you are
looking at improving or changing something in the commercial
industry, think about the impact to national security.
For me, it is national security. Most agencies don't think
of all of those mom-and-pop trucking companies as potentially
being something that may take our Nation to war. That is the
way I view it, Congressman.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Congressman.
We proceed to Congressman Duncan Hunter of California.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General, good to see you. I remember in 2004, when I
deployed, I was the embarkation officer and dropped off our
artillery pieces on a railroad in San Diego, which met us in
Kuwait, which we then went up into Iraq with. So I have got an
on-the-ground in touch with this.
I guess my first question is, if you had to do North Korea
and Russia at the same time, do you have enough ships? Pretty
easy.
General McDew. No. No.
Mr. Hunter. Okay. How short would you be?
General McDew. It depends. We really have to take a look at
the actual scenario and what effects you would have to try to
make and what timing. If it is completely simultaneously, I
don't know if there is enough ships in the world. But depending
on what effects at what time scale and what the TPFDD [time-
phased force deployment document] would have to go through, we
would have to see. And I can get the analysis folks to take a
look at it, and I am sure we can come up with that number.
Mr. Hunter. And if you just had to do one of them and you
calculate attrition, what is the attrition rate that you
calculate? Let's just take Korea, because they are being crazy.
General McDew. I am ashamed to say, up until recently, we
didn't account for attrition. We assumed----
Mr. Hunter. You assumed that none of the ships would get
sunk.
General McDew. We have never battled lack of domain
dominance for this Nation in 70-plus years. We are there now.
We are in a different mindset today. We are looking at a
different enemy, a different fight. We have to think
differently. We are now incorporating attrition, but not before
now.
Mr. Hunter. So when you look at the Ready Reserve fleet and
the MSP, is attrition going to be built into your next
recommendation to Congress of what we authorize and appropriate
for those ships?
General McDew. It has to be. It doesn't necessarily have to
be an increase.
Mr. Hunter. Well, I am assuming your numbers are going to
go up.
General McDew. Well, it also has to mean we have to change
our tactics, techniques, and procedures. Not everything is an
increase in numbers. Sometimes it is just how we employ, how we
deploy. The fact that you still remember how to put some stuff
on a ship----
Mr. Hunter. Not how.
General McDew. I would like to bring you back to the G-4
[Army Deputy Chief of Staff for Logistics], but----
Mr. Hunter. I just got it there. My Marines did it. I
didn't.
General McDew. But we don't have--actually, many people
left in the military who remember what it was like to actually
deploy. What we have been in for the last 15, 16 years is
sustainment. That is a completely different proposition.
Mr. Hunter. Second question, totally different thing. What
ability do you have to bring life support in in big amounts,
giant massive quantities of life support or ammo--let's just
call it ammo, life support, beans, bandages, bullets to a--if
you don't have a port and you don't have an airstrip?
General McDew. We are challenged if you don't have a port
or an airstrip. There is always airdrop. There is ability to
get in behind lines, but we have got to look at the contested
environment and the ability for the enemy to deny us that, the
ability to get in there. If we don't have air superiority, we
don't have a lot of things. And so I rely on that still being a
fact, but if it isn't, we start to look at different ways to
bring problems to bear and bring solutions to bear.
Another piece, you talked about bringing medical
evacuation. That is another part of my portfolio that has been
underrepresented, probably by me as well, in understanding the
impact of our ability to evacuate large numbers of people from
a hostile zone.
So we are looking at all those things, and I believe we
have plans that take care of some of them, but this antiaccess,
denial by an adversary is new for all of us, and we have to
think differently.
Mr. Hunter. I would just throw out there, there is a thing
called the Aeroscraft, the ability--I mean, it is a giant
blimp, basically, that can hold three or four tanks. It can
hold a lot of supplies and stuff, and they can just drop in, if
you have air superiority, obviously. A floating airship is easy
to shoot down, right?
General McDew. Yeah. Otherwise, they call those targets.
Mr. Hunter. Right. Last thing. Do you think--would you say
there is anything more important than the Jones Act for the
maritime industrial base in U.S. law at all?
General McDew. There are several pieces of U.S. law that
are part of the industrial base, and it is not just one. The
Jones Act is probably the anchor for it. But without the Jones
Act, without the Maritime Security Program, without cargo
preference, our maritime industry is in jeopardy and our
ability to project the force is in jeopardy. If we think we
need to project our force with U.S.-flagged vessels, with U.S.
mariners on board, we need all of those things right now to
secure that.
Mr. Hunter. And your stipend, you said, is like $3.2
million right now for MSP. We have authorized and appropriated
$5 million. We have upped that. If these U.S.-flagged vessels
were not doing commercial work at all, they were just sitting
there, what would the stipend have to be?
General McDew. You could debate the number a little bit,
but it would be upwards of $7-, $8- to $10 million a year.
Mr. Hunter. If it just sat there?
General McDew. Yeah.
Mr. Hunter. Okay. Thank you, General.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman.
We now proceed to Congressman Don Norcross of New Jersey.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman.
General, thank you for being here today. Very sobering. The
things that appear not to be immediately in front of us tend to
fall off the edges, whether it is deferred maintenance or
building air transportation, but as we all know, we are only as
strong as our weakest link.
What area in your portfolio keeps you up at night?
General McDew. Air refueling tankers.
Mr. Norcross. And that doesn't get better for another 3
years, at the earliest?
General McDew. At the earliest. If we had 1,000 air
refueling tankers, it might be enough. But if you look about
any contingency around the world, so you pick a spot in the
world, and you bring up any kind of issue. If you had a
simultaneous or even a competing regard anywhere else in the
world, your tanker UTE [utilization] rate goes up to a place
that I can't even--that I can imagine, but the numbers are
daunting, because any significant battle also brings up the
rate of defense of the homeland, and any corresponding COCOM
near that area has to bring up their defenses. All of that
needs air refueling tankers.
Mr. Norcross. So when your recommendations go in, as you
heard earlier, for the NDAA, is that your largest and most
focused request?
General McDew. It would be 1-A. One would be getting back
the C-5s off backup inventory and into active inventory; 1-A
would be accelerating the tanker program as best we can and
taking us out of the risk bathtub we have been in for a while
on tankers. We have made some of it intentionally, but now we
have got to climb our way out.
Mr. Norcross. We read recently where that might be even
pushed back a little further due to a number of technical
issues in the production line. When is the earliest, given what
you have seen, you think the first one will be delivered?
General McDew. I wish I could really tell you. There is a
projection by the manufacturer, and there is a projection by
the United States Air Force, and they are not the same
projections right now. And I would hate to speculate between
the two of them. The Air Force is primarily working with Boeing
to make sure that that is as quick as they can make it.
Mr. Norcross. What is plan B?
General McDew. There are some programming actions out there
on a plan B that we are probably not going to be able to
execute. You know, right now, the plan to retire the KC-10s may
have to be revisited, although I understand the expense that is
going to come with trying to keep the KC-10s around longer than
the plan, but we have to find a way to climb out of the bathtub
if the KC-46 is not going to be online in a reasonable amount
of time to allow us to potentially accelerate that recap. And
at 12 aircraft per year, that is going to take a long time. We
built 700 of them in 7 years in the 1960s, and we are looking
to recap them at 12 a year.
Mr. Norcross. So let me understand this. Your biggest
concern are the refuelers, and yet we are not making a decision
to keep them active enough to take that risk off your plate?
General McDew. The decision is there for the next few
years. I don't recall, and I'll get you the exact date, that
the Air Force plans to retire the KC-10, but it was also based
on bringing the KC-46 on. So it may be shifting as we speak. I
just don't want to speak for the Air Force right now on that
particular issue because those negotiations are going on almost
minute by minute.
Mr. Norcross. Very sobering.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congressman.
We now proceed to Congresswoman Martha McSally of Arizona.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for your testimony and your service, General
McDew. It is good to see you. We moved a lot of assets out of
the European theater over the last years, thinking that there
is a lasting peace there, to include A-10s and other fighters
and Army units. And now, as part of the European Reassurance
Initiative, we are deploying them back on a rotational manner.
So my concern is with the strains that you have talked
about today, what tax does that have on TRANSCOM to be
continuously deploying units to meet the requirements for
security and reassurance and dealing with Russian aggression in
Europe? You know, I think we really need to, and this is really
more the services, do a cost-benefit analysis here. But I just
want to know, have you quantified that tax both on tankers and
cargo to be constantly moving units back and forth now versus
having them stationed there?
General McDew. Congresswoman McSally, well, first of all,
it is good to see you again. You may not remember having met me
20-some-odd years ago, but Lieutenant McSally, when you were
first selected to go fly combat aircraft, there was a young
captain in the Pentagon who researched all the women who could
have actually selected combat aircraft, if it had been made
available to them at the time. It was Captain Darren McDew that
actually did some of that research back in the day, so it is
good to see you where you are now.
Ms. McSally. Good to see you again, too. That's great.
General McDew. So some of that tax is not necessarily a
tax. One of the things that we have realized, that we have been
in 15 years of sustainment, and so some of it we need to
exercise the muscle again. And as long as these rotations are
planned and scheduled, it is not that bad, and it is actually
good.
We have forgotten, units, how to move themselves from
Alaska through the continental United States to a port, get on
a ship, and move to Europe or the Pacific. That muscle memory
is a good exercise for the Army. It is not a bad one for the
enterprise of ours. We recently tried one of those and blew a
bunch of tires on a bunch of Stryker vehicles because of things
that we had forgotten how to do.
So not all of it is a bad tax. What is bad for us is if it
is emergent, not planned, like say for a real war contingency.
Ms. McSally. Or if another contingency emerges, right?
General McDew. Right.
Ms. McSally. In a resource-constrained environment, you
know, that may be nice to do, but there is a cost with that as
well, right? Have you captured what that cost is of the
rotation versus what it would be steady state if we weren't
doing that?
General McDew. Not really, because that would take us
assuming what level of presence the Army or the Department of
Defense would like to have in Europe.
Ms. McSally. Yeah.
General McDew. You know, would it be the 300,000-plus we
used to have? Would it be something short of that? Given those
assumptions, we could probably make that calculation fairly
easily.
Ms. McSally. Great. Thank you.
I know votes are being called, so I will yield back.
Thanks, sir. Good to see you again.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congresswoman.
We now proceed to Congresswoman Vicky Hartzler of Missouri.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, General, for all that you do. I wanted to hone
in just a little bit on the rail situation. I have heard some
concerns from some other commanders in National Guard units and
such from my district who were over there in the Baltics, and
they were explaining the difficulty with the different rail
gauges. Can you address what steps are being taken to rectify
this situation?
General McDew. Congresswoman, one of the first things we
are doing is realizing that the problem is a problem.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay.
General McDew. So we haven't been in Europe in this manner
in a while, and so it is realizing--we know that the rail
gauges are different, but what has transpired in Europe has
been similar to what has transpired in other places around the
world. If you don't use it for a while, you have got to go back
and figure out how to use it again, and how it is being used,
i.e., what is being contracted out, what is owned by the
government of the nation that we are trying to go through. What
are the ways to connect those dots? That's what we are trying
to relearn.
The rail gauge issue has been around for a long time, but
we had enough people there before and we had enough access and
we had enough kind of muscle memory that it wasn't as big a
problem as when you are trying to start all over again.
Mrs. Hartzler. How does that tactically work now? What plan
do you anticipate doing getting to the border and unloading and
putting it on their railcars that do match? Or are we looking
at changing the types of railcars that have, you know, perhaps
a movable gauge capability? I don't know, but how are you going
to address this?
General McDew. We are not there with the movable rail
gauge, but maybe I can have my team start to work on that one.
We would have to transload onto railcars that would be
available to move on that rail gauge, and we have contingency
plans for that, but we have got to go back and look at it
again.
One of the things that we are starting to realize--not
starting to realize--we had all these management headquarters
cuts. And I understand efficiency. I understand budgets and all
that stuff. But what has happened is our ability to think, our
ability to project different, to go after those problem sets,
is starting to slow down. So we can identify the problem. It
takes us a while to get to that as we are addressing all the
myriad of problems we have.
And so my request is, the other thing is, as we cut all the
commands and we brought down their manpower, where did they
make those cuts? I would guarantee you not many of them tried
to salvage their logistics transportation planners.
Mrs. Hartzler. Sure.
General McDew. And so what I am finding is I am trying to
help all those other combatant commands try to get after these
problem sets too.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. Just a quick question about ``the last
tactical mile.'' It is my understanding that DOD has not
incorporated those distribution metrics into their plan, and it
is the responsibility of the distribution process owner to
oversee the overall effectiveness. So what progress is
USTRANSCOM making in working with the combatant commands to
routinely collect distribution performance information for the
last tactical mile?
General McDew. I am thankful that the combatant commands
are thinking differently than when TRANSCOM was given that
moniker of the distribution process owner. When TRANSCOM was
first given that moniker of the distribution process owner, not
everybody was happy about it. And the reason the word is
``owner'' and not ``commander'' or ``director'' is because they
wanted TRANSCOM to have less power in some of those areas to
make decisions.
Today, moving forward, all the combatant commands
understand how much we need a global person to look at
transportation writ large. At the last distribution process
owner executive board, I let the team know of all the people
who were represented, that we are going to make some decisions
now about a number of things, and many of them are welcoming
TRANSCOM's role to look more deeply at the end-to-end solution.
That wasn't there a decade ago when we got this decision.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you very much. I'll yield back.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Congresswoman.
We will now be concluding with Congresswoman Elise Stefanik
of New York.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Chairman Wilson.
And thank you, General McDew, for your service and for your
testimony today. In your testimony, you discussed how our
enemies continue to use our dependence on the cyber domain
against us and that the greatest challenge for TRANSCOM is the
threat of an attack in the cyber domain. Obviously, we have
some unique challenges in cyber, especially when compared to
the rest of the DOD. Can you describe some of the ongoing
activities related to cyber and then, specifically, how are you
working with Cyber Command to better protect your networks?
General McDew. Congresswoman, our networks are fairly well-
defended. CYBERCOM, I have great confidence in what they are
doing to protect our networks. It is the rest of my network
that I am most concerned about. It is the part outside the
Department of Defense network.
I extend throughout the entire country and around the
world. Most of it on commercial dot-com networks is where I
have to do my business. If a combatant command were to give me
all their best secret information, I have then still got to
contract it out. And right now, that chasm between DOD and DHS
and how we think about cyber and what authorities we have to
bridge that gap are my most relevant concern.
Ms. Stefanik. And then just quickly before I have to run to
votes, I want to ask specifically what the impact of a CR would
be on your cyber efforts. Similar to Mr. Byrne's questions,
this is an issue that we are going to continue grappling with,
and we know that CRs are devastating to DOD, but I am asking
specifically when it comes to cyber.
General McDew. Well, that would be a direct impact on our
cyber protection force, that Cyber Command puts a force against
protecting our networks. The training and resourcing of that
team would slow down probably, and the training would be
impacted. I would imagine that would eventually get to maybe a
less defending of our network, but I would hope that they would
find a way to get around it.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you very much, Congresswoman
Stefanik.
And, General, thank you very much for being here. And we
are in the midst of votes. But I am just so grateful for the
members who have taken time to stay the entire time, their
dedication and appreciation of your service.
We are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:13 a.m., the subcommittees adjourned.]
