- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-60] Securing the Peace after the Fall of ISIL

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 115-60]

SECURING THE PEACE AFTER

THE FALL OF ISIL

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

OCTOBER 3, 2017

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
27-563                      WASHINGTON : 2018

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri, Chairwoman

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming                  JIMMY PANETTA, California
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
Elizabeth Conrad, Professional Staff Member
Barron YoungSmith, Counsel
Anna Waterfield, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Hartzler, Hon. Vicky, a Representative from Missouri, Chairwoman,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations...................     1
Moulton, Hon. Seth, a Representative from Massachusetts, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations...........     2

WITNESSES

Panel 1:

Crocker, Hon. Ryan, Former Ambassador to Iraq (2007-2009),
Diplomat in Residence, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton
University...................................................     4
Lynch, Dr. Marc, Professor of Political Science, The George
Washington University........................................     6
Pollack, Dr. Kenneth M., Resident Scholar, American Enterprise
Institute....................................................     5

Panel 2:

Pennington, Joseph S., Deputy Assistant Secretary for Iraq,
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, Department of State; and
Pamela G. Quanrud, Director, Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS,
Department of State..........................................    23
Swayne, Mark, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for Stability
and Humanitarian Affairs, Office of the Assistant Secretary
of Defense, Special Operations/Low-Intensity Conflict,
Department of Defense; and BGEN James Bierman, USMC, Director
of Middle East Division, Joint Staff J-5, Department of
Defense......................................................    23

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Crocker, Hon. Ryan...........................................    44
Hartzler, Hon. Vicky.........................................    41
Lynch, Dr. Marc..............................................    69
Moulton, Hon. Seth...........................................    42
Pennington, Joseph S.........................................    84
Pollack, Dr. Kenneth M.......................................    52
Swayne, Mark.................................................    79

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Moulton..................................................    91
Mr. Suozzi...................................................    91

SECURING THE PEACE AFTER THE FALL OF ISIL

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, October 3, 2017.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:26 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Vicky Hartzler
(chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. VICKY HARTZLER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MISSOURI, CHAIRWOMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

Mrs. Hartzler. Good afternoon. This hearing will come to
order.
I want to welcome the ranking member who is here. Started
seeing subcommittee members--we are starting a few minutes
early. And I know that they will be coming in. And we want to
thank all the witnesses for being here today.
So in connection with today's hearing, I want to ask for
unanimous consent that any committee members who may be joining
us be able to participate in the hearing with the understanding
that all sitting subcommittee members will be recognized for
questions prior to those not assigned to the subcommittee. So
ordered, and without objection.
We convene today to consider how the United States intends
to secure the peace once ISIL [Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant] is defeated. This is a very important issue to the
committee, to this subcommittee, and to me, the Ranking Member
Moulton, and other members. It is essential and appropriate
that we exercise proper oversight as our country's plans are
formulated and funding is authorized.
Following Operation Iraqi Freedom, the United States worked
to reestablish civil institutions and rebuild the military and
police forces in Iraq. Nonetheless, conditions in the country
deteriorated, leaving a security void that ISIL managed to
exploit. We owe it to our men and women in uniform to learn
lessons from that experience so that history does not repeat
itself.
It is critical that we do all we can here in Congress to
ensure a stable Iraq after ISIL is defeated. Today's hearing
will offer members an opportunity to learn more about how the
administration intends to achieve success beyond the
battlefield.
Our first panel of very insightful outside experts will
discuss the broader strategic issues associated with ISIL's
loss of territory and highlight critical issues that should be
considered as the administration's Iraq policy evolves. Our
second panel today will address the numerous challenges
associated with stabilization and rebuilding in Iraq and
discuss the status of U.S. government efforts to improve the
political and security environment in Iraq.
I now turn to my colleague, Ranking Member Moulton, for his
introductory remarks.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Hartzler can be found in
the Appendix on page 41.]

STATEMENT OF HON. SETH MOULTON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MASSACHUSETTS, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND
INVESTIGATIONS

Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And I want to
echo the comments on how fortunate we feel to have such a
talented and distinguished panel here to help us understand
these problems.
Today the subcommittee will focus on the critically
important task of securing the peace in Iraq after the defeat
of ISIS [Islamic State of Iraq and Syria]. I echo Chairwoman
Hartzler's frustration at securing appropriate administration
witnesses to answer the full gamut of questions the Oversight
and Investigations Subcommittee is within its purview to raise,
but I am grateful for everyone's presence here today and
ongoing service to our country.
I also appreciate our outside witnesses who will bring
considerable depth of expertise to bear on this subject,
including Ambassador Crocker, whom I first met in Iraq while
serving under General Petraeus. I think that is where I met
you, as well, Ken.
As we convene here today, Iraqi security forces supported
by the U.S. advise and assist mission have succeeded in
retaking most major population centers once controlled by
ISIS--Fallujah, Ramadi, and Mosul, ISIS's power center in Iraq.
Most recently, coalition-supported Iraqi forces seized back the
city of Tal Afar in the northwestern corner of Iraq and only
isolated ISIS strongholds remain outside of Hawija, Qaim, and
other pockets along the Syria-Iraq border.
Such victories have not been without a human toll. ISIS's
brutal tactics, employing civilians as human shields, vehicle-
borne improvised explosive devices, and booby-trapped
residential areas resulted in over 1,400 Iraqi troops killed
and at least 7,000 wounded, according to our embassy in
Baghdad. During the campaign, two American service members were
killed and over 20 were wounded.
The U.S. commander of the Combined Joint Task Force in
charge of the counter-ISIS campaign, Lieutenant General Stephen
Townsend, called it the, quote ``worst fighting he had seen in
35 years'' end quote, of combat experience and likened it to
Fallujah 2004 on steroids. Civilian losses have been greater
still, with the latest U.N. [United Nations] estimates at 8,000
killed and 1.2 million rendered homeless, displaced by the
fighting.
Despite the tragic human toll, I am encouraged by the
progress we have made in partnership with Iraqi forces to
defeat the scourge of ISIS and look forward to hearing from our
witnesses an update on the final stages of the military
campaign. As important and necessary as these operations are to
militarily defeat ISIS, I remain concerned that without
sufficient post-conflict planning and resourcing we will find
ourselves and Iraqi forces condemned to re-fighting the same
battles so many have already given their lives for in the past.
At its core, what troubles Iraq are fundamentally political
questions. Just as I disagreed with the Obama administration, I
am again concerned that this new administration is not
sufficiently prioritizing such underlying political dynamics.
What does this mean? First and foremost, I am concerned
Iraqi security forces may be woefully unprepared to provide
security to Iraqi civilians and ensure displaced persons can
return to their homes without fear of attack or retribution.
Experts I have heard here from Washington and in Iraq have
expressed worries of insufficient hold forces and police,
compounded by the beleaguered state of Iraqi military units,
reeling from the toll of the brutal counter-ISIS campaign.
Without sufficient local security arrangements, we cannot
expect for Iraq to be stabilized, for civilians to return to
normalcy, and for communities to be defended against the
emergence of a, quote ``ISIS 2.0'' or other militant groups.
Moreover, without capable and professional security forces, we
risk seeing a repeat of the same sectarian tensions leading to
Sunni embitterment that provided fertile ground for the growth
of ISIS in the first place.
Beyond the provisioning of civilian security, key gaps and
problems remain to be addressed, such as acute food insecurity,
insufficient access to health care, destroyed infrastructure,
degraded public services and utilities, newly inflamed
grievances among local communities, and insufficient plans for
governance arrangements in many areas.
Both as a Marine infantry officer who worked side-by-side
with Iraqis to turn the tide of the insurgency and now as a
Congressman and ranking member of this Oversight and
Investigations Subcommittee, I look forward to your testimony
and hope to hear a proactive, whole-of-government strategy that
represents the only chance of success.
I cannot tell you how painful it is as an Iraq war veteran
to see us fighting and refighting the same battles we fought
and for which so many of our friends gave their lives. At this
rate, my children will be fighting these same battles. We must
hear from this administration how this time will be different,
how this time you will ensure a political resolution so that
the U.S. military doesn't have to keep coming back and cleaning
up the mess every time Iraqi politics falls apart.
Thank you, Chairwoman Hartzler, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Moulton can be found in the
Appendix on page 42.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Moulton.
So I am pleased to recognize our witnesses we have for our
first panel. They are very distinguished and we appreciate
their time. We are joined by the Honorable Ryan Crocker, former
Ambassador to Iraq, and currently serving as diplomat in
residence in the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton University.
We have Dr. Kenneth Pollack, resident scholar at the American
Enterprise Institute, and Dr. Marc Lynch, professor of
political science at the Elliott School of International
Affairs at The George Washington University.
So, welcome. Ambassador Crocker, we will start with your
statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. RYAN CROCKER, FORMER AMBASSADOR TO IRAQ
(2007-2009), DIPLOMAT IN RESIDENCE, WOODROW WILSON SCHOOL,
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY

Ambassador Crocker. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, Ranking
Member Moulton, members of the subcommittee. It is an honor to
be here today.
I must say it is a lot more fun being on the outside panel
than on the panel that will follow us. I think you both have
hit on the essential fact here. The Islamic State is, in
essence, not a military problem. Its existence is a symptom of
a much deeper problem.
I went through a couple of years in Iraq, 2007 to 2009, the
time of the surge. Al Qaeda in Iraq, the forerunner of Islamic
State, was a key target of ours and the Iraqis. But even at the
height of the surge, we could never absolutely eliminate them.
Badly weakened, but still there, parts and pockets of Mosul,
and a fluid presence up the Euphrates River Valley.
Why? Because, again, with all that the surge achieved
politically, as well as militarily, we saw a period there when
the Iraqi Arab Sunnis came back into government, when Prime
Minister Maliki took on the Sadrist forces in Basra, throughout
the south, and in Baghdad itself, but there still lingered an
abiding mistrust on the part of some communities, the Sunni
Arabs in particular, of what would happen next.
And that gave Al Qaeda in Iraq space enough to survive. So
here we are on the brink of a decisive military difficulty--or
victory. But what we have to be able to do is win the peace.
Madam Chairwoman, that is not going to happen unless this
administration decides that Iraq is a national security
priority.
Sadly, if there is a chance to get this right, it will be
in Iraq. Syria has, I am afraid, quite a ways to burn before
you can talk about an effective political process there. And
that is going to take a lot of sustained effort. It will
require a Secretary of State who is willing to go to Baghdad,
spend time there, get to know the politicians, get a feel for
what is possible and what isn't, and in so doing have the full
backing of the President.
If we do less than that, I fear that we will see another
slide downhill. We can look at Iraq itself or we can look at
another example, say, Afghanistan after the defeat of the
Soviets. We decided our work then was done. We pulled out. On
the way out, we sanctioned Pakistan, who had been our most
allied of allies, and that act incidentally reverberates today
why the Pakistanis hedge their bets. They think we are going to
pull out again. And I do commend the administration for making
it quite clear that we are not talking about calendars anymore,
but we are talking about conditions.
So it is going to take a formidable political effort to
bring things to a better place in Iraq. Madam Chairwoman, we
are hardwired into their political system. I found during my
time there that we could be the catalyst that made good things
happen, but we would have to get something from one party
conditionally, take that to the other party, and we found that
when we did that some of the time they would give things to us
to work that they couldn't do directly with each other.
So, Madam Chairwoman, I understand that people in this
country are tired of the never-ending wars in Iraq, now in
Syria, that the Hill is tired of this conflict. I get it about
being tired. I spent 7 years of my life post-9/11 in Pakistan,
Iraq, and Afghanistan. So I know about tired.
But there are worse things. When we decided that we would
not intervene or continue our presence in Afghanistan, the
totally predictable civil war broke out between rival Afghan
factions, culminating in the victory of the Taliban, and that
was the road to
9/11. Policies have consequences. The absence of policies have
consequences. So again, I commend you, Madam Chairwoman, the
ranking member, for bringing us together at this time to
concentrate on how we might get it right.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Crocker can be found
in the Appendix on page 44.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Ambassador.
Dr. Pollack.

STATEMENT OF DR. KENNETH M. POLLACK, RESIDENT SCHOLAR, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Dr. Pollack. Like my predecessor, Ambassador Crocker, and
as you all pointed out in your opening statements, I too am
very concerned about the political repercussions of the future
of Iraq and American policy there.
I guess I am heartened that we Americans now duly intone
that victory in Iraq or any of the Middle East wars will not be
won by military forces alone. But I am nevertheless
disappointed and frustrated that we rarely ever walk--sorry,
walk the walk even though we have learned to talk the talk. The
one time when we actually got it right was, of course, when
Congressman Moulton and Ambassador Crocker were in Iraq. And I
do not see the willingness of the level of preparations on the
part of this administration that we saw at that time.
I would like to use my opening statement to just lay the
groundwork for what I envision as being necessary for a post-
Daesh [ISIS] American commitment to Iraq. And I am going to be
very brief to just sketch out the broad framework. But I think
it is important to start talking through the details of what is
going to be necessary, because again, as Ambassador Crocker
knows better than any of us, in Iraq in particular, the devil
is in the details. To talk about things just kind of in a broad
airy-fairy way and simply say that we need to be there is not
going to be helpful.
We need to talk about what it means to be there. We need to
talk about what engagement looks like and in particular--and,
again, as both you, Madam Chairwoman, and Congressman Moulton,
and Ambassador Crocker have all emphasized--we need to be
focused on Iraq's politics and how the United States can help
move Iraq's politics forward.
Now, all that said, it does start with the military side.
Yes, we have won an important victory over Daesh. That is a
useful step forward. But we all know that Iraq's security is
not going to simply be perfect moving forward. It is going to
require residual efforts, and in particular it is going to
require a residual American force in the country.
That force's mission will be primarily political. Yes,
there are military things that it can and should do, but we
need to focus on its political role as being the most important
of all, and that--it needs to be able to reassure Iraqis that
force will not be used against them, including by their own
government or by quasi-governmental entities.
That force needs to be able to prevent the re-
politicization of the Iraqi military. And it needs to maintain
the combat and logistical capabilities of the Iraqi military
that we have so painstakingly built and then abandoned and
rebuilt repeatedly but that is critical to allowing the Iraqi
government to maintain a monopoly on the use of violence.
All of that is going to require a stay-behind American
force, and I would argue that it needs to be bigger rather than
smaller to serve these political purposes. If you said to me we
would put 25,000 or keep 25,000 troops in Iraq, I would throw a
party. I imagine that that might be a bridge too far
politically, but I think the 10,000 would be perfectly
adequate. But we need to be thinking fairly large for these
political reasons.
Shifting quickly over to the political and economic
dimensions, which are, as we have all agreed, far more
important, we need to recognize that we have a moment now.
Iraqis are gleeful that they have defeated ISIS. They are
desirous of a better future. They want their government to work
better. And they are hopeful that they will get it, but they
have been frustrated so many times in the past, we shouldn't
assume that they are going to remain patient for all that long.
And the problem is, when they grow frustrated, they begin
taking unilateral actions that lead them back down the path of
civil war.
We need to help the Iraqi government to start to deliver
right now, soon, in particular, before their elections. We
can't rebuild the country completely. We cannot even help the
Iraqis do so. We can't turn it into Switzerland. What we can do
is to start programs that are going to give the Iraqis a sense
of progress moving forward, a sense that their government can
deliver, a sense that the United States is committed to them
and their government, and the hope for a better future.
If we can do that--and I have outlined a number of specific
projects in my written testimony--if we can do that moving
forward, we will keep the Iraqis committed to this political
process. That is what we have to have, that is what we need for
Iraq to succeed over the long term, that kind of a start. If we
don't, we are likely to be repeating our mistakes all over
again.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Pollack can be found in the
Appendix on page 52.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you very much. Dr. Lynch.

STATEMENT OF DR. MARC LYNCH, PROFESSOR OF POLITICAL SCIENCE,
THE GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY

Dr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and Ranking Member
Moulton. It is a real honor to be here on a panel with
Ambassador Crocker and Ken Pollack. And it is quite an
experience to be sitting here in 2017 and largely agree with
each other on the major issues, which would not have happened
in 2007. And that I think is grounds for hope, that there
actually is, I think, a bipartisan sense now of the urgency of
having a sustained commitment to getting Iraq right. And I
think that is something to build upon.
What is more, as we have heard, I think there is also
almost a unanimous consensus among analysts across all stripes
that if we hope to actually contain, degrade, and defeat ISIS,
we are going to need some kind of sustained political economic
reconstruction strategy and the idea of the primacy of the
political is something which I think was not present before.
And again, this is grounds for hope. I think we agree on the
diagnosis in ways which I think was not true before.
So in my written testimony, I offer I think some fairly
detailed discussion of a number of issues. I just want to
highlight several which I think would be useful for us to think
about now and hopefully have time to discuss.
The first is, as Ken said, that there is a window of
opportunity now, but it won't last for long. I think that we
recently published--in the page I edit for the Washington Post,
we published a piece by an Iraqi pollster who found really
quite remarkable findings, found 51 percent of Sunnis now
saying that the country is going in the right direction, 71
percent of Sunnis saying that they had favorable views of Prime
Minister Abadi. In 2014, the same pollster found 5 percent of
Sunnis said the same about Prime Minister Maliki.
This is directly and clearly tied to the national campaign
to defeat ISIS and liberate those areas. But it also is
fleeting, because the conditions under which these people who
have been liberated, conditions they are living in are
terrible. They are being sustained by a massive international
humanitarian effort which has been supported and coordinated
extremely well by the coalition, but in a sense it is standing
in for the Iraqi state and providing the necessary means of
survival for the millions of people who would be liberated from
ISIS.
This is a testament to a successful coordination of an
unprecedented humanitarian response, but it is also dangerous,
because when the next humanitarian crisis emerges and the
international NGOs [nongovernmental organizations] move on, who
is going to be taking care of all of these people who are not
currently being tied to the Iraqi state?
And so one of the most important things I think we need to
have on the agenda is a sustained transition strategy moving
from disaster relief and crisis relief to a sustainable
standard for providing services, goods, and critically,
governance for the people in these liberated areas. I know
planning of that kind is going on now. It is extremely
important that it be fully funded and made equal and parallel
to the military track.
I think that we all probably have thoughts on the impact of
the Kurdish referendum and the crisis that I think it has
sparked. I think at this point all we need to say is that it is
urgently necessary that we take whatever effort is needed to
calm things down and to try and stop the politicians on all
sides, both inside the country and outside the country, from
taking escalatory steps. We have to keep the dialogue going.
And I think this is pretty important for maintaining the
campaign against ISIS.
I think that for all of the military issues, I think that I
would come back again and again to the fundamental problem,
which is a crisis of state capacity in Iraq. We have
consistently seen the inability to construct state institutions
which are accountable, effective, authoritative, and honest.
And I think this is at the root of Sunni alienation; this
is at the root of the inability of the government of Iraq to
provide vital services, electricity, health, everything that
you might think of, not necessarily in the capital, but in the
rural areas and the Sunni areas, the places where you are
likely to see a reimagined ISIS insurgency take root.
And so I think that it is easy to say that we need a whole-
of-government approach, we need to have the politics and the
economics, along with the military, but I would actually hope
that we take seriously as a government the actual primacy of
these issues. If we do not find ways to actually have the Iraqi
government with our assistance provide sustainable and
meaningful quality of life, accountable, transparent, and
honest governance to the people across the core constituencies
of the regime, then we are going to see almost inevitably major
problems to come.
The other point that I would like to make, which I think is
the one area where we might have some disagreements on the
panel, is that of course what happens in Iraq is unfolding in
the midst of ongoing political tension and competition with
Iran. And there are major issues in how we should be thinking
about our relationship with Iran, the nuclear deal, the spread
of Shiite militias. These are important and vital issues.
But I would simply put out there for discussion that Iraq
is the single worst place where we could attempt to push back
on Iranian influence in the region, and that we should
prioritize the stabilization of Iraq and trying to maintain the
fragile Iraqi political consensus first, and find other arenas
where we might try and push back or contain Iranian influence.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lynch can be found in the
Appendix on page 69.]
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Dr. Lynch. And you hit on there
in your last comment a point that I was going to start off with
my questioning, and that was dealing with Iran.
It has been interesting to watch their burgeoning role
there in this recent conflict and then taking so much control
of various militias and ``assisting'' quote, unquote. But,
Ambassador Crocker, I thought you had some interesting comments
in your testimony that says some in the country believe that
cooperation with Iran in confronting ISIL is possible and
desirable. He said it is neither; Iran does not feel threatened
by ISIL.
And then you go on that these units are potentially greater
threat to Iraqi stability and our interests than ISIL was. That
really--this paragraph jumped out at me. So I would like to
hear from you your thoughts on the threat potentially of Iran
and the advances that they have made in the country of Iraq and
then how you think we ought to deal with that, and then I will
probably turn to the other witnesses, too, to kind of get an
overview of this situation, because as you said, Dr. Lynch,
this is a very important issue we have to deal with.
Ambassador Crocker. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. It is
indeed a critical issue.
What we find today is that Iranian influence in Iraq is at
an all-time high, both directly and indirectly through the so-
called Popular Mobilization Units that are far more under the
control of Tehran than they are of Baghdad. It is important, I
think, to take a step back and ask why. Why are the Iranians
doing this?
Biography and history are important. Qasem Soleimani, the
leader of Iran's Quds Force, their external operations element,
commissioned in the Iranian army a couple of months before Iraq
invaded Iran. He served through 8 years of that horrific war.
It would be like a British subaltern going through the Western
Front not for 4 years, but for 8.
So what do people like Qasem Soleimani think about when
they think about Iraq? Never again. Never again will there be
an Iraq that could present an existential threat to the Iranian
nation. So their interest is not stability in Iraq. It is the
opposite, to maintain a maximum level of influence, but also to
ensure that the Iraqi government can never quite get its
balance. And they are doing a pretty good job of it.
So while I certainly don't urge a military confrontation
with Iran in Iraq, I do think we need to be clear-eyed about
this. Their objectives in no way harmonize with ours. And we
are going to have to figure out how we can ramp up and give the
Iraqi government and people some choices over influence that
they currently don't have, because with our absence, the
Iranian presence is really the only game in town.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. Dr. Pollack, do you have some
thoughts on that?
Dr. Pollack. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
I feel like I may be somewhere in between my two panelists
both on this issue as well as physically. I start by agreeing
with Ambassador Crocker that Iran's interests are ultimately
not our interest in Iraq, that Iran's influence there has grown
disproportionately, and that ultimately it should be a goal of
American policy to limit Iran's influence in Iraq, recognizing
that it will never be zero because of their proximity to one
another.
That said, I also felt very strongly about some of Marc
Lynch's comments. I think that Dr. Lynch is absolutely correct
that we are in a precarious moment. And I don't think that
Ambassador Crocker was saying otherwise. This is part of the
trick moving forward in Iraq, which is right now Iran does have
enormous influence in Iraq. Right now, a great many Iraqi
politicians are very frightened of the Iranians. And it is
going to take them a lot to get them to the point where they
trust us enough to simply give the stiff arm to the Iranians.
I also agree that while I am a strong proponent of pushing
back on the Iranians across the region--in fact, I am
testifying tomorrow before the House Foreign Affairs Committee
on exactly that topic--I agree with the statement that Dr.
Lynch made that Iraq is not the place for that, right?
There are a lot of things that we need to do in Iraq. They
are important to us on their own terms. Iraq is not the right
arena for competition with Iran because of Iran's greater
influence there and the fragility of the Iraqi system.
I will simply say that I think that where we ought to focus
our efforts, and again I think this is very much consonant both
with Ambassador Crocker's remarks and with his own experience,
is on building up the Iraqi government and helping the Iraqis
to re-achieve their own unity, certainly among Arab, Sunni, and
Shia.
You know, the moment where we had the greatest success
against Iran in Iraq after the 2003 invasion was in the spring
of 2008, when the Iraqi government then led by Prime Minister
Nouri al-Maliki, sent mostly Sunni brigades down to Basra to
drive the Shia Jaish al-Mahdi, backed by Iran, out of the Shia
city of Basra.
And what was so amazing to me--and I was in Basra right
after the operation--was how the Shia welcomed these mostly
Sunni troops, because they saw them as simply Iraqis who were
here to drive out the foreigners, the Persians. If we can get
the Iraqis back to that point, where they once again feel like
Iraqis and not just Sunni and Shia, they will do a far more
effective job than we can in driving the Iranians out.
The trick is exactly as Ambassador Crocker pointed out to
be able to do that and to do it at a moment when the Iranians
are very influential in Iraq and watching to see what our next
move is.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you very much. Dr. Lynch.
Dr. Lynch. Great, thank you. And I think I am not as far
away from Ken on the analysis as I am physically. So that is
good.
So I think that you have to begin from the recognition that
as Ambassador Crocker said, Iran's role in Iraq is not going to
disappear, for reasons of geography, of sectarian affiliation,
of deep economic investment, widespread personal relationships,
and their cultivation of a portfolio of political allies and
proxies not only the Shiite side, but across the entire
spectrum. Iran I think has done a very good job of embedding
itself deeply in the texture and the fabric of Iraqi politics.
But this is not uncontroversial. And we actually are in a
moment where there is increasing sign of resistance within
unexpected communities to a dominant Iranian role; not the
existence of an Iranian role, but a dominant Iranian role. And
here I think is where the place for the United States is less,
in my opinion, about pushing back on Iran directly as it is
building up the Iraqi state and giving a professional
bureaucracy, a professional military, which can become the
foundation of the kind of national politics that Dr. Pollack
was describing.
And there I think there are real things that we can do
which do not have to be cast in a confrontational way and
don't, hopefully, have the risk of overturning this extremely
delicate political moment. Of course, Ambassador Crocker is
right about this, as he is about all things, in terms of the
lack of strategic harmony between the United States and Iran in
Iraq, but I would say that in the crisis moment of 2014, I
think this was less the case.
When it appeared that Baghdad was at the brink of falling
and that there was a real perception that the whole thing could
come falling apart, there was a convergence on the need to
protect the Iraqi state, prevent the advance of ISIS, and work
together in a pragmatic way.
And this was something which was never going to last, but
if you hadn't seen the Popular Mobilization Units going to the
front at the time they did, we could be having a very different
conversation right now about a shattered and lost Iraqi state.
And that is an important thing to remember.
Not all of the PMF [Popular Mobilization Forces] units are
the same. Some of them are I would say functionally the
equivalent of the Sahwa, the Awakening Brigades. Some of them
are straight-up Iranian proxy forces. And having a
differentiated view of that is quite important.
When you have Muqtada al-Sadr going to Saudi Arabia, when
you have the appearance of outreach from key Shia
constituencies out into the Sunni Arab world, these are
important things which I think should be used diplomatically
and not dismissed purely on sectarian grounds.
And so I think that what we should be thinking about is
creating a place for the United States to be the actor that is
supporting governance in Iraq and providing services and
supporting a project of state first, politics first, rather
than trying to compete with Iran on its own terms in those
sorts of ways.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. I am going to turn to the ranking
member now, but I will want to follow up at some point if you
don't address it in--the willingness of the Iranians to allow
for a consolidated government to form with significant amount
of Sunni involvement in that. But we can come back later.
Now turn to Ranking Member Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Chairwoman Hartzler.
And as someone who witnessed firsthand the influence of
Iran in Iraqi politics and, frankly, in military affairs, I
just want to emphasize my agreement with the importance of
these questions. It is hard, I think, to see how if Iran is
fundamentally opposed to our interests in building an Iraqi
state, we are going to make this work without confronting that
threat, as well. So thank you very much.
Gentlemen, you have I think all agreed, remarkably so, on
the importance of the primacy, to use one of your words, of a
political effort here and in building the Iraqi state. You have
also--Ken, you talked about--Dr. Pollack, you talked about the
value of 10,000 troops, maybe even 25,000 troops. We are going
to ask the administration from their witnesses how they are
prepared to execute such a political plan or if they are
prepared to do so at all.
But could you talk for a minute each of you about why this
is worth it? Why is it worth the United States investment to
put in 10,000 troops if their effort--even if their effort is
mainly political? Why is it worth the investment of State
Department resources and aid and development resources to build
up the Iraqi state?
We have been there a long time. And many Americans are
asking, why don't we just pull out and go home? And, Ambassador
Crocker, you referred to this a little bit in your
introduction, but just explain to the American people why this
investment is worthwhile and why now is the right time to make
it. Ambassador Crocker, you are welcome to start. Thank you.
Ambassador Crocker. Thank you, Congressman Moulton. What we
are seeing in the region, potentially in Iraq, is not just the
overthrow of regimes, but the collapse of states. And sadly,
when states collapse, other forces will fill the void, as we
have seen. I would call it a failure of governance throughout
the region. The modern Middle East is about 100 years old. In
that time, that chronic failure of governance has led to crisis
after crisis, and I would argue has brought the region to the
point it is at today, which is deeply dangerous not only for
the region, but for the world, including ourselves.
So there is a fundamental choice here. Either we continue
as we have been doing, in which case I think you are going to
see Islamic State 2.0, as Islamic State was Al Qaeda in Iraq
2.0. That is not in our interests any more than watching
Afghanistan spiral down in the 1990s, again, the rise of the
Taliban and the road to 9/11.
Congressman, I have heard much in my career about a failure
of intelligence leading to this or that. There is some truth in
it. But it is not the whole truth. I call it a failure of
imagination that we cannot imagine how bad things can really
get. We couldn't imagine that Iranian- and Syrian-backed
elements in Lebanon would blow up first the American embassy--I
was a survivor of that attack--and later the Marine barracks.
We can't imagine how Iran could move into Iraq through the
creation of these proxies. And Dr. Lynch is absolutely right,
there is a spectrum here. But the weight on that spectrum is
toward the Iranian-influenced units. We----
Mr. Moulton. Mr. Ambassador, is there anyone in the United
States government who imagined how bad Syria would be today?
Ambassador Crocker. In a word, Congressman, no. And that is
what I mean about a failure of imagination. Analysts need to
think outside the box. They need to think as though there were
no box. I could not have imagined when I left Iraq in the early
spring of 2009 that it would descend to the point it is at now.
And it is a sharp reminder that you don't end wars by
withdrawing your forces. You simply cede the battlespace to
others more determined.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Ambassador. Dr. Pollack.
Dr. Pollack. Thank you very much, Congressman. I am
privileged to get to go around this country and give talks on
the Middle East, and I get asked this question frequently. And
I will give you the answer more or less that I give them.
The first answer that I give is the relationship to our
economy. And I have got to use a four-letter word. It is
actually a three-letter word, but it comes out as a four-letter
word, and that is oil. We are all infatuated with shale. The
truth of the matter is, though, that the world still runs on
oil and that Middle East is a major producer of oil, and Iraq
currently is the fourth-largest oil producer in the world.
Now, could North American shale make up for the complete
loss of Iraqi oil? Maybe. I don't think that anybody really
wants to find out. And what we have seen in the past is that
oil crises have been major problems for the U.S. economy,
causing some of the worst post-war recessions that we have
experienced. Until we can do better with weaning ourselves off
of oil and finding new sources of it, the Middle East is going
to matter and Iraq is going to be critical.
Beyond that is the point that Ambassador Crocker was
making. When I go around the country, I typically--you have a
line that I have been using for over a decade about how the
United States is not like an American city in the southwest.
But given the tragic events that have unfolded there in the
last couple of days, I am going to refrain from making that
comparison and simply say that the problem that we have found
with civil wars is that they spread. They don't stay contained.
There is a very extensive body of scholarly work that
demonstrates what scholars call the contagion effect, that
civil wars in one country destabilize and then cause civil wars
in neighboring states. As you pointed out, Syria helped push
Iraq back into civil war, and together they have created a
mini-civil war in Turkey. In its day, civil war between
Israelis and Palestinians caused civil war in Jordan, which
then caused civil war in Lebanon, which then caused civil war
in Syria.
And as you also alluded to, Ambassador Crocker's point
about a failure of imagination, I have got a pretty good
imagination. And back in 2012, having studied deeply on the
literature of civil wars, I was thinking about what the Syrian
civil war could mean for the Middle East and for the world, and
I remember as I was writing a piece asking myself, should I
point out that if this got really bad, it could start to affect
Europe? And I decided I shouldn't, because people would think
my imagination was running away with itself.
Well, it not only affected Europe, it helped cause the
British to pull out of the EU [European Union], okay? Even I
couldn't imagine that. Right? But that is the problem with
these kinds of civil wars. They don't stay contained. They
spill over. If we simply walk away from Iraq and allow it to
descend back into civil war, we don't know what comes next.
Kuwait, Jordan, maybe Iran, maybe we would think that was good,
at least in the short run. Saudi Arabia. These are countries
which at some point we can't possibly accept. They will gut our
economy.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Dr. Pollack. Dr. Lynch.
Dr. Lynch. Thank you. So for the record, I don't agree that
we should have 10,000 troops in Iraq or 25,000 troops. I don't
think that we have to go to zero, and I think there is a good
argument made for the residual--kind of a residual force of
trainers and embedded kind of small units.
But I don't think that we should be thinking about it in
terms of putting a long-term 10,000, 25,000 permanent U.S.
military garrison in Iraq. I think that would actually put us
back in an unhealthy place where we were before the withdrawal.
I think what we have now is a situation where we are there
at the request of the Iraqi government. There is actually
political support at a fairly wide level for the American
presence there. And we have a bipartisan support for what we
have in Iraq now. So the politics are in some ways right for a
small residual force for the United States in both the United
States and in Iraq.
But moving to have this kind of long-term, large-scale U.S.
military presence I think risks unsettling both of those
consensuses that have become a flashpoint for political
controversy here in the United States and would draw a great
deal of unwanted attention inside of Iraq to this renewed
notion of a permanent American military presence. I actually
think that is not a good idea, but we can continue to discuss
that.
On the question of why it is worth it, I want to also
perhaps be a little contrary here, as well, to break the comity
that we have had to this point. I think that this is ultimately
up to the Iraqis to choose. This is not an American decision.
If the Iraqis choose to create a sectarian and exclusionary
state, to not confront corruption, to allow the rural and Sunni
areas to go without governance and to not try and meet the
needs of their Sunni population, then nothing we do can help
them. We could have 10,000 troops, we could have 50,000 troops.
We could do almost anything and it won't help.
The choice is up to them. And the hope that we have is that
after having faced the crisis of 2014, they are now willing and
able to make those choices, to create the kind of functional
state which can partner with the United States on equal terms.
And I think that is the direction we need to be moving in, is
having a partnership which is based upon not just keeping a
presence in Iraq no matter what, but to have it based on the
notion that this is the type of state that we want to support
and giving the types of assistance that can actually support
that kind of state. Different way of thinking about it, but I
think an important difference.
Mr. Moulton. Dr. Lynch, I think I understand your position.
Do you agree that we have a national security interest in the
Middle East and in Iraq?
Dr. Lynch. Oh, absolutely. And I agree 100 percent with----
Mr. Moulton. But do you think ultimately we should let the
Iraqis decide on whether we pursue that national security
interest?
Dr. Lynch. No. My point is that if the Iraqis make the
wrong choices in terms of the type of state they build, then we
can waste an enormous amount of American blood and treasure
accomplishing very little, because ultimately if they recreate
the sectarianism, corruption, and state failure which led to
2014, then we cannot achieve our national security goals as I
think we all agree that they should be defined.
Mr. Moulton. Do you think we can have any influence on that
decision?
Dr. Lynch. We can have influence on it. And that I think is
what I was trying to say about the political underpinnings that
now exist for a sustained partnership between this Iraqi
government and the United States. And otherwise I wouldn't be
recommending that we have this kind of long-term commitment and
focusing on building the economic, political, and military
degrees of cooperation. I absolutely think that this is a
moment where we do have that kind of influence and we certainly
have the interest to sustain it.
But I want to warn against unconditional commitment even if
you don't have the foundations that would make it possible.
That is what I am most worried about, is that by giving a blank
check, we could enable exactly the kinds of dysfunction that
created 2014 in the first place.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you. And if I may just conclude with one
very brief question, if you could answer in one sentence or
less, just each of you, you have agreed so much on the need for
the primacy of a political commitment and how that must lead
our efforts in all that we do.
I was a frequent critic of the Obama administration because
I didn't feel that they understood this. And they responded to
the ISIS crisis by just sending military trainers in, which
didn't really do much to fix Iraqi politics. We got lucky with
the new prime minister, but I don't think that we can claim
much credit for the political improvement that has happened
there.
Do you think this administration understands this and is
prepared to make a political commitment the prime commitment?
Ambassador Crocker.
Ambassador Crocker. Yes. I do think that is the case. When
you look at leaders like Secretary Mattis, he certainly knows
Iraq up close and personal. The national security adviser, H.R.
McMaster, the same, both Iraq and Afghanistan.
Mr. Moulton. Dr. Pollack, do you agree?
Dr. Pollack. I will perhaps refine Ryan's answer slightly
and say I think that there are those in this administration who
absolutely understand it and are absolutely committed, but they
don't seem to yet have a decision made about what their policy
is going to be.
Mr. Moulton. Dr. Lynch.
Dr. Lynch. I have no idea.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. Representative Scott of Georgia.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chair. Gentlemen, thank you for
being here.
As we talk about securing the peace, it seems to me that
the more pressure we put on these groups in one area, they
simply move to other areas of ungoverned territory, and there
is certainly a tremendous number of areas where they can go in
northeast Africa, the Middle East, where they can--it seems
remobilize, re-equip, and come back with maybe a different goal
and different strategy.
So my question revolves around that challenge. As we--what
would you suggest the best path is to stop what I would call
the remobilization or the relocation of the terrorist
organizations, where they are able to regroup and come back and
attack in another country?
Ambassador Crocker. It is an important question,
Congressman. In one sense, if we can keep them moving around,
that keeps them off-balance, but we would have to, again, have
the resolve, if they are relocating somewhere else where there
is no effective state, pursue them there, not by sending in the
101st, but there are other platforms. You know, the more we can
keep them on the defensive, the less likely they are to have
the time and the space to plan another major attack into Europe
or, God forbid, into this country.
So, again, I would like to say that we could find a way to
eliminate this scourge. I don't think that is going to happen
anytime soon, but we sure as heck can keep them off-balance, we
can trip them so that they have no safe place ultimately in
which they can plan strategic-level attacks.
Dr. Lynch. I think, Representative Scott, that is a great
question. And I think it gets to the heart of having to place
Iraq within a full-scale regional and international strategy.
And so what my comments about trying to build the capacity of
the Iraqi state should be read as part of a much wider strategy
of trying to rebuild states across the region, and that
includes not just rebuilding militaries and counterterrorism
units, but actually building governance and actually building
accountable states which are responsive to their people that
can provide and deliver services.
And so I think that I would absolutely think that you are
putting your finger right on the problem with a shattered
Middle East, not just a shattered Iraq. That said, I think Iraq
is actually a distinctively important place for both Al Qaeda
and for ISIS. This is where Al Qaeda transformed for the first
time into a serious insurgency back with Zarqawi. This is where
the remnants of that insurgency became the Islamic State and
were able to move into Syria and take over these parts of Iraq.
I think that a defeat and removal or at least a strategic
defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq will have much greater
impact on its appeal and attractiveness and power across the
rest of the world than pretty much any other place.
Dr. Pollack. Congressman Scott, I will simply add, first, I
agree very much with the points that Dr. Lynch made. I think he
has got it spot on. I will start by saying that we need to
separate out two different problems, the problems of the civil
wars in Iraq, Syria for that matter, and the problem of
transnational terrorism. They are ultimately related but
distinct topics.
And I will start by saying the line--to use a line from a
friend of mine within the Trump administration, it is not the
case that Iraq and Syria are in civil war because ISIS is
there. ISIS is there because Iraq and Syria are in civil war.
Mr. Scott. That is right.
Dr. Pollack. And so point number one is, we do need to
stabilize these different countries. At the end of the day,
though, you are absolutely right, Congressman, there will
always be ungoverned spaces on the map. And the terrorist
groups will always seek refuge there.
The hope has to be that if we can deny them recruits,
because there aren't large numbers of people in places like the
Middle East who are desperately unhappy and looking to kill
someone as a result of that, you can cut off the flow of
oxygen, you can diminish their strength, and then both
defensive measures, like those that we put in place after 9/11,
and offensive measures, such as special forces operations,
drone strikes, et cetera, can diminish the threat to the point
where it isn't significant at all.
Mr. Scott. Madam Chair, I am almost out of time. One of the
other things I think that we need to talk through is whether or
not when we have small pockets where we have 10 or 15 or 20
that we believe to be or know to be through intelligence part
of one of the terrorist organizations, that we should go ahead
and take them out prior to them recruiting and becoming a
significantly larger and more capable group. It seems to me
that we would do better to--if we know they are what they are,
we are not going to fix that, so we might as well help the rest
of the world. Thank you.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. Mr. O'Halleran.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Dr. Pollack, you stated about the stay behind and an
indeterminate amount of time. This is the second time today we
have heard the issue of our troops staying behind. Afghanistan
was the other issue earlier today.
And I don't know what is going to happen in western Syria
especially, but if we have potential there, then we have the
Kurdish Iraqi situation, and are we going to be peacekeepers
along that? Or how are we going to get the U.N. involved?
So what does stay behind mean? And what is the implications
of that on the geopolitical issues within that area?
Dr. Pollack. Thanks very much, Congressman. And I think
this is an important set of questions for this committee in
particular to dig into.
As I noted earlier, Iraq is a quintessential civil war. We
know a lot about these civil wars. We know a lot about how to
bring them to peaceful ends and prevent them from recurring.
What the history of these civil wars have demonstrated over and
over and over again is that you need to have three conditions
in place. One, what is called a hurting stalemate, where none
of the groups believes that they can win a military victory,
and in fact they have real incentives to stop fighting.
Second, there needs to be a political power-sharing
arrangement. And third, there needs to be some institution that
remains in place for a period of time, typically 10 to 20
years, that guarantees or at least reassures people that
conditions one and two will continue to obtain. Historically,
the best institution for that is an external peacekeeping
force.
And I would argue that that is, at least in Iraq--I am not
an Afghan expert, I am not going to speak to Afghanistan--that
is a different mission. It is a war in a very different state
of affairs. But in Iraq, that is how we should be thinking
about the U.S. force there, as a peacekeeping force.
What we have seen is, peacekeeping forces need to start
with a certain size to establish presence. And my point about
the numbers is driven by State Department--sorry, by CENTCOM
[U.S. Central Command] and DOD [Department of Defense] planning
for the stay behind force. In 2009, 2010, 2011, the actual
military force in Iraq led by General Lloyd Austin formulated a
plan. They believed that the right number was somewhere between
22,000 and 25,000 troops to maintain that presence. The
Department of Defense refined that and said we think we can do
it with 10,000 troops.
I think that those numbers are more or less correct, given
where Iraq is today. Now, over time, I suspect that those
numbers can come down, because what you see in these civil wars
is that over time the communities rebuild their trust and that
presence can become increasingly symbolic. So this is not
Korea. We are not going to need a large force there ready to
fight a major war at a moment's notice.
But what we do need to be thinking about is the political
role of these troops in reassuring Iraqis that they are not
going to have violence used against them, that their military
is not going to be re-politicized, and their military isn't
going to lose the capability to put down bad actors when it is
necessary to do so.
And as I said, I think that the numbers formulated first by
USF-I [U.S. Forces-Iraq], General Austin and his men, and then
refined by the Department of Defense, are exactly where we
ought to be thinking. Those were the right numbers at exactly
the same moment in time.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Doctor.
Ambassador Crocker, Mr. Scott brought up the issue
concerning other locations in the world about terrorism. And we
have a significant amount of--a lot of this is going to be
requiring State Department work. The military can't do
everything, and we would rather have no war than a war.
So do you feel that the current proposed cuts to the State
Department, given North Korea and all the other issues going on
around this world, are a position that we should be taking?
Ambassador Crocker. Thank you for asking that, Congressman.
In a word, no. What we are seeing, frankly, is not simply a
budget cut in megatons. We were seeing, I think, an effort to
deconstruct the State Department and the Foreign Service.
And I can tell you, if that is not reversed, this is
something we are going to be paying for, for a very long time.
If we have to cut back our intake, then you are going to have
that gap moving forward for the next 20 years, where you don't
have the senior officer cadre who are fluent in foreign
languages, who know these countries and cultures, who know how
to deal with it.
So I can't put it strongly enough. This is a very, very
serious issue. If we don't want to have to fight a whole lot
more wars, then you need a strong, well-resourced Foreign
Service to go out there and do what may be possible to see that
the troops don't have to come in.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. Representative Cheney.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And thanks very
much to all of the witnesses here today.
Ambassador Crocker and I had the privilege of serving
together in the State Department. And, Ambassador, you know
that I think you are one of the wisest, most thoughtful members
of the Foreign Service we have. And I am very grateful for your
appearance here today and for your testimony.
Could you talk a little bit about the connection and the
relationship between our ability as a nation to influence
political events in a place like Iraq and our troops? And in
particular, I am thinking about as we surged in 2007, what that
meant in terms of our leverage in the country, and how you try
to replicate that same kind of political leverage in an
environment in which we are not going to have that number of
troops on the ground, certainly.
But how do you make sure that the United States, in
addition to the--reversing the kinds of cuts that you have
talked about, but having the political leverage, is it possible
to have the kind of political leverage with all the sides that
would be necessary for a political solution in the absence of
the kind of military presence that we saw at the moment when
our leverage was highest?
Ambassador Crocker. Thank you, Congresswoman. And I must
say, it is very nice to see you sitting there.
We will not have that level of leverage again. But I think
we may not need that level. The Iraqi forces after their
horrific collapse in 2014 have pulled themselves back together.
It is true that the Counter Terrorism Service is carrying out a
major part of this. But, you know, there has been progress over
these last 2 or 3 years with the Iraqi army generally. So we
want to be in a position to continue to encourage that.
We are the United States of America. We do have leverage,
should we choose to use it. But that is why, again, I would not
make any suggestions on troop levels at this point. We need to
see a President engage. We are a Presidential system. If the
President isn't decided on what he wants to do, then you start
to lose that kind of influence.
So, again, I would like to see the President ask his
Secretary of State to go out to Iraq, spend more than 12 hours
there, start a process of engagement with not just the current
government, but political leaders across the board, and then
report back on what is possible and what isn't possible, and to
go from there.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you. And, Dr. Pollack, I walked in as you
were saying that there will always be ungoverned areas. And in
keeping with the great tradition up here in the House of
Representatives, I am not going to let the fact that I walked
in two-thirds of the way through stop me from asking you a
question.
Talk about the extent to which--you are not saying that we
shouldn't be denying safe haven, are you?
Dr. Pollack. No.
Ms. Cheney. And so when you--what is that balance? In terms
of--we have got to deny safe haven. We have also got to deny
recruits. But how can you ensure that we are going to deny safe
haven in the absence of, you know, some basic level of troops,
American troops on the ground?
Dr. Pollack. Thank you very much, Congresswoman. It
obviously depends on what we are talking about. In places like
Iraq, where I think the United States has a clear national
interest that goes beyond the mere terrorism problem, I think
the presence of troops is warranted, at least for a certain
period of time and probably longer than Dr. Lynch believes is
necessary.
There are going to be places, though, like Mali, where I
don't think that we are necessarily warranted American military
presence because our interests are much narrower, no offense to
any Malians who are here or may be thinking about this. But it
simply does not rise to the same level as Iraq.
Under those circumstances, I think the United States does
need to use other tools available to it, whether it be
diplomacy or assistance to the host nation, to try to make
these places as unhospitable as possible. I want to agree with
Dr. Lynch that the best way to do it is to help these countries
repair themselves, an effort that you were trying to lead at
least for the Middle East when you were at the State
Department. You know better than I do that if you have
functional societies----
Ms. Cheney. You don't cost us votes in here today.
Dr. Pollack. If you have functioning societies, you are
going to have far fewer terrorists.
Ms. Cheney. Thank you very much. I appreciate it. And I
yield back, Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you very much.
Representative Panetta.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Gentlemen, thank
you for your time, your preparation, and your testimony today.
I apologize for being late.
In regards to that sort of infrastructure development, I
guess I saw something--or the RAND Corporation did something
about Mosul's infrastructure, when--its water, its sanitation,
its power capacity is not doing that well. What are the current
efforts right now, be it through the United States government
or be it through the Iraqi government, anything at all to help
develop that? Because clearly that will play a part in its
self-governing.
Dr. Lynch. There have been pretty massive efforts to deal
with the humanitarian crisis dimension of it. There is over 150
NGOs on the ground working, coordinated by the coalition, and
there has been a really quite remarkable effort at the
humanitarian relief side. But the reconstruction side is still
a blank slate. And I think that in the midst of crisis, it is
very difficult to plan for the long term and to begin
reconstruction when the fighting is still going on, which I
think is why having this hearing right now is so important,
because now is the time to get those plans into place, make
sure they are fully resourced and coordinated.
One of the other problems is that is going to have to be
linked up to the political development inside of Iraq. In other
words, there has to be some sense of what governance is going
to look like in Mosul, who is going to be responsible for the
administration of these reconstruction projects, who will get
political credit for them, and how will they be linked into the
broader Iraqi political system. To me, this is the absolute
most important thing for us to be looking at right now.
Mr. Panetta. Okay.
Ambassador Crocker. Well, thank you, Congressman. It is an
important question, obviously.
One of the problems the Iraqis confront, and their friends
with them, is a diminution of resources. There just isn't that
kind of money floating around anymore. They are running a
horrific deficit, and you see the consequences.
During my time there in 2007, a decade ago, the prime
minister, Nouri al-Maliki, extended the first supplemental
budget increase--we taught them a lot of bad habits, and
supplemental budgets, of course, would be among them. The prime
minister allocated $250 million to the province of Anbar,
because he was finally persuaded that if you really want to
turn the tide out there against Al Qaeda, support the
Awakening. And it worked.
Well, Prime Minister Abadi doesn't really have $250 million
to push up to Mosul. So I think the emphasis is going to have
to be on, you know, a hard-eyed analysis of what really needs
to be done and done quickly to provide momentum for political
solutions, but at the same time to be pressing on the issue of
governance, because I think we have all said this in one way or
the other.
Again, if you want to look through the 100-year history of
the modern Middle East, there is one single word that I use,
governance, the failure thereof. And that goes back to
colonialism and imperialism, the French and the British, and it
runs right up to today. Now we have Islamism, also a failure to
govern.
So if you--even if you do have the money for resources, you
have got to get the governance thing down and down right, and
it is enormously difficult and it is going to take a lot of
time. I just hope we are prepared to make that commitment.
Dr. Pollack. Congressman, if I could just add one point,
which is this stuff is very hard to do in the moment, right? We
are once again trying to build an airplane in mid-flight,
something that we have repeatedly tried to do in Iraq. I would
actually argue the time to have dealt with the governance issue
in Mosul--in fact, I was arguing it then--was 18 to 24 months
ago, when it would have been far easier to deal with.
Unfortunately, we didn't, and it is getting harder and harder.
We are coming up on elections in Iraq. Inshallah, there
will be elections at some point in the spring. The closer we
get to those elections, the harder it is going to be for us to
deal with many of Iraq's political problems. And as again,
Ambassador Crocker knows better than anyone, after those
elections, we could face a long and painful process of
governance formation. It is why doing this now is so critical
and why it is so wonderful that you are taking up this issue
now and hopefully can push the administration to engage with it
more fully.
Mr. Panetta. Understood. Thank you. I yield back. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Mrs. Hartzler. Sure, thank you. And we have more questions,
but I know, Dr. Lynch, you have indicated you had a hard stop
at 4:30, so if you need to leave, we certainly want to give you
the grace to do that. And thank you for coming. Appreciate it.
Dr. Lynch. Thank you, Chairman. I think my students will
understand if I stay for the last few minutes.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay, very good. Well, thank you.
Representative Suozzi.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you to
the witnesses again. And I apologize, like the previous few
Congress Members, for being late here today and for missing so
much. And I apologize if I am repeating some things that you
have asked earlier.
I am concerned about two complicating factors for the long
term in the area. One is the close relationship between Iran
and Iraq based upon the fact that major Shia religious sites
are located within Iraq. And it is normal for tourists from
Iran to come into Iraq on a regular basis. And there is a lot
of cultural friendships and relationships based upon these
religious sites that have been established over centuries, and
how complicating is that factor?
The second factor has been the genocide of Christians and
Yazidis and other minority groups within Iraq and Syria. And I
just want to get a quick insight from each of you about how
complicating a factor that will be, those two factors will be
going forward.
Ambassador Crocker. On the first, Congressman, I would
certainly never recommend that Iraq take steps to bar Iranian
pilgrims from the holy sites in Iraq. You are quite right,
those are major pilgrimage destinations, just as we see Muslims
from around the world flock to Mecca in Saudi Arabia.
My colleagues have said quite rightly Iran will certainly
have influence in Iraq. It is natural, one neighbor to another.
But we also need to keep in mind that an agreement on--that
they are all Shia together is significant, but there are many,
many differences, linguistic, Arabs versus Persians, lots of
constraining elements at work, too. So in countering Iranian
influence in Iraq, I would go nowhere near an effort to block
Iranian pilgrims.
On the plight of the Christians in Iraq and, indeed, in
Syria, no question about it. We are reaching the point where we
may see the critical weight of the Christian communities,
particularly in Iraq, get below the level necessary to sustain
their presence. And I would think that that would need to be a
very important issue for the administration to take up. But it
has to be done delicately. We cannot create a public impression
that we are there to defend the Christians. That is sadly only
likely to increase the pressures on them.
So this is all tough. It is all complicated. As Dr. Pollack
says, you can't do it in the moment. You have got to make the
commitment to a long-term, high-level sustained political
effort in Iraq and elsewhere in the region.
Mr. Suozzi. And how do you militate against the influence
of the Popular Mobilization Units? I mean, that is--those are
all Iranian-backed, right, for the most part?
Ambassador Crocker. No, sir. I think as Dr. Lynch and Dr.
Pollack have both said, they run a spectrum.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay, you don't have to answer that, then.
Anything you want to add, Mr. Pollack?
Dr. Pollack. I think they are both excellent points,
Congressman. And I will simply make some broader points. First,
as you point out, as we have talked about repeatedly this
afternoon, there are deep interlinkages between Iran and Iraq.
And there is nothing that we are going to do that are going to
end those.
Likewise, the problems of genocide and intercommunal
violence in Iraq are also pervasive. And it is important to
remember the words of a very wise man who used to repeatedly
say that Iraq is very, very, very, very, very hard and it is
very, very, very, very hard all the time. Did I get all the
verys?
That said, we also--you know, one of the most remarkable
things about Iraq is the ability of this country to overcome
all of those problems and all of those interlinkages. We need
to remember that in 2007, 2008, when the United States started
to reverse the perverse incentives that we created in 2003,
2004, it was incredible how fast Iraq started to turn around.
Now, Iraq was never Switzerland, right? Iraq was not
exactly, you know, ready for EU membership. But the change, the
direction, the delta was remarkable, and it was incredible to
see Iraqis coming together out of a recognition that hanging
together was much better than hanging apart.
So it is simply a way of saying that you are right, there
are problems, there are complications, we need to be aware of
them. That is exactly why we need to plan ahead, why we need to
make a big effort, work with the Iraqis, but we also shouldn't
just throw up our hands and say this is impossible.
Dr. Lynch. If I may, the problem of the minorities in Iraq
has been an enormous since 2003. You have seen the devastation
of minority communities across Iraq, not just Yazidis and the
Christians, but beyond. The best protection for minorities is
to have a strong and capable Iraqi state that can protect all
of its citizens. Trying to single out particular communities
for protection I think is very difficult to do, and it is not
sustainable in the long term, but making that part of a broader
package of building state capacity I think is absolutely vital.
Mr. Suozzi. I have exceeded my time. Thank you very much,
Madam Chairwoman.
Mrs. Hartzler. You bet. Thank you to each and every one of
you. We very much appreciate this. We have more questions we
could ask, but we are going to have votes in about a half an
hour. We want to get to our second panel. But thank you so much
for all your insights and all of your devotion to our country
and helping out today.
So let's go ahead and I would like to invite the second
panel to the witness table. So we will invite them in.
So as they get settled, I will make some brief
introductions. We want to welcome this Department of Defense
panel. We have Mr. Mark Swayne, Acting Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Stability and Humanitarian Affairs in
the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special
Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict.
We have Brigadier General James Bierman, director of the
Middle East division on the Joint Staff J-5.
We have Mr. Joseph Pennington, Deputy Assistant Secretary
for Iraq in the Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs at the
Department of State.
And we have Ms. Pamela Quanrud, Director of the Global
Coalition to Defeat ISIS at the Department of State.
Due to the time that we have, I think we will forego the
opening statements, if we could, since we only have a half an
hour before votes. And we want to get right to your thoughts
and your insights on things. So thank you so much for being
here.
Mr. Pennington, I think I would like to start with you.
What can you tell us about conversations between the United
States and the government of Iraq? How long do you anticipate
having a large military footprint in Iraq? And what is the
prospect of executing an agreeable status of forces agreement
with Iraq?
Mr. Pennington. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you
for the opportunity to be here today to testify.
I think I will--on the first part of your question, I will
kick a large chunk of that to my DOD colleagues, but I will
just comment that I think the success that we--and when I say
we, I mean the coalition supporting Iraqi partners on the
ground--have had in the fight against ISIS has convinced Iraqi
leaders or Iraqi partners, including Prime Minister Abadi, of
the efficacy of partnership with U.S. and coalition forces.
The prime minister is open to and enthusiastic about the
prospect of continuing that partnership going forward to meet
new challenges in Iraq, once the active military operations
against ISIS wind down.
Again, I want to not get into too much of the DOD territory
here, but I think there is a very good prospect for continuing
a security partnership under the strategic framework agreement
that we have in place with Iraq. And I think there is a good
appetite for that on both sides.
With regard to the part of the question about status of
forces, as you may know, we have an exchange of notes that
regulates military presence in Iraq now. We believe--and I
think my colleagues would say the same--that that is sufficient
for our presence as it currently stands, given the purpose and
the scope of that relationship.
Maybe I will stop there and invite other comments.
Mrs. Hartzler. Sure, appreciate your perspective from the
Department of State. Department of Defense want to weigh in on
that?
Mr. Swayne. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman and Ranking Member
Moulton and all subcommittee members for having us today. For
the issue of the SOFA [Status of Forces Agreement], I agree
completely with my State colleague. U.S. forces in Iraq are
operating under the 2014 exchange of notes with the government
of Iraq. This exchange of notes provides U.S. forces with the
appropriate protections and not further commitments--no further
commitments are required, so we feel that that exchange of
notes is appropriate for right now. Thank you.
Mrs. Hartzler. Yes, very good. Well, thank you. Mr. Swayne,
given continued budget pressures, readiness crises across the
military and competing national security interests, how do you
expect to achieve our objectives in Iraq?
Mr. Swayne. Thank you very much. As we--the DOD mission in
Iraq is focused on dealing with ISIS and to deliver them a
lasting defeat. I think that is a critical issue for the United
States Department of Defense. It is clear that our objective is
to defeat ISIS wherever it exists, and in Iraq is a very
critical portion of where ISIS remains. Once they are defeated,
we think that that defeat will not occur immediately after ISIS
loses its territorial control.
ISIS is likely to continue to plot or inspire external
attacks, and to deal with that threat, the United States
Department of Defense is going to have to have a relationship
with the government of Iraq and the Iraqi security forces to
require continued training and to effectively secure liberated
areas.
Now, the last 3 years of fighting have effectively secured
liberated areas, and we have focused on conventional
operations. And a new ISIS threat will require proficiency in
wide areas of security operations in counterinsurgency, and
that is an area I think that we can work with the Iraqi
government and the Iraqi military to determine what the needs
are going forward with the Iraqi security forces, and that
includes the United States and also our coalition partners as
we look for the advise-and-assist teams and to work for the
future training missions.
Mrs. Hartzler. But the question was dealing with our budget
situation that we have and the readiness crises that we have
encountered. So do you have what you need in order to be able
to finish the mission there and carry it out? What are areas of
concerns that you have or needs that you may have?
Mr. Swayne. Yes, ma'am, thank you. With the actual budget
numbers and the actual numbers of our troops going forward,
that is something that in this unclassified open hearing, we
are not prepared to discuss the particulars. It is ongoing
right now for the planning within the Department of Defense and
to look at what the requirements are with our Iraqi partners
and then come back and work with the committee to determine,
once we have that plan, in a classified, closed session, then I
think we will be ready for an open discussion after that.
But at this time, the details on the budget or the numbers
are certainly things that we are concerned about, thinking
about. It is very clear to us that in the defeat of ISIS, the
long-term defeat of ISIS and a lasting defeat of ISIS, we need
to have a strong Iraqi government and a strong Iraqi security
forces. And that is certainly at the top of our priority list
within the Department. Thank you.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay, thank you. Ranking Member Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. Madam Chairwoman, thank you very much.
Thank you all for joining us here today. As an Iraq war
veteran myself, I know that I am joined by several others both
in the room, and, General, thank you for your service on the
panel. We were in Hillah about the same time in 2003.
I can't tell you how painful it is as an Iraq war veteran
now sitting on this committee to see us fighting and refighting
so many of the same battles that we fought, that our friends
gave their lives for. And so the question that we must ask is,
how will this time be different? How do we know that now that
ISIS is about defeated there won't be an ISIS 2.0, just as ISIS
in many ways is Al Qaeda in Iraq 2.0?
We heard from the expert panel that preceded you how
important it is that Iraqi politics be the primary effort. The
primacy of the political effort is the phrase that several of
the panelists used. But I am not hearing that from you yet. I
am hearing about how we are going to ensure we clean up the
rest of ISIS and we train the Iraqi military. I haven't heard
anything about how we are going to ensure the success of Iraqi
politics, which ultimately will prevent us from having to come
back and clean up the mess when Iraqi politics fails.
Just before this hearing, I discussed this with Secretary
Mattis and General Dunford. And the Chairman and the Secretary
agreed that we have to have a political plan. So where is that
political plan? How will it be better and different than the
political effort in the past to ensure that we don't repeat the
same mistakes and find us coming back to Iraq to refight these
same battles yet again?
Mr. Pennington. Thank you very much for the question,
Congressman. Maybe I will start on that. And I think just as we
have approached the military issue--the military side of the
relationship with Iraq in this fight against ISIS in a somewhat
different way, what we will call by, with, and through,
supporting, but having Iraqi partners lead on the ground,
building that partnership from the ground up, we believe that
the same kind of approach on the political side is the right
strategy going forward.
And so we have focused our efforts, our immediate efforts
on strengthening Iraq's ability to govern the liberated spaces,
and by that I am referring to our efforts towards
stabilization.
Mr. Moulton. Can you just give us an idea of what those
efforts are?
Mr. Pennington. Sure. So by stabilization, it is a fairly
broad concept, but the way I would define it is to create the
conditions on the ground to enable those who have been
displaced by the fighting and by the ISIS terrorism to make the
decision to return to their homes and live in security,
reestablishing their communities, with the support of the Iraqi
government.
Behind that Iraqi government support is the United States
and our coalition partners. And so we, on the one hand, have
spent more than $1.7 billion to deal with the immediate
emergency of humanitarian displacement, making sure people can
survive when they are displaced, and beyond that and more
recently, have worked with our coalition partners through the
U.N. Development Program, something called the Funding Facility
for Stabilization, to help the Iraqis to go into liberated
areas, to rebuild the infrastructure, basic services, water,
electricity, schools, health clinics, clearing rubble from the
streets, getting some cash into the economy.
Mr. Moulton. So with all due respect, if we had been here
in 2004 or 2005 or 2007 or 2008, it would have been the same
thing. How is this time different?
Mr. Pennington. Well, I would suggest, Congressman, that it
is a matter of reestablishing government authority in areas
where they have been absent, through our consistent support to
help strengthen governing institutions, to partner with Iraqis,
and we have an excellent partner.
Mr. Moulton. Sir, I was there last in 2008. We did exactly
the same things. How is this time different? How will we ensure
that when we do all those same things as we did as the previous
panelists mentioned actually quite successfully in 2007, 2008,
with over 100,000 troops to assist in the effort, how is this
time going to be more successful so it doesn't fall apart
again?
Mr. Pennington. On the political side, Congressman, as you
know, we are approaching an election season in Iraq. That is
something that is going to be--the politics of this are going
to be fought out by Iraqis. We have, of course, contacts across
a broad range of Iraqis, Sunni, Shia, Kurd minorities.
We are encouraging full participation of all segments. We
believe we have the--and there is some polling data to bear
this out--that Iraqis are increasingly seeing their governing
challenges as requiring national solutions, and so there is a
greater sense of an Iraqi national identity, a greater cross-
fertilization across sectarian lines.
We would expect in this election to see alliances and
coalitions built across sectarian lines which would build a
more inclusive governing structure.
Mr. Moulton. So I appreciate the hopeful description of
Iraqi politics. You still haven't said a single thing that we
are doing differently. What is the United States doing
differently? General, would you care to comment on this,
please?
General Bierman. I will make a couple comments. And thanks
for the question. Based off of the events in 2014, the Iraqi
government invited us in. And what occurred with the rapid
spread of ISIS was a representation to Iraqis across the
spectrum of how bad things could be.
And we have established a trust relationship, military-to-
military, but we would be the first ones to tell you that the
ultimate success and future of Iraq is political, is economic,
and is diplomatic.
Some of the things that I would tell you that I see is
different, like you, having made several trips back and forth,
I think we have a fragile but responsible Iraqi government. And
I think they want a long-term relationship with us, and they
have voiced across the military and civilian governance that
they want us to stay, because the events of the last 2 years
have showed them that they need us.
The other thing I would say is the Iraqis, contrary to some
of the experiences you and I have had in the past, not to take
anything away from the great efforts of the U.S. military to
enable the Iraqi operations, they are fighting their own
battles. Over the last year, the Iraqis have suffered tens of
thousands of casualties in the fights to liberate their
countries.
And I take nothing away from those extraordinary U.S. and
coalition service men who have been killed or wounded. God rest
their souls. But the Iraqis are carrying this fight on their
backs. We are going to have significant challenges as we near
the end, as we approach the end of physical ISIS. That has been
a unifying factor that has united a lot of disparate elements
across the spectrum in Iraq. And we are going to have to work
very, very hard politically, diplomatically to knit this
fragile Iraqi ecosystem together.
One of the key components of strong governments is going to
be efficient and professional Iraqi security forces. So while
we stay, you know, focused within our military lane, we very
much see that as a means to an end that one of the key factors
in enabling the Iraqi government is what we are doing on the
military side. Thank you.
Mr. Moulton. And, General, I agree with everything you
said. And that was my experience on the ground in Iraq, too, is
I understood how important it was for the politics to follow
through. But back in 2008, I felt like we had a lot of
political resources in country. As I have been to visit Iraq
more recently as a member of this committee, I have repeatedly
heard from our State Department and officials on the ground
that--and our military--that they don't have the political
resources necessary.
Chairman Dunford just a couple of hours ago said--talking
about Afghanistan--that we need to push State Department
resources further down into the Afghan political system, but we
are not doing that yet. Again, has anything changed? Are we
doing it now in Iraq where we weren't doing it 6 months or a
year ago, so that ultimately where we have not been able to
ensure the political success of Iraq in the past, you can now
tell me that you have the confidence that we will?
General Bierman. I would just simply agree with what you
just heard from the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, that
we would certainly advocate an increased and stronger role
from----
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, General, for your candor.
General Bierman [continuing]. From the Department of State.
And I think that the folks that they have on the ground are
doing remarkable things, but we would support increased efforts
in that area.
Mr. Moulton. Would anyone else on the panel care to
comment?
Mr. Pennington. If I might, Congressman, just following up
on the general's comments, I think in terms of what is
different now, I think one thing that is different is that the
Iraqis have seen the terrible cost of political failure up
close and the destruction of communities, the destruction, the
genocide that has been carried out against various groups by
ISIS, and ultimately the destruction of largely Sunni cities, I
think has been a very sobering experience for Iraqis across the
political spectrum and across sectarian divides.
And I think that is what is driving what I referred to as a
more hopeful political picture. There are no political
guarantees. And this will be a process that is Iraqi-driven.
And we will support in every way that we can, but I think that
level of destruction and the level of terror that the
population has endured has changed attitudes in Iraq.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you. Director Quanrud, do you have
anything to add?
Ms. Quanrud. No.
Mr. Moulton. Mr. Swayne, if I may just briefly ask, do you
agree with the consensus of the expert panel that the primary
effort must be political in Iraq at this stage?
Mr. Swayne. Yes, absolutely. I think there is no doubt
about, for sustainable security, for sustainable stability in
Iraq over the next few months, years, we have to have a clear--
so I agree with that wholeheartedly and to respond a little bit
to the question before, DOD, it is our whole-of-government
approach working by, with, and through. We certainly have to
work very closely--we, the Department of Defense, must work
very closely with the Department of State and USAID [U.S.
Agency for International Development] as they work to support
the Iraqi government.
And we must stay committed, we must be working with our
international partners. The U.N. is doing quite a bit in Iraq
right now on not only the humanitarian assistance issues, but
also stabilization. They are doing that under and with the
Iraqi government. I think that is important that we support the
Iraqi government for their viability, and I think if there is
anything a little bit different, we are all focused on
supporting that government, that Iraqi security force, and
working holistically from our government.
And to answer your question, we absolutely need to work
more closely and support our State colleagues on what the needs
are, what the whole needs are for that long term.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Swayne. I mean, I am pleased to
hear that, because earlier you had said that the DOD effort is
to defeat ISIS and that was it. We need a whole-of-government
approach.
Mr. Swayne. No, sir. And I apologize if we didn't--I didn't
have my opening remarks. I didn't get to----
Mr. Moulton. Fair enough.
Mr. Swayne [continuing]. Say those points. So I had to go
back and review those and get that. But there is no doubt about
it. It is a whole-of-government approach.
Mr. Moulton. Madam Chairwoman, thank you very much.
Mr. Swayne. I apologize if I----
Mr. Moulton. Thank you.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. Representative Banks, Indiana.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Pennington, can you talk a little bit about the
security cooperation budget for Iraq in a post-ISIS
environment? What does that budget look like today? What are
the strategies for what that budget might look like tomorrow
moving forward?
Mr. Pennington. Congressman, I know there have been
discussions between others from the administration, from the
Department about budget issues, and I am not really prepared to
talk about specifics of the budget.
We have a robust security cooperation program with Iraq
through foreign military financing [FMF] that I know the
subcommittee is aware of. We are continuing that. There is also
a train-and-equip element to this that is DOD-run that my
colleagues may wish to comment on. But in terms of what budgets
look like going forward, I think we need to leave that to other
briefers.
Mr. Banks. So is it safe to assume, though, that the FMF
budget might look different in a post-ISIS environment than
what it does today?
Mr. Pennington. Congressman, I am just not in a position to
say what it is going to look like.
Mr. Banks. Okay, that is disappointing. Thank you. I yield
back.
Mrs. Hartzler. Representative Gallego.
Mr. Gallego. Mr. Swayne, why isn't the OSD [Office of the
Secretary of Defense] Policy's Middle East office or the office
of the ASD [Assistant Secretary of Defense] for International
Security Affairs presented here or presenting here today?
Mr. Swayne. Thank you, sir. My office was asked to come
represent--because my area of specialty is stabilization and
humanitarian assistance. And it was determined that the aim of
this particular committee, subcommittee discussion would be to
focus in that post-ISIS--what we can look to do, the Department
of Defense supporting other interagencies in that area. That is
the reason, sir.
Mr. Gallego. Okay. Interesting. Is there a disagreement in
policy or is there a lack of engagement, in your opinion, by
the regional office leadership at the Pentagon on ISIL's life
cycle, especially post-Mosul? We just actually had another
briefing before this discussing this, also.
Mr. Swayne. No, sir. I see no lack of--we are certainly
coherent in policy. I think that is--they feel comfortable that
they can send somebody besides the DASD [Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense] for Middle East up here to brief on our
activities. When we talked about the last question by
Congressman Banks was to talk about the--what is the budget for
the Department of Defense 2017, we have $1.1 billion for the
training and equipping through NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act] section 1236 authority, and in 2018, we are
planned $1.27 billion.
So it is certainly as the number of dollars and our
commitment to working with the Iraqi security forces, not
lessening, it is increasing, we certainly see the need--again,
as we talked about we have a plan to defeat ISIS, but the seeds
of the next resurgence of ISIS are in the rubble of where the
ISIS-controlled areas right now, the areas that ISIS destroyed,
and we need to be diligent and work closely with the Iraqi
security forces, working with our interagency partners, as we
sustain that stability so that ISIS 2.0 doesn't grow out of
those seeds that are in the rubble.
So we are certainly committed to it, Congressman.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Swayne. Who is the acting or
current--or who is the current DASD for the Middle East?
Mr. Swayne. Yes, sir. The current DASD for--is an acting
DASD----
Mr. Gallego. Acting.
Mr. Swayne [continuing]. Brigadier general rank. I believe
that is also another reason we have two--we would have two
military uniformed officers up here. And I felt that--I believe
the leadership felt that it would more appropriate if a
civilian representative of OSD Policy--brigadier general rank
is certainly in tune with all of these activities. I talk to
him every day about Iraq, Syria, and the de-ISIS efforts.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Gallego. Just in closing, Madam Chair and Ranking
Member, I think it is--for me, it shows a certain level of
disagreement and also lack of commitment when we have so many
acting positions that are being filled in a policy area that we
all think is extremely important.
Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. Representative Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chair. General, you talked
about, if you will, a unifying enemy that has brought people
together. Assuming that we are able to defeat that enemy in the
near future, one of the issues that will have to be addressed
is the issue of the Kurds.
They have recently had an overwhelming referendum on
independence. And my question revolves around that. How do you
see stability in the region for the Kurds after the defeat of
ISIS?
General Bierman. You would agree with me, sir, it is a very
concerning development. It is one we tried to forestall across
the whole of government. Secondary to the political and
diplomatic interactions we had with the KRG [Kurdistan Regional
Government] leadership, we certainly messaged that at the
military level, as well.
It has occurred now. You know, the referendum has come and
gone. And we are watching that very, very closely. One of the
key factors in the battlefield successes that we have had
against ISIL in Iraq has been Kurdish and Iraqi security forces
cooperating and working together, most recently demonstrated in
the liberation of Mosul.
And we can't afford to have this referendum and whatever
follows destabilize us as we are on the brink of defeating
physical ISIS. We are watching events very, very closely on the
ground. There has been some political maneuvering that is
occurring.
So far, we have not seen any elevation of violence, but,
you know, secondary to what is going on, on the diplomatic
side, we certainly in the military are messaging both Iraqi and
Kurdish military leaders that we have established very strong
relationships with over the last couple years. It is a concern.
Mr. Scott. What are Iran's intentions in Iraq and Syria? I
mean, do they intend to just try to continue to foster chaos?
What do you think the end game for Iran is?
General Bierman. I think the Iranians want to ensure that
they create conditions in Iraq so that they are never
threatened like they were during the 1980s, which was a
horrific and bloody war, and both countries suffered
significantly.
I think the Iranians want to establish a land bridge that
goes from Tehran all the way into areas of Syria and Lebanon
where they can threaten and potentially apply pressure to
Israel. But I think ultimately I would walk back to the first
of my answer and say the Iranians seek a neighboring Iraq which
cannot threaten the revolution and the Iranian regime.
Mr. Scott. Madam Chair, I know we are short on time. I will
yield the remainder of my time so that other members can ask
questions, as well.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you very much, and those were very
good questions on Kurds and Iran. Representative O'Halleran.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
General, thank you for your service to our country. You had
mentioned a fragile government. What defines that fragile
government? And in your mind, what can we do to change that?
General Bierman. Yes, sir, I want to make sure I stay in my
lane, but I think Iraq is a country made up of a lot of very
different, disparate cultural, religious, demographic elements.
During my five trips back and forth to Iraq, I have been in
Shia land, I have been in the Sunni areas, and I have been in
Kurdistan. And I think it is a tremendous challenge to any
government to try to knit together people with those kind of
different interests and agendas, and then to provide
responsible and inclusive governance.
I would, sir, go back to what I said before at the risk
maybe of repeating myself a little bit. We are very, very
focused on ensuring that our efforts to enable the Iraqi
security forces, you know, address any internal or external
threat, that that buys the time for the Iraqi government to
continue to coalesce, improve, and provide that responsible
governance to the people of Iraq.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, General. Luckily, we have Mr.
Pennington here. And if you can expand on that question and
also identify what the current staffing levels are in Iraq for
the State Department. Are there additional needs that you look
into--have? And what are the funding levels for assistance into
the area?
Mr. Pennington. Thank you, Congressman. On the question of
governance and fragility of governance, I think it is fair to
say that the United States government has been very actively
engaged in trying to shore up the Iraqi government on a number
of fronts. I mentioned the support for Iraqi priorities of
humanitarian assistance and stabilization of liberated areas.
That is the prime minister's focus. That is what helps him
politically and helps the government strengthen
institutionally.
I would also point out the support that we have provided to
the Iraqi government in terms of getting its fiscal house in
order on the economic side. The economic pressures that Iraq
has been under, because of the conflict, the presence of ISIS,
the collapse of oil prices, the humanitarian crisis, that
created an economic crisis both in Baghdad and Irbil of massive
proportions.
We and other G-7 [Group of Seven] partners stepped forward
to fill the fiscal gap. We through a sovereign loan guarantee,
a $1 billion sovereign loan guarantee, which the Iraqis then
followed up by borrowing in the private market, that would not
have been possible without our support. And getting a deal with
the IMF [International Monetary Fund], which provided the
additional financing necessary to close that gap and keep the
government on its feet during this time of tremendous
challenge, again, would not have been possible without U.S.
support.
And that--the IMF program has been the key to starting the
government on a path of significant economic reform, which they
are complying with the conditions of the IMF program. So on all
of those fronts, we are being both responsive to the needs, the
political needs of the Iraqi leadership, supporting them where
it is most important to them, and also strengthening the
institutions.
Mr. O'Halleran. And do you feel that the staffing levels
are adequate and that--the funding levels, are the question I
asked.
Mr. Pennington. Congressman, in terms of staffing, there
was a decline in staffing following the incursion of ISIS into
Iraq for security reasons. A lot of those numbers have now
trended back up. The chief of mission has--is continually
making recommendations on staffing levels to respond to needs
that he sees on the ground. Washington has been fully
responsive to those requests, and so we work those issues on a
daily, weekly basis.
Mr. O'Halleran. And funding?
Mr. Pennington. Funding, in terms of our economic support
funding for Iraq, has been holding steady. We are well
resourced for this year for the activities that I described.
Again, not going to get into a discussion of budget levels
going forward, but we think for the moment we have what we
need, particularly when you factor in that coalition partners
on the civilian side and support--actually the ratio is roughly
3 to 1. For every dollar we put up for stabilization,
humanitarian efforts, our coalition partners come up with about
three times that. And so put all that together, and I think the
support has been quite robust.
Mr. O'Halleran. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. Representative Panetta.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Madam Chair. Lady and gentlemen,
thank you very much for being here. Appreciate your testimony,
your preparation, obviously.
I admit you know a heck of a lot more about this topic than
I do. And so my question is going to be pretty broad and pretty
easy. But I think in order to accomplish a lot of the goals
that you are talking about, you not only need money, you not
only need military help and diplomacy, but you need
credibility. And so based on your experience, what is the
United States reputation in Iraq with the government, with the
people? And does that affect our ability to accomplish our
mission?
Mr. Pennington. Maybe I will start, Congressman. That is a
great question. I will be happy to start, but I would welcome
other comments.
I think we have built up since the incursion of ISIS, the
coming to power of the Abadi government in summer of 2014, and
the way that the military and now subsequently the
humanitarian, the support has played out in Iraq, I think there
is a recognition that the United States role has been
indispensable in allowing Iraq to make the progress that it has
made. And I think it is hard to quantify in terms of public
support, but I think what we do see is a broad spectrum of
support across sectarian lines in Iraq that understand the
benefits of an America--of a strong relationship with the
United States and American presence. And this goes Shia, Sunni,
Kurd.
And so when we talk about a future relationship, whether it
is security, economic partnership, commercial relationship, I
think it is safe to say that there is broad support across the
Iraqi political spectrum. And I believe that does translate at
the popular level, as well. It is harder to measure.
Mr. Panetta. Despite what happened, you know, after 2003,
what happened with the Iraq war?
Mr. Pennington. I think our absence from Iraq or our
pulling back from Iraq in 2011, for all--and that is another
topic that we probably won't get into here today--but it did--
and then our coming back to Iraq in a sense in 2014, when Iraq
was faced with the most grave crisis, has really I think
changed minds in Iraq or--of course, there are some who will
never accept that presence. But I think most Iraqis want the
U.S. to be with them, want our support, welcome our support,
and look for a long-term relationship with the United States.
General Bierman. I would just, sir, add to that good answer
by saying we have gained a level of credibility in the way we
have conducted the campaign. You know, looking back at where we
were at 2014, when ISIS had overrun much of western and
northern Iraq, working by, with, and through the Iraqi security
forces, we have steadily over a period of 2 years, we have
stayed focused, we have stayed committed, we have made common
cause with the Iraqis, and we are seen in some respects as
winners.
But I would say--and, you know, it is a soft pat on the
back if at all--that is not going to be enough in the long
term. And one of the drumbeat themes from all of you is, it
needs to be political and it needs to be diplomatic. And I
think we could very easily lose some of the credibility we have
gained by battlefield military success if we don't translate
those gains into stabilization, you know, still a million
displaced Sunnis who--they think it is great that their city
has been liberated, but if their homes, their neighborhoods,
their infrastructure is wrecked, whatever goodwill time we have
bought for the Iraqi government, we have got to follow up on
that rapidly. And that is going to be a big determinant of our
long-term credibility.
Mr. Swayne. My answer to that question, Congressman, is in
the past after 2003 we were the--I would put it in the terms of
we were the big brother and we had a little brother in the last
few years. It is a partnership. They have an established
government. They have an established Iraqi security force. We
are not the big brother. We are a partner along with other
coalition members who are coming in working with side by side.
I think that is also a bit of a difference that it is not this
paternalistic relationship. It is a specific.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. Representative Suozzi.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you to all
of you for your service to our country. We are very grateful to
you for your good work.
I traveled to Afghanistan in the spring, and there was a
very clear military five-point plan as to what the strategy was
going to be from a military perspective. And I am certain that
there is a clear military strategy that has been documented by
the Department of Defense related to Iraq and Syria.
My question is, does the Department of State have a good
document that I can read as to what the long-term plan is over
the next 4 or 5 years related to both Afghanistan and Iraq and
Syria? Ms. Quanrud? No?
Mr. Pennington. Thank you, sir. Just to clarify. Are we
talking on the military side?
Mr. Suozzi. No, on the Department of State side, on more
the civilian side.
Mr. Pennington. We do have a--we have had strategy
documents that are not time-limited that define our interests
and long-term strategies in Iraq. Afghanistan is outside of, I
think, any of our purview. Those are things we could discuss in
a different setting.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay, but I would like to get that document, if
I can. Give me a good document to read. Okay?
Mr. Pennington. We will take that back.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. Just wondering, how many of you
have read the testimony from the first panel before? Have you
had access to that or have you had an opportunity? Raise your
hand if you have. You have. Good, good. I thought it had a lot
of good suggestions, a lot of good insights to be considered in
there. So I am glad to hear that you did that.
General, there was some discussion in the last panel about
the number of troops that we should have remain to stabilize
once ISIS is defeated. Do you have an opinion on that? What do
you think that we need, as far as numbers of troops?
General Bierman. Yes, ma'am. And I know you will understand
if I talk probably generally without specific numbers. We want
to ensure that there is a balance that we need to strike.
Coming back to the discussion of plans, our focus after the
defeat of ISIS in terms of reliable partnership, building Iraqi
capacity, is going to be on training, equipping, intelligence,
counterterrorism, and security assistance.
And I would say we want to leave just enough, but we also
need to ensure that we remain very aware of the Iraqi political
environment and that we don't wear out our welcome. The Iraqis
continue to signal that we want us there, and we are having
some very positive talks in terms of what is the right amount.
There was a comment made earlier about some of the resource
challenges we are seeing with all our commitments across the
globe. So we are very focused on what is the smallest amount
that we can leave in terms of residual capacity that will have
the effect that we need to build Iraqi capacity.
I think the conversations which are not in our lane, but we
are a part of have been very positive back-and-forth between
U.S., Iraqi governments, and some of the participating
coalition governments.
Mrs. Hartzler. Mr. Pennington, along those lines, one of
the most important things that needs to occur is this political
solution. It is the very difficult job of putting together an
inclusive government that has Sunni and Shia and Kurds and is
going to, you know, respect all the minorities, Christians,
Yazidis, et cetera.
What efforts are being made by the Department of State now
to help force this discussion and this relationship? And with
the presence of Iran there, how successful do you think this
would be, to be able to get this together and get it right?
Mr. Pennington. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Again, we are
now heading into an Iraqi election season, so these issues are
going to be debated during the course of that process. We
can't, of course, control how that process comes out, but we
can, of course, make sure that we are in connection with those
across the spectrum in pushing them toward our central ideas of
how governance--how we see governance in Iraq, which is
inclusive, which is responsive, which is service-oriented, and
which is cognizant of all sects, including minorities and their
interests.
So we have discussions with all sides, Sunni, Shia, Kurd
minority across the spectrum about those issues. They know that
support from the United States depends on inclusive governance.
We have made that very, very clear. We see the prime minister
as someone who is governing Iraq from--and despite all the
challenges, from a nationalist, from an Iraqi perspective, not
from a sectarian perspective.
And so we see that he has developed, we believe, support
from populations including many of the communities who have
been liberated, which are mostly Sunni communities. And so
the--if you look at public opinion polling in Iraq, for
example, the attitudes toward the central government in Baghdad
among Sunni populations have increased significantly in the
last 6 to 12 months, because of the effort against ISIS and the
effort to get people to return to their homes.
And so we definitely have influence on the process and on
the actors, but in the end, these are Iraqi political
decisions. There will be coalitions formed, alliances formed.
Our preference, of course, is that those alliances include
cross-sectarian groupings. We think that in the current
environment that that is possible and even likely.
Mrs. Hartzler. Very good, thank you. Do you have any
secondary questions? Yes, Representative Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. Just a concluding comment. And I want to,
first of all, thank you all for participating in the panel.
Just as I expressed the responsibility that I feel as a member
of this committee, but especially as an Iraq war veteran, to
ensure that we don't waste more lives in Iraq, that we finally
get this right after many times of getting it wrong and
repeating our same mistakes, I hope you will feel that
responsibility, as well.
And I know that it is difficult working under an
administration and having the constraints of that environment,
where not everybody in the administration may see eye to eye
with you or may agree with you. But I hope that you will
remember the troops on the ground, the State Department folks
on the ground, the people who are trying to get this right and
need your support to succeed.
Thank you.
Mr. Swayne. Congressman, can I just make a point about
that?
Mr. Moulton. Yes, sir.
Mr. Swayne. I pledged my allegiance to the Constitution,
and I support the President of the United States and all the
people appointed over me, but I come to work every day because
of all the soldiers, sailors, airmen, and marines that are out
there, and also our State Department people. So I take that
commitment to heart.
And I think we would be remiss if we didn't acknowledge
that we are deeply saddened, but on October 1st, just most
recently in Iraq, a service member lost his life to an IED
[improvised explosive device]. Another service men was a
casualty to that. So our heartfelt condolences go out to their
families. And that is not lost on me or anybody on the panel.
So we appreciate you saying that, and we certainly think about
it, sir.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Swayne.
Mrs. Hartzler. I just wanted to thank each of you for
coming today. And thank you for your commitment to the issue at
hand and getting Iraq--having an opportunity to have success
there for the future and remembering the troops. I think we
have lost--over 4,500 American soldiers have given their lives
to give the people of Iraq an opportunity to have freedom and
to keep us safe here at home.
And so thank you for remembering that every day and for
keeping that in mind. I am encouraged by the polling and some
of the things we are seeing, the gains that have been made the
last few years. But we need to make sure and get this right
moving forward.
We have a wonderful opportunity ahead of us to chart a new
path for Iraq. It is not going to be easy, but I know us here
in Congress and on this committee are committed to doing what
we can to help support this effort, because we want to see it
succeed from here on out.
And so we appreciate your commitment to that, look forward
to working with you, and thank you for coming today, for your
testimony. And with that, our hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:31 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

October 3, 2017

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

October 3, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

October 3, 2017

=======================================================================

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. MOULTON

Mr. Moulton. General Bierman and DASD Swayne, in your testimony you
alluded to the importance of demobilizing and reintegrating Shia
militias (including but not limited to the Popular Mobilization
Forces)--what role does DOD have in supporting this process and
ensuring demilitarization proceeds?
Mr. Swayne and General Bierman. Securing peace in Iraq will require
a coordinated and strong whole-of-government approach that works by,
with, and through the Government of Iraq. This approach continues
placing the U.S. military in a supporting role, including in efforts to
demobilize and reintegrate Shia militias. In November 2016, Iraq's
parliament passed a law that stipulates that the Popular Mobilization
Forces (PMF) are an independent military institution within the Iraqi
Security Forces (ISF), which will be an obstacle to dissolving the PMF.
Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi supports the law and is working to
consolidate PMF factions not allied directly with Iran into the ISF.
As defeat-ISIS operations succeed in liberating ISIS-held territory
in Iraq, the Department of Defense's (DOD) security force assistance
will shift to broader institutional efforts that ensure ISF are both
effective and legitimate. U.S. building partner capacity efforts will
prioritize counterterrorism, critical infrastructure protection, and
border control capabilities. Civil-military operations will be a
critical supporting effort for each line of effort. Working closely
with the Department of State, the U.S. Agency for International
Development, and international partners, DOD will support the
Government of Iraq's efforts to solidify viable roles for the PMF
within the ISF that are not duplicative or provocative of sectarian
tensions.
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. SUOZZI
Mr. Suozzi. Please provide a strategy document that outlines the
Department of State's long-term goals and interests in Iraq and how the
Department plans to implement them.
Mr. Pennington. The Department of State's 2015-2017 Integrated
Country Strategy (ICS) Chief of Mission Priorities for Iraq is included
below. The ICS is the formal document in which the Department of State
articulates its goals and country-specific policies. We will update
this document in the next planning cycle to account for this
Administration's priorities, including maintaining military gains
against ISIS, countering malign Iranian influence, and promoting
American trade and investment ties in Iraq.

Begin 2015-2017 Iraq Integrated Country Strategy Chief of Mission
Priorities:

``Over the next three to five years, the U.S.-Iraq relationship
will remain a key priority for the United States, grounded in our
shared Strategic Framework Agreement and impelled by our shared
imperative to degrade and ultimately defeat the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL). We are committed to helping Iraq counter ISIL by
providing U.S. military advice, assistance, and training, and by
supporting inclusive governance, democratic institutions, advancing
human rights protections, and improving relationships with the
country's Sunni neighbors. Iraq has the potential to become one of the
largest oil suppliers in the world over the next 20 years, endowed with
energy resources that offer the possibility of economic self-
sufficiency. It also has the potential to become an influential
international actor and U.S. ally, if it can overcome the sectarian
violence, political division, and corruption that have characterized
the last decade.
Our immediate focus in Iraq is to degrade and ultimately defeat
ISIL. Mission Iraq priorities for the next three years will be:
enhancing Iraq's ability to secure and defend itself and its borders;
bolstering Government of Iraq (GOI) revenues, improving financial
management, and encouraging effective and equitable service delivery;
providing humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons
(IDPs), refugees, and vulnerable populations; and assisting in post-
conflict stabilization in areas retaken from ISIL.
Mission Iraq will also implement relevant parts of the
Administration's overall regional strategy to help Iraq combat ISIL.
Outreach and diplomatic efforts will support political reform, disrupt
and constrain ISIL's financing, address the humanitarian crisis, and
expose ISIL's true nature. We will continue to facilitate coordinated
security assistance and military sales, as well as provide necessary
support to Iraq to implement a comprehensive strategy to isolate ISIL
from the Iraqi population and develop a longer-term plan for
sustainable security. Our efforts will focus on rebuilding the Iraqi
Security Forces (ISF) to take the fight to ISIL, while integrating
tribal fighters. Mission Iraq will work to advance the eventual
transition of these fighters and other local forces into a National
Guard, as well as continue to provide targeted technical assistance to
strengthen the institutional and organizational capacity of the
Ministry of Defense as it regenerates Iraqi Army units. We will
continue to encourage Iraqi political and security leaders to ensure
that the fight against ISIL is conducted in a manner that protects
civilians, minimizes the impact of the conflict on them, and adheres to
the rule of law. And we will continue to engage Iraq's next generation
through educational and cultural exchange and social media outreach
programs that offer an alternative vision to ISIL's violent extremism.
Our engagement with the GOI will continue to be broad and intense,
covering a wide range of political and economic interests. While the
GOI concentrates its resources and efforts on fighting ISIL, we will
encourage prudent budgetary and fiscal practices that Iraq must employ
to ensure it has the ability to finance the fight against ISIL, as well
as to develop crucial infrastructure and deliver services in sectors
such as oil and gas, electricity, housing, education, agriculture,
public works, and health care. Through targeted technical assistance,
we will work with key Iraqi interlocutors to encourage and support
prudent financing mechanisms and multi-year budgetary planning to
foster Iraq's long-term economic stability.
Humanitarian assistance, in the context of the current crisis,
remains an ongoing priority as the GOI struggles to cope with the
millions of displaced persons residing in Iraq. Continued U.S. and
international support in the form of humanitarian assistance and
stabilization is critical to ensuring that Iraq can alleviate prolonged
as well as emergency displacements. An important component of this
effort is a focus on Iraq's religious and ethnic minority communities,
which have been disproportionately affected by ISIL's violence.
As the ISF, working with the international coalition against ISIL,
begins to push ISIL out of areas over which it exercises control, the
GOI will need to be prepared to fill the potential gap in government
administration and services that will be left in ISIL's wake. While the
GOI's primary focus now must be to concentrate on defending territory
that it holds and reconstituting its capacity to retake lost terrain,
Mission Iraq will begin discussions, as appropriate, with GOI partners
to conceptualize a strategy for quickly reestablishing local
government, relying primarily on the efficient application of GOI
assets to ensure that government institutions and activities are
rapidly established, held accountable, and sustainable.
In the medium to long term, Mission Iraq will continue to encourage
the development of ``functional federalism,'' aimed at decentralizing
administrative and fiscal authority from Baghdad to the provinces;
promoting local governance; and ensuring Shia, Sunni, and Kurdish buy-
in to Iraq's democratic institutions. We will advocate for long-term
resolution of the disagreements between Baghdad and Erbil regarding oil
exports and revenue management and will support Iraq's efforts to pass
comprehensive hydrocarbons legislation.
Also in the medium to long term, Mission Iraq will work with the
GOI to increase oil production capacity. Poor project administration,
procurement capacity, limited political will and inefficient policies
have led to a lack of onshore pumping and limited storage capacity
threaten Iraqi oil production and exports from reaching their full
potential, stifling government revenue growth. Iraq also has a
tremendous opportunity to harness its significant natural gas
resources, which could help the country meet its domestic electricity
needs. In addition to partnering to share best practices on fossil fuel
production and exports, we are engaged with the GOI on capturing gas
for power generation and hydrocarbons revenue management. We will
encourage the GOI to continue the reforms necessary to accede to the
WTO as their implementation would create an environment more welcoming
to foreign investment. These reforms would open a path to Iraq's
economic diversification, allowing the country to eventually become
less dependent on oil revenues as the nearly sole-source of GOI
income.''

[all]
