- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-37] CREATING A FLEXIBLE AND EFFECTIVE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT AND ACQUISITION SYSTEM: ELEMENTS FOR SUCCESS IN A RAPIDLY CHANGING LANDSCAPE

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 115-37]

CREATING A FLEXIBLE AND EFFECTIVE
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
MANAGEMENT AND ACQUISITION
SYSTEM: ELEMENTS FOR SUCCESS IN
A RAPIDLY CHANGING LANDSCAPE

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

HEARING HELD

APRIL 26, 2017

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-823                         WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND CAPABILITIES

ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York, Chairwoman

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania           JAMES R. LANGEVIN, Rhode Island
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               RICK LARSEN, Washington
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana         JIM COOPER, Tennessee
LIZ CHENEY, Wyoming, Vice Chair      JACKIE SPEIER, California
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           MARC A. VEASEY, Texas
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, Florida
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
Kevin Gates, Professional Staff Member
Lindsay Kavanaugh, Professional Staff Member
Neve Schadler, Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Langevin, Hon. James R., a Representative from Rhode Island,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and
Capabilities...................................................     2
Stefanik, Hon. Elise M., a Representative from New York,
Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities..     1

WITNESSES

Greer, Edward, Former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Developmental Test and Evaluation..............................     7
Halvorsen, Hon. Terry, Former Department of Defense Chief
Information Officer and Department of the Navy Chief
Information Officer............................................     5
Levine, Hon. Peter, Former Department of Defense Deputy Chief
Management Officer and Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel
and Readiness..................................................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Greer, Edward................................................    46
Halvorsen, Hon. Terry........................................    36
Levine, Hon. Peter...........................................    27
Stefanik, Hon. Elise M.......................................    25

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Scott....................................................    65

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Franks...................................................    73
Mr. Shuster..................................................    73
Ms. Stefanik.................................................    71

CREATING A FLEXIBLE AND EFFECTIVE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT AND
ACQUISITION SYSTEM: ELEMENTS FOR SUCCESS IN A RAPIDLY CHANGING
LANDSCAPE

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, April 26, 2017.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:03 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Elise M.
Stefanik (chairwoman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ELISE M. STEFANIK, A REPRESENTATIVE
FROM NEW YORK, CHAIRWOMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND
CAPABILITIES

Ms. Stefanik. The subcommittee will come to order. I would
like to welcome everyone to this hearing of the Emerging
Threats and Capabilities Subcommittee of the House Armed
Services Committee on the important topic of information
technology [IT].
Several of us from the committee recently had a discussion
with Eric Schmidt, who is the executive chairman of Alphabet,
as well as the chairman of the Department of Defense [DOD] new
Defense Innovation Board. That discussion was very helpful in
provoking us to think about how the Department could do a
better job incorporating best practices from industry. And
while it is unrealistic to think that DOD will ever operate
exactly like industry, it is nonetheless imperative that we
achieve every ounce of efficiency out of our back office and IT
operations in order to fully invest in combat capability. The
challenge is finding that correct balance, and today's hearing
brings us one step closer.
Information technology represents over $30 billion of the
Department's total budget; however, too often it is treated as
a support tool secondary to platforms, weapons, training, and
the operations of the Department. But anyone who has seen U.S.
forces operate over the past 25 years understands that our
military advantage comes from those network systems providing
the intelligence, precision strike, information fusion and
warning capabilities our warfighters have come to rely on.
This committee has been focused on reforming the operations
of the Department for the past 2 years, from streamlining
acquisition regulations to streamlining an overly cumbersome
bureaucracy. The end goal of these efforts has been to enable
us to buy and develop systems with greater agility and
flexibility so that state-of-the-art tools get into the hands
of our warfighters faster.
I know our witnesses today will help provide us with a
better framework for understanding how to think about defense
management and acquisition practices for information technology
as we explore the critical questions before us, such as: What
are the characteristics of well-performing programs that we
should focus on? What leading indicators should we be
monitoring to determine if programs are going off the rails and
before it is too late? And how can we better identify,
encourage, and reward those program managers that are executing
information technology programs well?
Let me now turn to the ranking member, Jim Langevin of
Rhode Island, for any opening comments he would like to make.
Jim.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Stefanik can be found in the
Appendix on page 25.]

STATEMENT OF HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
RHODE ISLAND, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS
AND CAPABILITIES

Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Chairwoman Stefanik, and thank you
to our witnesses for being here today. I definitely look
forward to hearing what you have to say, given your wealth of
knowledge in this area.
So management and acquisition of information technology at
the Department of Defense is one of the most challenging and
pressing DOD organizational and administrative issues facing us
today. For years, Congress, the executive branch, and industry
have attempted to bring DOD's IT programs and processes into
the 21st century. Despite attempts like the Joint Information
Environment and streamlining acquisition processes, DOD's pace
to improve its IT posture is not progressing with the desired
speed to achieve serious efficiencies, increase security, and
take advantage of enhanced capabilities that are readily
available. For example, the intelligence community has
developed and is using commercial cloud services, yet
widespread use of cloud computing has not yet taken place at
the Department.
All that said, I will be the first to acknowledge that the
Department of Defense IT management, modernization, and cyber
are extraordinarily complex. I will also acknowledge that
Congress, in an attempt to be helpful, has taken action that
has seemingly had the opposite effect.
That is why today's hearing is so important. IT management
and modernization experts who served at the DOD sit before us.
I look forward to their concrete recommendations for improving
DOD's IT posture in an expeditious manner, and I hope they
provide granularity on legislative, regulatory, and cultural
barriers, like risk aversity, that are inhibiting the rapid
change required. And I am certainly glad that they help us
understand what is working as well as highlight the success
that the Department has already had in this arena.
So with that, Madam Chair, I thank you for organizing this
hearing. I thank our witnesses for being here today. And I
yield back.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Jim.
Today, we welcome three distinguished witnesses, all of
whom have served as senior officials within the Department of
Defense, and so they not only understand the government
challenges with information technology management and
acquisition, but also how private sector practices can be
applied or need to be avoided.
First, the Honorable Peter Levine, former Department of
Defense Deputy Chief Management Officer [DCMO] and Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness [P&R]. Next,
the Honorable Terry Halvorsen, former Department of Defense
Chief Information Officer [CIO] and Department of the Navy
Chief Information Officer. And Mr. Ed Greer, former Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Developmental Test and
Evaluation [DT&E].
Welcome to all of our witnesses. I would like to remind you
that your testimony will be included in the record, and we ask
that you summarize key points from that testimony in 5 minutes
or less for your opening statements.
And, Mr. Levine, I will start with you. The floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF HON. PETER LEVINE, FORMER DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEPUTY CHIEF MANAGEMENT OFFICER AND UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
FOR PERSONNEL AND READINESS

Mr. Levine. Thank you. Chairwoman Stefanik, Ranking Member
Langevin, and members of the subcommittee, I thank you for the
opportunity to appear here this afternoon to discuss DOD's
information technology management and acquisition processes.
What I would like to focus on, with your permission, is DOD
business systems acquisition.
For years, DOD has been trying to buy new business systems
the same way that it buys weapon systems and other big ticket
items, and the result has been a series of sometimes
spectacular failures. The fact is that there is no such thing
as a stand-alone business system and no such thing as a stand-
alone business system acquisition. The DOD's business systems
are interconnected not only with each other, but also with the
business processes that they run.
When DOD wants to acquire a new financial management system
or logistic system or HR [human resources] system, it
inevitably finds links to dozens if not hundreds of other IT
systems which either feed it data or rely on it for data. Each
of these systems, no matter how outdated, redundant, or
ineffective they may seem, has a core of devoted users who are
likely to resist change.
DOD tries to ensure that change management and business
process reengineering take place concurrently with new business
systems acquisitions, but it has not been easy. Acquisition
officials don't have the authority or expertise to require
their customers to do business process reengineering when they
buy new systems, and management officials responsible for those
business processes have proven to be incapable of running large
acquisitions.
In the last couple of years, Congress has helped this issue
considerably by streamlining section 2222 of title 10, which
provides the statutory requirements for DOD business systems
acquisitions, and by repealing requirements for major automated
information systems, or MAIS programs, that mimic the
acquisition process for major weapon systems.
When I testified with Terry here last year, I promised that
the Department would take advantage of the new flexibility
granted by Congress to better coordinate the roles of the DCMO,
the CIO, and AT&L [Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics] in
the acquisition of business systems.
Two weeks after that hearing, I left the position of DCMO
to become Acting Under Secretary for P&R, but I am pleased to
say that streamlining effort went on in my absence and that
just a couple of months ago the Department issued a new DOD
instruction addressing business systems acquisitions. This new
instruction appropriately sequences for the first time decision
points regarding business solutions, IT solutions, and
acquisition solutions so that we don't have these redundant
processes going on side by side without referencing each other,
but we have a coordinated process.
This is also the first step toward building an IT-specific
acquisition process as the Defense Science Board [DSB]
recommended almost a decade ago. Consistent with the DSB's
recommendations, the new instruction establishes a unique set
of decision points for business systems acquisitions and
requires prototyping and incremental delivery of capability.
I would have to say, though, that the DSB report, which is
a 2009 report, recommended a unique acquisition system not just
for the acquisition of business systems, but for the
acquisition of all IT. It has been a disappointment for those
who were here with the Congress--I was on the SASC [Senate
Armed Services Committee] staff at the time that that report
came out--that that still hasn't been fully implemented for IT.
Congress felt strongly enough about this that you enacted
provisions on this twice, first in 2010 and then in 2015,
telling the Department: Please go look at this DSB report and
figure out a way to implement the kind of IT-unique acquisition
system that the DSB is recommending, having looked at
commercial practices, and figure out how it would best apply to
the Department. I commend you to look at that report. It is
still the right thing to do. It is still what the Department
needs to do.
So while I think the Department has made good steps in the
direction of change, there is still a long way to go. And one
thing I would add before I wrap up and hand over to Terry is
that the issuance of a new DOD instruction like this one I just
mentioned is the beginning of a process of change, not the end
of a process of change.
One thing that I have seen in the Department is it takes
every bit as much effort to make sure that the instruction, the
legislation, the regulation is really implemented, implemented
in the spirit it was intended, as it does to enact it in the
first place. So it will be up to the new team at DOD when it
arrives to ensure that the new processes are appropriately
implemented in practice, and in particular with regard to
business systems, that the CMO [Chief Management Officer] will
have to remain engaged throughout the acquisition life cycle to
ensure that the Department adopts new and efficient business
solutions rather than tailoring new business systems to old and
inefficient processes.
With that, I thank you again for inviting me here today,
and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Levine can be found in the
Appendix on page 27.]
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Mr. Levine.
Mr. Halvorsen, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. TERRY HALVORSEN, FORMER DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER AND DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY CHIEF
INFORMATION OFFICER

Mr. Halvorsen. Madam Chairman, Ranking Member,
distinguished members, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today before this committee. This is an important topic, and I
would like to echo much of what Peter just said. Obviously, we
did testify together on this topic last year, and I did testify
the last 2 years on this topic.
DOD has made progress. They continue to face critical
global challenges. I do think they will meet those challenges.
But it is faced with an added and unprecedented dimension: This
is arguably the period in history with the fastest developing
and most complex technology.
Unlike previous times, the vast majority of this technology
growth is occurring in the private sector, not originating with
the government. This means in addition to identifying the right
capabilities to meet DOD requirements, DOD must be able to
acquire and integrate this technology with greater agility.
Today's environment demands more broadly defining capability
and not providing detailed requirements that dictate solutions.
At times, the government process today, because of the
current thinking, delivers legacy solutions. We really do need
to think about how we talk about capabilities and not dictating
a series of technical requirements that will be out [of] date
the day we publish them.
DOD needs a better understanding of the commercial
environment to become more effective and efficient working with
industry and determining how solutions should be implemented.
With respect to business systems, DOD really needs to ask
itself: Should it implement whole commercial solutions or some
degree of hybrid solutions retaining some government
capability?
I will echo what Peter said, that this also needs to focus
on the process, and I strongly recommend that the going-in
position for business solutions until proven wrong through
business case analysis is that the government and DOD should be
adopting commercial solutions off the shelf. The real question
really is what businesses should DOD be directly in and where
should it offload those businesses to the commercial sector.
Regarding systems that are more aligned with the primary
mission of DOD, such as national security systems, DOD must
more carefully weigh the mission risk, the mission security
requirements, and since these systems are more likely to be
operated by military and civilian members, DOD must really look
at the workforce implications of training and sustainment.
The new, changing environment also means DOD will be
requiring more services from industry as opposed to just buying
products. To successfully buy services in this exploding
technical environment will require DOD to form better
partnerships with industry and for industry to be more open to
sharing technical data with DOD.
To facilitate the building of these critical partnerships,
I believe this committee and others will need to look at the
laws governing relationships and contact between DOD officials
and industry members and expand those programs. The laws we
have today have been written with great intention, but they are
outdated. Many of them from a financial perspective still use
numbers from the 1970s. They don't make any sense, and they
limit the ability for DOD and other government agencies to
function correctly.
We also need to look at the way we test commercial products
for acceptance and security perspective today, and I elaborate
this in my written testimony. The security accreditation
process is costing both the government and industry lots of
money and doing a disservice to, in the case of DOD, our
service members for how long it takes to get those products
certified.
We insist on testing stuff that has commercially been
accepted and tested in industry. We need some legislation that
says: Why can't I accept that testing as the official testing?
Test can the government operate it correctly, 100 percent, that
testing should be included, but we really need to look at how
we do the testing. That has become one of the long poles in the
tent.
You have to improve efficiency. I will talk a little bit
about the McKinsey report, about the 125 million. DOD
definitely took that report seriously, but some of those
numbers in there were not well thought out in the end. But they
should be continuing to refer to that report. It does give the
right topic areas that DOD should be looking at to gain more
efficiencies in.
As Peter, I am happy with the DOD CIO, and the DCMO
relationship. I think it is strong today, and I think it will
continue to get better. That is important, because it is a
combination of the process and the technology.
In the end, this is a little bit about a cultural solution
more than it is laws and anything else. We need to think
differently. I think we have unintentionally been building for
a long time a culture of distrust and one that was based on
overregulation and a foundational belief that all the players,
industry, government, and academia, all needed to be protected
from itself, and we have done a good job at doing that.
Somewhere we have lost what was good in the systems we had
prior. I was quoted at the DOD as saying that our secret weapon
was our commercial capability and our relationships with
industry. I would amend that to read our secret weapon is our
commercial capability, our relationship with industry, and the
combined efforts of the military, civilian, contractor, and
commercial workforce to make it all work and deliver the
results.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Halvorsen can be found in
the Appendix on page 36.]
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you.
Mr. Greer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF EDWARD GREER, FORMER DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR DEVELOPMENTAL TEST AND EVALUATION

Mr. Greer. Chairwoman Stefanik, Ranking Member Langevin,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to express my views this afternoon.
In 2013, this same subcommittee hosted a roundtable
discussion on IT acquisition reform, and it seems like the same
challenges and the same issues were discussed 3 or 4 years ago.
So we do need to be mindful of what kind of progress we have
made.
Today, I am going to talk about MAIS [major automated
information systems] challenges, best practices, the role of
developmental test and evaluation, and business systems versus
tactical weapon systems.
MAIS challenges. The challenging nature of MAIS acquisition
can be attributed to many factors. I will briefly discuss
three.
Program complexity. Typical MAIS programs have to be
integrated into multiple existing and emerging enterprises that
contain a large number of government and commercial entities.
Another challenge: unstable requirements. In many cases,
the changes are driven by advancements in technology, vendors
updating hardware, operating system upgrades, and so on, or by
changing world events.
And the third challenge: build versus buy. While many IT
companies regret building enterprise software solutions because
it was much more expensive than expected, there are times when
custom software solutions is the right answer. A rational
build-versus-buy decision starts with well-defined requirements
and a quantifiable outcome.
Second, the best practices. There are many best practices
within the commercial sector and within DOD. I would like to
highlight just a few.
Executive leadership participation. Robust and continued
senior-level attention and participation contributed
significantly to the success of agile MAIS acquisition programs
as documented in the DOT&E [Director for Operational Test and
Evaluation] 2016 annual report. When senior leaders are on-
site, they can add resources as necessary and they can also
shorten the decision cycle time.
Another best practice, continuous developmental test and
evaluation. The program office should have a coherent DT&E
strategy to find and fix problems as each software component is
developed and delivered. Deficiencies are much easier to fix
before integrating into modules and components.
And the best practice of evolutionary acquisition, which is
a method intended to reduce cycle time and speed the delivery
of capabilities to users. Often, in an evolutionary model, the
development of increments must occur in parallel to deliver
capability on time.
The third topic, the role of developmental test and
evaluation. Conducting DT&E in an agile environment must be
done early and often. During a major weapon system development
cycle, 80 percent of the test and evaluation is developmental
test and evaluation.
There are DT&E organizations within the services and at OSD
[Office of the Secretary of Defense]. I have worked in both.
They serve a different purpose. The DT&E professionals within
the services are typically funded by the program managers
[PMs], whether it is acquisition programs, MAIS, or whatnot,
and they are potentially subject to biased reporting due to the
pressure from the PMs. I have seen it firsthand. The OSD DT&E
organization is not funded by the program managers. They are
mission funded and therefore independent.
And the last area to talk about is business systems versus
tactical weapons systems. It is important to make a distinction
between cyber and IT/IA [information assurance] policies for
warfighting systems and those pertaining to business systems or
corporate enablers like email, common business systems, and
cloud applications. Technical laboratories and communities
should be held accountable for making recommendations for IT
consolidation and savings, but should control their own destiny
in determining the best solutions. There is not a cookie-cutter
approach.
To ensure there is an appropriate focus on the cyber
systems engineering, it is now time to pair a traditional CIO
function with an RDT&E [research, development, test and
evaluation] warfighting system cyber assessment function, which
is focused on the tactical weapon systems and RDT&E
infrastructure.
That concludes my remarks, and I look forward to answering
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Greer can be found in the
Appendix on page 46.]
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Mr. Greer.
We now turn to members' questions. My question is for all
three participants in the panel today.
Industry best practice calls for the use of leading
indicators as a way to measure the health and performance of a
sector; however, DOD, as you know, tends to focus more on
lagging indicators because they are easier to measure, but they
don't do a very good job of helping decision makers decide if a
program is performing well or not, at least not until it is too
late.
What kinds of leading indicators should we be using to
measure IT programs as well as performance of our acquisition
systems? And what are the obstacles to being able to collect
that sort of information currently?
Mr. Halvorsen. One of the first things we ought to do is
concentrate on money. That is what industry does. We do look at
how is the money being spent, and if you find that you are
starting to have undocumented rising cost, that is generally a
pretty good indicator that something is wrong.
Performance is the next best thing if you look at industry,
they will look at performance. And it is not the performance of
how the acquisition process worked. You ask what are one of the
problems. We grade the acquisition process.
Now, I am going to say everybody in this room has fault in
that. I did, and so does the legislation, because it requires
that I had to report on how I was doing in the process. Most
acquisitions, the day they were finally declared unfit, still
had green in checking the acquisition process. That doesn't
make a lot of sense to me.
So why aren't we looking at performance in the field? I
mean, industry, if I am going to grade it, I grade it: Did it
meet the customer requirements? That ought to be the number
one, and track the money. If we did those two things, we would
absolutely have a much better system today. And then get out of
the rules and laws that require that we have to track and
produce: Is the acquisition process itself being followed? The
acquisition process is part of the problem.
So I really think if we followed--you could take these
templates right off industry guidelines, we are not different
in that respect, and track the actual outcome performance
results, not the process.
Mr. Levine. I think that when we look at the DOD
acquisition system not just for IT but for anything, we need to
recognize that we rely on our contractors for almost all the
data on their performance. So we need to be careful about what
kind of data we prescribe, because if we say we want more data,
then we are adding a contract requirement and a new regulation
to a system where we don't need a whole lot of new regulation.
I would add to what Terry said about tracking dollars,
though. It is important not just to be able to track dollars,
but to be able to link dollars to performance. And certainly
with the acquisition system in general, I have always felt that
earned value management systems are one of the most important
things that we have, because they don't just track how much
money you are spending, but track it against measurable
milestones so you can see whether you are progressing in the
way you thought that you should be progressing.
Now, some of our contractors have earned value management
systems, some of them don't. It depends on whether--you know,
if they are government contractors, if you are a Lockheed or a
Boeing or somebody like that, you will have an earned value
management system. If you are a commercial contractor, you may
not have one that matches government standards. So we may need
to figure out how we can work within data that is otherwise
already provided and collected by commercial industry to
determine these things without imposing new requirements.
Mr. Greer. Industry does a very good job at quantifying
their requirements. They stay rigid with their requirements.
They developed a product based on quantifiable outcomes. They
also make it a priority to make sure their senior leaders are
proactively engaged. They are on-site where the decision time
is much shorter.
Proprietary data is an area that, as Peter mentioned, is a
concern. In some instances, it is difficult to get our hands on
the data, and when we do, it costs us dearly. So that is an
issue.
The last one is a partnership, perhaps, an integrated
product team with industry so we don't have to worry about
lagging indicators. We will be right there working with the
industry developing the leading indicators and monitoring the
leading indicators.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you.
I now yield to Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I want to thank all of the witnesses for your
testimony.
So to carry on on this point, in your opinion, what do you
think is the single most important action both Congress and the
new administration can take to enable a rapid modernization of
IT? I know it is a broad question, but kind of following on
with our discussion. Please give us your insights.
And then the other one, I will say, in your opinion, what
cultural barriers, such as risk aversity or service
preferences, exist within the Department and what
recommendations do you have to overcome them?
Mr. Halvorsen. So the first thing I would say is we need to
push the authority to acquire down, and we can do that in small
numbers. So, I mean, here is an interesting thing. In my
previous job, I was the CIO. I had a $37 billion budget.
Approved that. It is the only place in the DOD where as a
single entity, I as CIO, I had to approve that budget, write
that budget, yet I couldn't authorize directly a million
dollars if I saw great technology to put right on the table.
That doesn't seem to make a lot of sense to me. I think that is
the first thing I would do.
Smaller numbers, control. Give it a limit of maybe $10
million total that the CIO could say, ``Yes, that is great
technology, I want it,'' and waive some of the requirements
that an institution as big as DOD has to review every piece of
that against some competition criteria. That does not make
sense.
Part of the time, if I can see best practices in industry,
and that is where industry is going, I ought to be able to say
as the CIO, ``Industry CIOs do that, they say this is where
industry is going, I am making the decision,'' and we go. We
could do that, try that, small amounts of money. I think that
would really drive some rapid acquisition quickly.
The second thing, your question about what else do we need
to do, I would really recommend that this committee establish a
group, and I think in 90 days they could get some very good
results. But stack it with both industry and military business
systems owners, not just the technical guys, because in the
end, back to our original question, I never had my customers,
DOD, soldiers, sailors, marines, and civilians are not real
shallow, and they are not real--they will tell you what the
problems are really quickly in language you will get to
understand quickly if you go ask them. We don't ask them
enough.
And so I think that is the other problem. Let's go out and
ask the customers. Bring some customers on this panel, bring
some industry experts, bring some leadership, 90 days I think
you could get a really good result on here are some of the
specific things you could do to really get at the cultural
issue, because this is cultural.
Even when it is fixed and even when we have the authority,
the whole system, which includes the DOD, the way we inspect
and review, and, frankly, includes the way GAO [Government
Accountability Office] inspects and reviews, we are using the
mindset that was 20 years old.
We have got to change that. That will take time. But I
think this committee, because it has done it in the past, could
establish that a committee take a review and put some things in
legislation and then follow up on it with your personal
attention, and that would get some good results.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Mr. Levine.
Mr. Levine. I agree with Terry, that I think that the real
focus ought to be on planning and prioritization so that you
are spending the money in the right place. We tend to focus in
a hearing like this on what is wrong with DOD's policies and
practices and how can we make things better through that and we
can make things better.
But if you are really looking for how are you going to
improve the IT environment at the Department of Defense,
whether it is in business systems or weapon systems, the issue
is, we have a lot of low-hanging fruit out there, things that
need to be improved. We don't necessarily spend our money in
the right places for the right priorities, and that
prioritization, I think, is the number one task that we have.
Mr. Greer. In response to your first question, contracting
is, in my mind, a major impediment, whether it is acquisition
weapon systems or IT systems or whatnot. If you look at the
entire food chain from A to Z in terms of delivering an IT
agile system, it starts with the statement of work, then it
goes into a do-loop in the contracting arena because of
policies. It is not the executors, it is the policymakers,
whether it is an OSD or the echelon command within the services
on more pointed here at Congress, legislation that has been
burdened on the contracting community. Conducting a zero-based
review of all of the contracting policies certainly might be
one approach.
I mentioned earlier about the CIO. My personal view is--and
I am an engineer, I have the technical background more so than
the IT side of the house--but certainly the CIO has such a
broad responsibility. That is another long lead time approval
cycle. It has been from my experience.
In terms of cultural barriers, a lot of the government
organizations do have in-house software development teams. And
sometimes they make less than informed decisions regarding
whether or not they should develop in-house software solutions
or go out to the commercial sector. And I believe that is a
cultural issue that ought to be addressed.
Thank you.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
I yield back. I will have additional questions if we go a
second round.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Gentlemen, thank you for your service.
And, Mr. Greer, you mentioned the proprietary data and how
much--you said it costs us dearly, I believe is the term that
you used. And regardless of what weapon system it is or IT
system it is, I mean, we have seen examples in the past where
we as the government, we paid for the research, we paid for the
development, and then in an error in the contracting, even
though we paid for all of it, some private company ends up
owning that data.
I assume that we are not making that mistake anymore? Is
that something that we have corrected in the contracting?
Mr. Levine. Congressman, I would be happy to respond to
that.
Congress did change the rules on that several years ago,
about 3 or 4 years ago. I was with the Senate Armed Services
Committee then. But you changed the rules. In particular, there
was a rule that said the way that rights and technical data
work, if it is 100 percent developed through private
expenditure, the private company owns it; if 100 percent
developed at government expenditure, the government owns it;
and if it is mixed expenditure, we get just government purpose
rights.
But those rules also said you have to identify in the
contract up front which data you are going to have ownership of
as the government. So even if it was developed exclusively at
government expense, if we failed to identify it up front, we
didn't own it, and the contractor would come back and tell us,
``Well, we own it now because you didn't say in the contract,
so you are going to have to pay through the nose to use what
you paid for in the future.''
We changed the law so that it said, given that we were
supposed to own it in the first place, if we failed to identify
it in the contract, then the amount that we will owe you to
provide us that data is the amount that it takes to produce the
data. We are not going to have to pay you monopoly rights to
buy it from you again. So we did make that change--or you did
make that change--in the Congress a couple of years ago
Mr. Scott. Okay. I just know that as somebody who
represents a depot, this is a problem for us in supply chain
management in some of the older systems out there where we paid
for the development of a product and we are having to then pay
for the schematic to manufacture the part because they don't
have it anymore.
Mr. Levine. It has been a huge problem. It should be better
going forward, but of course that doesn't get us all the
technical data from contracts in the past that we wrote under
this old system.
Mr. Scott. Absolutely.
Mr. Greer. And I might add for just a couple of seconds
here, even if it is just one piece of small source code within
a weapon system, that will hold us hostage, and that is what is
happening today. So you can have all of the lawyers get
together and come up with compromises, generate legislation,
but at the end of the day, the major prime contractors are
still holding the government hostage.
Mr. Levine. The change that we made a few years ago, the
change that Congress made a few years ago also attempted to
address that by saying that you have to segregate the smallest
piece of technical data that you actually spent your money on
and isolate that and tell us how we can work around it so that
you can't tell us that we have to pay for all of the technical
data or rely on you for all the technical data. So there is an
attempt to address that as well.
There is also currently, I believe, Congress----
Mr. Scott. Is that attempt effective, or do we need
different language to make it more effective?
Mr. Levine. I believe it is effective, but it needs to be
implemented and practiced over a period of time to see where
the problems are. Congress has established a technical data
panel to look at these issues. And I suspect that, with all due
regard to my friends in the contractor community, they are
going to try to reverse some of these changes. So I would urge
you to be very alert to the recommendations of that panel and
make sure that there isn't backsliding on those issues that you
are concerned about.
Mr. Scott. If you would provide additional information to
us on that, I would be very appreciative of it.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 65.]
Mr. Scott. Gentlemen, it took the Army 10 years to decide
on which new pistol they were going to use. I don't know if it
was because of the law, the bureaucracy. But the iPhone came
about about 10 years ago, the original iPhone. Flip phones were
still popular back then. With technology there is certainly a
timeline that we cannot operate in. Is it the law or is it the
bureaucracy that needs to be changed?
Mr. Halvorsen. Yes. Some of the laws still need to be
restructured on that. There are some things that still treat
off-the-shelf technology like a weapon system. We have got to
stop doing it. We really do need to say off-the-shelf
technology, commoditized technology, does not need to be
treated like a weapon system, but then we have got to get
through the bureaucracy.
Mr. Scott. Do you have any specific language that you could
suggest, provide for our committee?
Mr. Halvorsen. I will shoot you--yes, sir, I will do that.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 65.]
Mr. Scott. I would appreciate that.
Madam Chair, I am down to about 20 seconds. I will yield
the remainder of the time.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you.
Ms. Gabbard.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you. Thank you, gentlemen.
I wonder if you can comment on what impact, if any, you
think that Buy America provisions have on obtaining the best
possible technology.
Mr. Levine. It has always been a concern in the acquisition
community that if you have Buy American provisions that become
too restrictive, it will limit our ability to get the best
weapon systems for our warfighters.
The acquisition community always has a bias toward getting
the best possible for the best possible price. As long as the
Buy American provisions are in the area where they are now, the
acquisition community has been able to work around them; but
there is concern if you ramp it up too much, it might impede
their ability to do what they need to do.
Mr. Halvorsen. I will echo what Peter said. There are some
cases where, unfortunately, you can't Buy American in much of
the technical side.
I think the other thing we want to talk about here is that
part of the Buy American also addresses some security concerns.
What we really ought to be looking at, and this is maybe a bad
way to say it is, where don't we want to buy? Very candidly, I
don't want to buy stuff, I didn't want to in my last job, that
was manufactured in certain nation-states. I think that needs
to be more of the focus here.
And what I would say, the words here, we might in the
technology area want to change that to Buy American and allied.
The other problem we have in the technology communications
business is we don't go to war alone, the DOD does not, and we
need to be able to communicate effectively with allies. So that
is something we have really got to make sure that agency by
agency we don't put out Buy American rules that would preclude
us from then communicating very well.
I also think there is great benefit if we focus this around
Buy American and allied and how we could do some better
arrangements for everybody in terms of cost, delivery times,
and production.
Mr. Greer. Outsourcing integrated circuitry is a concern
that I have had for quite a while from a cybersecurity and
trusted systems point of view. We are second to none when it
comes to manufacturing integrated circuitry and mass producing
or producing small quantities. But the outsourcing of the large
quantities is something that we all have to be concerned about
only from malware perspective and other reasons.
Mr. Levine. I would echo what Terry said, though, that
there is a difference between worrying about your supply chain
vulnerability, where you are worried about countries of
concern, and what you do with Buy American, which is to say
that all countries are off the table.
Ms. Gabbard. Right. With regard to, you know, you
mentioning Buy American and allied, what are some of the
approaches that our allies are taking with regard to some of
these challenges with workforce and improving their own speed
of acquisition? Are there lessons we can learn?
Mr. Halvorsen. There are. So an example, like the U.K.
[United Kingdom] and Australia, their CIOs are permitted up to
I think it is 10 million pounds to look at existing technology
and say: Hey, this would fit. Let's buy a small amount of it.
Let's test it. Let's put a performance objective around it and
track the cost performance to Peter's.
They have to have those, but they can make the commitments
right on spot to do that. That makes them a lot more attractive
to new technology, because if you are a startup new technology,
you are on a 6-month funding cycle. If you don't get that 6
months, you are walking away. You have to. So that is something
we could do.
They also have changed their workforce construction. My
counterpart in the CIO at the U.K. until just recently--he
retired March 31--was what was they called a crown contractor.
To get around the pay gap issues, they were able to negotiate
not quite a civilian salary, but better than the government
salary, and they were able to hire him, give him full civilian
authority to make the decisions. But he came out of both
industry and the military, he had been a retired two-star, he
did 5 years with British Telecom. I think that is kind of what
we want to be able to bring into the government, people who
have both government and industry experience. You need both to
succeed at the top level.
The Canadians are doing the same thing. And the way they
are doing their supply chain also, those nations which are in
Five Eye,
and there is only one nation that doesn't
have this authority, and it is probably the leading nation in
the Five Eye community, which would be us, they are allowed to
look at a computer, say, check a supply chain.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

``Five Eyes'' (or FVEY), refers to an intelligence
alliance involving Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom,
and the United States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
So there are some U.S. companies that I wouldn't want to
buy from because when you look at their components, they are
all from countries I don't want. That is the most important
thing. So they are allowed to say: Hey, if that is a U.K.
company, but all of their parts are sourced out of a place we
don't like, well, then we are going to go buy an allied
company. We ought to have that kind of flexibility restriction
to make those decisions when it is in the best interest of
defense.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you.
Mr. Levine. One thing that the last administration did, if
we want to look to a domestic example rather than overseas, is
to have teams of IT experts who came in from Silicon Valley to
help DOD and other agencies look at specific problems and
identify solutions. So they would identify commercial
solutions. Sometimes they would write software themselves to
address it.
I believe that the new administration is considering
similar kinds of steps. But that gets you ahead of a cycle. You
know, you don't have to take 5 years----
Ms. Stefanik. We are running out of time, Mr. Levine.
Mr. Levine. Thank you.
Ms. Stefanik. Dr. Abraham.
Dr. Abraham. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Gentlemen, thank you for your direct testimony. It is
appreciated. There was some great solutions or possible
solutions mentioned in you-all's testimony. And as we know,
industry has to make a profit. They have a board of directors
that they report to. And, unfortunately, in the DOD or any
bureaucracy, that word is not even in their dictionary. And,
you know, that is a problem.
Again, it all comes down to accountability. And when you
have a budget, Mr. Halvorsen, of $37 billion or whatever and
you can't write a check for something that you see, it is just
idiotcracy at its finest.
So it is a national security issue. And I understand we
have to maintain qualitative and quantitative advantage over
our enemies. But for these programs that we could just
literally pick off the shelf and save literally hundreds of
millions of dollars, it just--it bodes poorly for us in the
government for us to allow this to happen.
Are there any examples, can you give me some examples of
some successful industry partnerships?
Mr. Halvorsen. Well, you know, I hesitate, because some of
those I was directly involved in. But I will tell you, the
Microsoft partnership with DOD, the ability that Microsoft let
us, looking at the license agreement, let me at that point make
the decision that the entire Department could go to Windows 10,
get to a single operating system, without having to renegotiate
the current contract, that was a partnership with Microsoft.
That what they saw down the road, and I think this is going
to happen if the government goes to Windows 10, to one of the
Representative's comments earlier, it will actually facilitate
then the follow-on move, which I know is being planned, into
the 365 and public cloud domain.
So Microsoft saw that as investment. It was a good, open
dialogue. That was very good.
Again, I hate to say it, I will go on the record, I am now
working for Samsung, but one of the things that happened early,
we put out a capability statement that said we needed a secure
smartphone. That is all we put out. Samsung came in. We worked
with them. We actually co-developed what today they feel is
their KNOX security system. It kept everybody's prices low. We
were able to field that at the secret and now top secret level
in less than 24 months. The products, which are rare in my
history, were delivered on time and at cost. And in the end,
they actually cost less than we thought they would.
Dr. Abraham. That leads somewhat to the second question I
have. Mr. Scott referenced the iPhone 10 years or less. And,
again, these products are being developed by a different
generation of entrepreneurs, engineers, IT people. What are we
doing to attract some millennials into the fold?
Mr. Halvorsen. Not enough. We are going to have to address
a couple things on that. One of them is the pay gap. I will
tell you, I lost my director of security. You know, he went and
he quadrupled his salary after spending, you know, 32 years
serving the government. Good.
That is one thing we are going to have to address. But we
are also going to have to address some of the other things that
the millennials want, which is they want their technology.
One of the things that when I went in my old job and now in
my new job, I talk to millennials, ``Why don't you look at
DOD?'' ``Well, because they will take my phones away. I won't
be able to do the things I want.''
Now, that is not true as much anymore. We are using
multifactor phones, those type of things. But there is the
perception that the government lags greatly in the ability to
be flexible in the workplace.
We have got to get that message out. The rules are there. I
mean, the laws are there. I mean, I could let my people
telework. I could do those things. It just wasn't the way we
thought. That is a cultural issue. The laws are there to make
that happen.
That is something that maybe this committee and other
committees ought to be asking some questions about what are we
doing on the millennials, what are we doing to be more flexible
in the workplace? There are some good answers to that, but that
needs to be the holistic plan, not just individual efforts.
Dr. Abraham. A minute left. Mr. Levine.
Mr. Levine. If I could just add one thing to that. We don't
take advantage enough of the things that we do have to offer. I
think that the most attractive thing for the Department of
Defense for people who work there is the mission and the
feeling of commitment to the mission and that they can make a
difference. And I think that we don't take enough advantage of
that. We don't sell that well enough. When we treat civil
servants as bureaucrats who are just too much, there are too
many of them, we need to get them out of the way, we need to
fire them and cut their pay, it doesn't create the image that
people want to see of themselves. And we need to do a better
job of selling the mission to get the kind of people we want.
Dr. Abraham. Very good.
Mr. Greer.
Mr. Greer. And just one or two points here. In the IT
community, I believe that we have to raise the level of our
professional series. We have a lot of nonprofessional IT
specialists, and they serve a very good purpose, but where we
are today, what the cyber vulnerabilities and resiliency
challenges, I think making sure that we hire enough
professional series in the IT community is important. And it is
not necessarily the pay that is attracting, like Peter said, it
is the quality of work for these millennials.
Dr. Abraham. Thank you, gentlemen.
I yield back.
Ms. Stefanik. Mr. Larsen.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Greer, can I talk a little bit about your build-versus-
buy conundrum in your testimony, in your written testimony? I
am sorry for being late, you may have addressed this. But I
wanted to ask you in your experience on this build-versus-buy
tension generally are there some criteria that we should be
thinking about where there is a leverage point within the DOD
where they ought to build versus they ought to buy in general?
Mr. Greer. That is a difficult question to answer in a
short period of time, mainly because there is a hybrid
solution. There are a lot of commercial software packages like
SAP that we do purchase, but we use government people to
program it and code the SAP system. And so that is always an
issue.
Mr. Larsen. Sorry. Mr. Halvorsen looks like he is excited
to answer too. But go ahead.
Mr. Greer. Well, I am just expressing my views.
Mr. Larsen. That is great.
Mr. Greer. Okay. And this is why----
Mr. Larsen. So then continue.
Mr. Greer. But in terms of having firm requirements and
quantifiable outcomes and making that make-buy decision, it
gets difficult within the government, mainly because of
cultural issues. There are a lot of software programmers in the
government, and they inherently lean in the in-house solution
side.
Mr. Larsen. So let me ask you this then. Are there specific
build-versus-buy decisions on cloud computing? Is that treated
differently than, say, operational software like on the
Microsoft decision?
Mr. Halvorsen. It should be, but it is generally not the
culture. But I want to be very clear on this: If you could buy
it, buy it. I did not find that to be as difficult for anything
that wasn't a weapon systems as [inaudible]. If you can buy it,
we should buy that, and we should put--and we really did try to
do this.
I mean, one of the plaques over at my desk was
``customization bad.'' You should fight every attempt we take
to customize that software off the shelf, because every time we
do it, it is a lifelong contract for contractors without much
gain. Our business processing systems, back to Peter's point,
don't differ that much from the best in industry. They
shouldn't, if they do.
So one of the first criteria is, if it is a business
system, you should have to come in with a different business
case that says why I am not buying that solution, why am I
building any specific software.
It is getting that way for many communication systems,
because we are using off-the-shelf communication. If it is off
the shelf, really consider why you need to put something extra.
And in the communications it might be for cybersecurity, but I
have found if I go to industry, when I did that, if I told them
I wanted that extra, most of the time they were happy to put it
in, and most of the time they carried that in their commercial
product because it was going to sell more as security becomes
more important.
Mr. Levine. The track record of the Department is, if we
are buying a commercial-type business system, if we start
tailoring it, we end up spending more money on the tailoring
than we spent on the system in the first place. It just doesn't
make sense to do anything unique unless you absolutely have to.
Mr. Larsen. I am sure if we went back to the first hearing
that I attended on this issue when I was first elected in 2001
a lot of the answers would be the same.
On the build versus buy then does that principle, can that
principle apply to the people? For instance, in Washington
State, we have the example of the National Guard working with
private sector and public sector folks on cybersecurity and
doing red teaming and doing some mapping out of how to approach
defense. And some of these folks are reservists and they are
trying to attract folks in for 2 weeks a year, two weekends a
month, in a sense buying people as opposed to building them
internally. Does that model work in terms of the IT personnel
acquisition side, if you are acquiring people?
Mr. Halvorsen. It certainly needs to be part of your plan.
It can't fill all the balance. And there are some security
issues that you might not want to put everybody that way. But
absolutely we need to be taking advantage of that.
If you look at our last sets of operations, you look at the
Reserves we put on board, many of them were with those
technical skill sets. As the CIO when I was there, I would
reach out and bring Reserves on who were working for Google,
working for whatever big company. And it is actually part of
the deal, I will give DOD great credit, they actually have that
in their plan.
Continuing that into other areas I think makes sense with
caution. It is not as easy to do that with people as it is with
software, but it is something that we certainly ought to be
looking at.
Mr. Greer. Contractor support is an area that we need to
leverage even more. There is always a need for inherently
governmental personnel to be able to represent the government.
But I think we can leverage more on the contractor support
side, especially as your workload goes up and down. You are
able to make adjustments much more quicker.
Mr. Larsen. Yeah. Thank you.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you very much to each of our three
panelists, Mr. Levine, Mr. Halvorsen, and Mr. Greer. And thank
you to the members for their thoughtful questions. This is a
critical issue that falls under this subcommittee's
jurisdiction that we will continue to focus on as we prepare
and draft this year's NDAA [National Defense Authorization
Act], and we look forward to continuing to engage with you to
get your suggestions.
Thank you very much. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:57 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 26, 2017

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 26, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

April 26, 2017

=======================================================================

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT

Mr. Levine. The statutory provision to which I referred in my
testimony is section 815 of the National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2012. As I indicated, this provision:

Ensures that DOD may require the delivery of data
generated in the performance of a contract that is necessary for the
purpose of reprocurement, sustainment, modification or upgrade, even if
such delivery was not required by the original contract. In exchange
for the delivery of the data (which was generated at government
expense) the government is required to compensate the contractor only
for reasonable costs incurred to covert and deliver the data in the
appropriate form.

Requires the contractor to provide technical data ``is
necessary for the segregation of an item or process from, or the
reintegration of that item'' with the rest of the system. In other
words, if a contractor wants to withhold data on a widget that was
developed at contractor expense, it has to tell DOD how to work around
the widget, so that the rest of the technical data, which DOD owns,
won't be useless. Since I am no longer with the Department, I am unable
to give a report on the extent to which this provision has been
successfully implemented. However, section 813(b) of the National
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 establishes a
Government-Industry Advisory Panel to review statutory requirements
regarding technical data rights. Some may seek to use this panel to
unwind the 2012 reforms.   [See page 13.]
Mr. Halvorsen. Language that stresses DOD should use commercial
business case analysis to include review of DOD business process when
procuring what is clearly a commercial solution to include hardware,
software and IT service contracts. Something like the following:
``DOD will apply commercial best practices when conducting business
process and detailed market analysis when procuring readily available
IT hardware software and services in support of or in replacing
business systems. If DOD can demonstrate through business intelligence
and analysis a clear product/service leader(s) in a specific area DOD
can pursue sole source or limited partnership procurements. These facts
can include the ability to support a large enterprise like DOD, similar
to how other large commercial companies develop procurement
partnerships.
An example of this would be using the MICROSOFT based Services
Cloud supported by MICROSOFT 365 and Azure. This is the leading cloud
solution for the fortune 500 and clearly dominates the market and would
be considered a best of breed solution. If DOD can make this case it
should be allowed to by-pass current acquisition rules and go direct to
procuring a best of breed solution, negotiating and spending time on
obtaining the best value (pricing and performance) instead of defending
and deliberating on multiple of solutions. This doesn't mean the
MICRSOFT would be the guaranteed provider, it does mean that MICROSOFT
products/services would be the used to form the service cloud
architecture and operating system.
I want to make it clear I am not a MICROSOFT employee and receive
no compensation from MICROSOFT for these recommendations. My current
employer Samsung receives no direct benefit as a result of these
recommendations. These recommendations are aligned with statements and
testimony I made as the DOD CIO. I use MICROSOFT as it is the most
compelling example and in my opinion moving to the cloud is a necessary
and critical step to improving DOD security, greatly improving
productivity and saving dollars.
With respect to all of the responses I have provided to the
Questions for the record, they represent my personal opinions and
beliefs and are in my own words. I am currently an employee of Samsung
Electronics of America. The responses I have provided have not been
endorsed, constrained of approved by Samsung Electronics of America or
any other entity.   [See page 13.]
Mr. Greer. There are a few acquisition programs that have had
difficulty obtaining data/software/interface rights by prime
contractors. Despite language that stipulates the Government has
purpose rights if Government funds are spent to develop a deliverable,
industry still presses back when the Government attempts to exert its
rights. Industry is interpreting that if a deliverable contains their
proprietary information or reveals the workings of what they claim as
their intellectual property (IP), they may limit access to it.
Additionally, for software intensive deliverables, industry has started
`bundling' IP with the deliverable to the government, and claiming the
government has less than purpose rights to the overall product. This is
leading to complex licensing issues for deliverables the Government
should have purpose rights to. This has happened on F-35 as well as
many other programs. Language should be clarified to state the
Government has no less than purpose rights to the code segments (source
and executable) and interfaces used in an overarching deliverable
funded in any part by the Government.
From an acquisition oversight perspective, with the KC-46A program,
Boeing made it clear during contract negotiations that they would not
use Boeing 767 reliability data to meet the government requirement.
That sounded like the right approach at the time given the KC-46A
differences in configuration, but in practice it meant that Boeing will
not share any reliability test data from their Boeing 767-2C (the
provisioned freighter) either from Boeing DT&E or FAA Amended Type
Certificate (ATC) certification testing. Although we do get some
anecdotal failure data from these flights in which the government
participates, it is purely word of mouth from those attending the
briefings or flying the tests. We do have reliability data from
flights, which are used to meet contract specifications. The net result
is that we have very incomplete reliability data. The DASD (DT&E)'s
official MS C assessment concluded, ``As a result, the Lead
Developmental Test Organization (LDTO) used data only from flights in
which the Air Force participated to estimate the system's progress
against the reliability growth curve, which presents an incomplete
picture of the system's reliability.''
Also, the tension over Boeing 767 proprietary data makes it
difficult and time-consuming to obtain test data that the government
feels is necessary to evaluate the system under test when that data
comes from Boeing DT&E or ATC testing. When it was in Boeing's interest
to share more quickly and ``freely'' during the boom issues prior to MS
C, the data flowed more freely. Most of the time, it can take weeks or
longer to get the data the government believes that it needs.
To the best of my knowledge, Boeing has provided (or will provide)
the data required for gov't spec verification, though it has been a
painful process that runs through Boeing Commercial Aircraft (BCA)
because they technically own the aircraft during EMD. As best as I can
tell, we will never get the B-757-2C reliability data from Boeing
internal and ATC testing. I sat in on a meeting between BCA, Boeing
Defense, and the program office and can relate that BCA was surprised
that we wanted the requested data. In the commercial world, BCA simply
delivers aircraft that meet the customers' specifications. The
commercial customers don't care how the aircraft was built and tested.
Maybe part of this equation involves the gov't rethinking what data we
really need, which drives back to the acquisition process and how the
gov't buys stuff.
The Department of Defense has tremendous capabilities to modify
legacy weapon systems if full data rights were available. Government
personnel could perform the Non Recurring Engineering development for
small to medium upgrades in-house saving millions of taxpayer's
dollars. For example, The NAVAIRSYSCOM's Naval Air Warfare Center,
Aircraft Center has an Aircraft Prototyping Facility for modifying DOD
weapon systems. The DOD should be taking advantage of facilities like
this as opposed to sole sourcing modifications to the prime
contractors. The Army has similar modification facilities.
The lack of government access to design data related to items
(platforms, systems, components, hardware, software, etc.) already
purchased by the government has been and continues to be a major cost
driver for any subsequent upgrade done to these items during their
service lifetime. Although IT systems are certainly a critical element
of this problem, the problem is pervasive. Asserted data rights
involving organic government prototype development programs costs time
and money at a minimum and, in the extreme, can simply stop an effort.
This problem is further compounded on a broad scale by government
laboratories and field activities that are reticent to reverse-engineer
the data out of the government-owned items due to ultra-conservative
legal advice predicting litigation as well as fear of Congressional
inquiries. This is in stark contrast to the private sector where
backing data out of owned items through reverse engineering is
commonplace, protected by legal precedent and an essential element of
one company modifying or upgrading another's product. Reverse
engineering is not always practical but it is often an effective work-
around particularly in situations where the prime contractor no longer
produces the item.
The complexity in system acquisitions and understanding
intellectual property rights in Modeling & Simulation (M&S)
acquisitions, requires a clear understanding from Program Managers,
System Engineers, and Procuring Contracting Officers to M&S Integrated
Product Teams of the Government's license rights in intellectual
property comprised of technical data (e.g. technical packages and other
information relating to the developed product's design, configuration,
or to operation, maintenance, installation, or training data) and
computer software (e.g. executable code, source code, code listings,
algorithms, formulae, design details). The lack of clear understanding
among various Program Offices highlights the need for specific
guidelines for contracting for open M&S systems and the data rights
required. Open System Architecture is a key pillar of the Department of
Defense's Better Buying Power (BBP) initiative to implement best
practices to strengthen the Defense Department's buying power, improve
industry productivity, and provide an affordable, value-added military
capability to the Warfighter.   [See page 13.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

April 26, 2017

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. STEFANIK

Ms. Stefanik. In addition to investments in IT to improve its use
of data to inform decision-making, DOD also needs to address the
cultural barriers that hinder effective information sharing throughout
the Department. For example, RAND found in 2015 that ``institutional
structure and bureaucratic incentives to restrict data access are
exacerbated by policy and guidance to protect information. The result
is a strong conservative bias in labeling and a reluctance to share.''
In your opinion, what are the initial steps that the Department needs
to take to address these cultural barriers, and who should be
responsible for leading this effort?
Mr. Levine. There are both good and bad reasons for restricting
data. Some restrictions on access to data are appropriate to safeguard
classified and sensitive unclassified data from unauthorized
disclosure. Widespread dissemination of such data to those without a
need to know, even within the Department, could lead to compromise.
Other restrictions appear to be imposed for more parochial reasons:
program managers, PEOs, and component acquisition executives may seek
to retain control over their programs by controlling the flow of data
to Comptrollers, to CAPE, and even to others in their chain of command.
Before I left the Department, DOD was seeking to address this issue
through a coordinated ``big data'' project. The objective of the
project was to identify data elements are needed by users at all levels
of the acquisition system, as well as by outside stakeholders in the
Department, and standardize that data to increase transparency. If
successful, this project should help address the problem identified by
the RAND review.
Ms. Stefanik. In addition to investments in IT to improve its use
of data to inform decision-making, DOD also needs to address the
cultural barriers that hinder effective information sharing throughout
the Department. For example, RAND found in 2015 that ``institutional
structure and bureaucratic incentives to restrict data access are
exacerbated by policy and guidance to protect information. The result
is a strong conservative bias in labeling and a reluctance to share.''
In your opinion, what are the initial steps that the Department needs
to take to address these cultural barriers, and who should be
responsible for leading this effort?
Mr. Halvorsen. Representative, when I was the DOD CIO and I believe
it is still true, that DOD is making good strides in this area and this
is currently being led by the Deputy Chief Management Officer and fully
supported by the SD and DSD. I would encourage Congress and DOD to work
with industry to look at the current laws and rules that restrict
government employee direct interaction with industry and restrict the
sharing of information with industry. Industry should also be
challenged to share data more openly with DOD and the government in
general. One specific recommendation I would make is for DOD supported
by legislation to include industry more directly in developing policy/
instructions with respect to business systems. While DOD CIO I
explicitly involved industry in developing the cloud policy and
security guidelines. This was challenged by many groups inside and out
of DOD but the resultant document was well received and is allowing in
this area much better communications between industry and government.
Ms. Stefanik. What is the DOD role as it relates to developmental
test and evaluation for IT systems that are predominantly commercially
based and where DOD is integrating, but not actually developing new
capability? Is there a particular balance in developmental testing
between what DOD is responsible for and what industry should be
responsible for that can reduce duplication in effort, cost and
schedule performance?
Mr. Greer. Yes, there is a balance between what testing DOD is
responsible for and what performance certifications can be provided by
industry and accepted by the test community. DOD tests are conducted in
mission relevant environments to ensure overall capability is effective
and suitable and to assess resilience to CYBER threats. Component level
testing of individual COTS hardware components may often be conducted
at the supplier level and accepted by the Government.
DOD is in the process of acquiring multiple defense business
systems (DBS) based upon commercial enterprise resource planning (ERP)
systems. The first priority is to conduct business process re-
engineering to try to change DOD processes to fit the commercially
offered systems and minimize customization of the ERP. In most cases,
the unique nature of the DOD identifies gaps between the DOD process
and the ERP capabilities. In this case development of special report,
interface, conversion, extension, form, and workflow (RICE-FW) software
objects are required.
In these cases, developmental testing of the DBS focuses on the
RICE-FW and integration into the DOD facilities and networks rather
than the basic capabilities that are proven by use in industry.
Mission-oriented developmental testing using actual users performing
mission tasks in a test environment allows integrated testing with the
operational testers, early identification of human factors integration
problems, and identification of software defects in the RICE-FW objects
with sufficient time for correction prior to operational testing.
Additionally, DOD's roles in developmental test and evaluation of
IT systems integration are in the realm of cybersecurity. DOD must
ensure that the new IT system does not introduce a vulnerability to the
DOD network and that the combined cyber defenses are integrated. Just
because a commercially based IT capability meets industry, it does not
mean that it is secure. The IT capability may meet standards of
performance (certification) but it must be tested for effectiveness
(penetration).
DOD should be responsible for cybersecurity testing and the vendor
must correct those deficiencies. This should be in a developmental test
environment that allows time for the vendor to make corrections. After
corrections are made, the IT capability is ready for operational
cybersecurity testing. Cybersecurity is an area where the test-fix-test
methodology is still relevant.
Ms. Stefanik. In addition to investments in IT to improve its use
of data to inform decision-making, DOD also needs to address the
cultural barriers that hinder effective information sharing throughout
the Department. For example, RAND found in 2015 that ``institutional
structure and bureaucratic incentives to restrict data access are
exacerbated by policy and guidance to protect information. The result
is a strong conservative bias in labeling and a reluctance to share.''
In your opinion, what are the initial steps that the Department needs
to take to address these cultural barriers, and who should be
responsible for leading this effort?
Mr. Greer. Cultural barriers are often difficult to overcome. A
good method of breaking down barriers is to encourage more transparency
with regard to ongoing developmental efforts. Sharing visibility into
IT related projects, investments, and infrastructure may help increase
re-use of development that would otherwise be unknown across
organizational boundaries, reducing duplication of effort. Establishing
a community of interest (COI) for IT related investments may be
beneficial in fostering this kind of exchange of ideas and information.
This is a leadership challenge, as is all cultural change. At a
minimum, the Director, Developmental Test and Evaluation should get
back statutory authority for oversight of ACAT ID and MAIS programs and
to ensure access to all data in DOD and have direct access to the
Defense Acquisition Executive with regard to his independent
assessments of system performance and issues regarding his ability to
make those assessments in time to effectively inform decisions.
I believe that an organization such as the Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Developmental Test and Evaluation (DASD
(DT&E)) helps break down these barriers, where they exist. For example,
the staff specialists in the DASD (DT&E) engage in multiple programs
across all the Services. Similarities exist in some programs and the
staff specialists, by their close association with the program office
testers, identify lessons learned and share this information among
other staff specialists and other programs. Where appropriate, the
staff specialists have encouraged and facilitated direct contact
between programs to delve into the details of the lessons learned.
Ms. Stefanik. The 2016 Annual Report on Developmental Test &
Evaluation stated that the Department's current knowledge management
capabilities and processes used to gain, collect, and analyze the
information necessary to conduct acquisition assessments and
evaluations are deficient and ineffective for today's world. In your
opinion, what investments in analytical tools and technologies should
the Department prioritize in order to begin to remedy this situation?
Mr. Greer. There is a need to transition to an Enterprise
environment for Weapons Systems RDT&E and Cyber engineering to store,
access, and share program RDT&E data. Establishment of a classified
environment with the right controls in place as well as mechanisms to
increase cross-program security collaboration is needed. With this,
comes the need to pair an ``RDT&E Warfighting System Cyber Assessment''
CIO function that is focused on the tactical weapons systems impacts of
Cyber to work alongside the ``traditional'' CIO function for business
systems, email, common databases and promulgation of policy.
Warfighting acquisition programs and Cyber technical work must be
staffed by the appropriate mix of Government experts from the Systems
Engineering and RDT&E community vice the traditional CIO community or
corporate operations workforce. In the current complex Cyber threat
environment, Defense Department needs have evolved far beyond
traditional IT/IA and business systems best practices. Our ability to
operate in the Cyber Warfare environment of the future hinges on agile
changes to our policies, organizational structures, workforce, and
infrastructure. Another Enterprise Solution that would benefit
acquisition programs is a Shared Data Warehouse and Repository.
Currently, data is stored and process on separate servers in a single
program office. This data is isolated from many groups that can use it.
A DOD Enterprise Solution to data storage and data warehouse tools
would provide the necessary access for DOD acquisition programs to use
and share data across various platforms. As mentioned in another
question is an urgent need to gain access to industry acquisition data,
which in most cases today is industry owned. The right Contract and
Legal clauses to obtain access to this data freely and use it in
government owned facilities and programs would provide the capabilities
necessary to perform data analytics to conduct acquisition assessments
and evaluations for all programs.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SHUSTER
Mr. Shuster. Can you tell us how many DIUx projects have
transitioned to programs of record or other major programs within the
Department of Defense? What is the process for transitioning prototypes
or pilots to the services or other agencies of the Department? Is the
contractor required to lead these efforts? What outreach does DIUx do
within the Department of Defense to alert them to the potential
innovations available from commercial providers?
Mr. Halvorsen. Sir I cannot with any specifics and would recommend
that this question be referred to DOD. I can say that I am a believer
in the concept and programs that expand DOD presence in technology hubs
like Silicon Valley are worth pursuing. I would also suggest that
measuring the effectiveness is a little premature. DOD has not had this
type of program in place much longer then a year and both DOD and the
technology hubs are learning how to make this work. In addition to this
program DOD has been pursuing employee exchange programs with industry.
These programs though limited to date have been well received by DOD
and participating companies.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FRANKS
Mr. Franks. Can you give a specific example of a good, well-
performing, or successful IT acquisition? What were the characteristics
that made it successful? How long did it take?
Mr. Halvorsen. Sir, the Next Generation Department of Navy IT
services contract is a good example of a successful IT procurement.
This was the follow on to the Navy Marine Corps Internet (NMCI)
contract. The contract yielded about $2B dollars in savings to the DON
and as importantly continued commercial like services for the DON.
Planning for this took over a year but was shorter then contracts of
like size and scope. It involved close coordination with industry
providers, a very detailed understanding of the capabilities desired,
and a willingness to understand trade space as related to price and
performance. I no longer have access to the details on this contract,
but I am sure DOD could provide. There are still some issues with this
contract but overall I give it very high marks. The negotiation of the
Windows 10 upgrade license agreement is another good example of the DOD
applying good practices and working well with an industry partner, in
this case MICROSOFT. This negotiation was truly an enterprise effort in
the department with DOD and the services working closely with MICROSOFT
to interpret the action as an upgrade covered by existing agreements
and not a major systems change. This enabled DOD to not have any bill
for the actual license, while the business case for MICROSOFT was
having DOD be better positioned to transfer to the cloud and
elimination of costs in supporting older systems. When completed the
transition to windows 10 will improve security, position DOD for cloud
transition and result in cost savings. The biggest cost associated with
the transition to Windows 10 is equipment modernization, which had
fallen behind in DOD, but would have to be done at some point. Doing
the modernization in conjunction with the windows 10 upgrade, allows
for some modernization delay while gaining 80% or more of the new
windows 10 capability. This is the type of DOD-industry partnership
that is needed.
Mr. Franks. When you consider the critical need of modernizing the
network, particularly to harden against enemy attacks and infiltration,
shouldn't an immediate and complete overhaul of the IT procurement
process be a priority?
Mr. Halvorsen. Yes and this review needs to focus on both the
requirements/capability process as well as the acquisition process. The
current requirements process often results in very detailed and
technically restrictive solutions being acquired that don't get DOD the
latest solutions or the best value. Many times because of the length of
the process and over specification, DOD is buying legacy the day the
contract awards. The review needs to look at successful commercial
process and encourage partnership with industry. This will present some
problems, especially with small business, but I believe creative
solutions can be applied to offer small business an opportunity to
partipate in major enterprise acquisitions. DOD also needs to increase
the dialog between the mission/business owners, the acquisition
workforce and the industry providers. We need to look at the current
rules restraining DOD employees from direct discussions with industry,
many of these rules have not been updated in 30 years.
Mr. Franks. Can you give a specific example of a good, well-
performing, or successful IT acquisition? What were the characteristics
that made it successful? How long did it take?
Mr. Greer. I can think of several IT acquisitions that were
executed efficiently--the examples are described in more detail below:
1) The Army Logistics Modernization Program (LMP) Increment 2 was a
highly successful Defense Business System program that came to the
Limited Deployment Decision milestone in 2015 with a 98% test case
success rate during developmental testing. All failed test cases had
work-arounds and corrective action plans acceptable to the user, and
zero open severity 1 or 2 software problem reports. LMP success may be
attributable to:
The LMP program management office (PMO) was highly experienced,
knowledgeable of the system, and effectively planned and executed the
complex program consisting of three waves of deployment with multiple
functional areas. The PMO also established a close working relationship
with the functional user to perform business process re-engineering,
clarify requirements, and resolve issues quickly and effectively.
Increment 2 was a continuation of Increment 1; with the same system
integrator using the well established and understood change management
processes. Developmental testing (DT) included various events to
specifically address performance, interoperability, and cybersecurity.
Most importantly, the test strategy included mission-oriented
developmental testing (known in the PMO as Business Operations Test
(BOT)) that used actual users from the depots performing operational
mission threads for their test cases. This identified human factors
improvements that led to better user performance. The DT actual users
became operational test (OT) trainers that resulted in a very high
success rate for all the tasks and transactions that were tested during
Initial Operational Test and Evaluation. The overall schedule from
milestone B to milestone C was approximately 22 months.
2) The Marine Corps' ACAT IAC Common Aviation Command and Control
System (CAC2S) Phase 2 was a very successful integrated acquisition.
The operational test community worked well with the developmental test
(DT) community, and accepted much of the DT data that satisfied OT
requirements, reducing the overall acquisition time by 6-months. USD/
AT&L nominated the CAC2S acquisition effort as a Defense Acquisition
University integrated acquisition case study. Time between MS B and MS
C was 34-months.
3) Defense Agencies Initiative (DAI) has been a successful Defense
Business System Program. It enables compliance with Congressional
direction for all DOD organizations to be auditable. The Defense
Agencies Initiative (DAI) transforms the budget, finance, and
accounting operations of most DOD Defense Agencies in order to achieve
accurate and reliable financial information in support of financial
accountability and effective and efficient decision-making throughout
the Defense Agencies in support of the missions of the warfighter.
Defense Agencies Initiative (DAI) is a critical DOD effort to modernize
the Defense Agencies' financial management capabilities.
Mr. Franks. We've all heard of Moore's Law and know how rapidly
technology advances and evolves. Do you know if there are any
requirements for new systems we are building or purchasing to be
capable of growing and evolving alongside technology--perhaps
``upgradeable'' systems which won't be obsolete the moment they become
operational or shortly thereafter?
Mr. Greer. The rapid development pace of IT does mean that the
Government will need to start driving requirements into new systems for
Non-Proprietary deliverables, interfaces, and use of open systems
architectures. Additionally, use of system virtualization and cloud
technologies may mitigate IT obsolescence issues. Ensuring system
designs, interfaces, and computing hardware are non-proprietary and
open to the Government mitigates the possibility of ``vendor lock in''
and provides multiple flexible upgrade paths. The DISA Defense
Enterprise Office Solution (DEOS) is a program that provides e-mail,
voice and data conferencing, office products (e.g., word processing,
etc.) and other capabilities with a cloud-based solution, potentially
across the entire DOD enterprise. The acquisition strategy for DEOS
contains a provision, which DISA calls ``Evergreen'', that will require
the system integrator to provide upgrades, at no charge, whenever DEOS
capability upgrades are offered commercially.
DODI 5000.02 supports growing and evolving alongside technology
through the use of a modular open systems approach (MOSA). It requires
programs to identify how a MOSA will or will not be used in their
acquisition strategy. (Sec 801 PL 113-291). This approach integrates
technical requirements with contracting mechanisms and legal
considerations to support a more rapid evolution of capabilities and
technologies throughout the product life cycle through the use of
architecture modularity, open systems standards, and appropriate
business practices. A modular design coupled with an appropriately open
business model provides a valuable mechanism for continuing competition
and incremental upgrades, and to facilitate reuse across the joint
force.

[all]
